Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 272]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53 P.S. § 66601(d)] of the Second Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Richland, County of Cambria, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 240,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Richland, which shall be
known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Richland,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Richland, and it is the intention
of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only
such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Richland and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 8-18-1999.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the township or other instruments or evidence of
the township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 RICHLAND CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees, and specifically legislation regarding the
Board of Supervisors Defined Benefit Pension Plan and the Police
Pension Fund.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the township.
S. Legislation pertaining to the establishment of the Highland Sewer and
Water Authority and the Windber Area Authority.
T. The Township of Richland Police Department Code of Conduct and
amendments thereto.
U. The Township of Richland Zoning Ordinance and amendments thereto.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto1 and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 272."
Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
township offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and
it is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes and
revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the
Code specified in § 1-15.
C. Nomenclature.
(1) Throughout the Code:
(a) References to the "Zoning Board of Adjustment" are revised to
read "Zoning Hearing Board."
(b) References to "Justice of the Peace" or "District Magistrate"
are revised to read "District Justice."
(c) References to the "Department of Environmental Resources"
are revised to read "Department of Environmental Protection"
or "Department of Conservation and Natural Resources,"
whichever is appropriate.
(d) References to the "Department of Community Affairs" are
revised to read "Department of Community and Economic
Development."
(2) Throughout Chapter 99, Buildings, Dangerous, the title "Building
Inspector" is revised to read "Codes Enforcement Officer or Zoning
Officer."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
§ 1-6 RICHLAND CODE § 1-8
1:6
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of
general circulation in the township. The enactment and application of this
ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public and the filing
of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required by law,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the township
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance, upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed
until the date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice
and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after January 9, 2000.
§ 1-13 RICHLAND CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 6
ADMINISTRATIVE BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 71. Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 112.
§ 6-1. Creation.
There is hereby established a Richland Township Administrative Board of
Appeals.
§ 6-2. Functions.
§ 6-3. Membership.
The Richland Township Administrative Board of Appeals shall, unless
otherwise appointed by the Richland Township Supervisors, by resolution,
consist of the members of the Richland Township Zoning Board of Appeals,
or the Richland Township Supervisors may, by resolution, appoint five other
individuals to the Administrative Board of Appeals who shall serve as
follows: one member to be appointed for five years, one member to be
appointed for four years. one member to be appointed for three years, one
member to be appointed for two years and one member to be appointed
for one year; and thereafter, each new member to serve for five years or
until his successor has been appointed or at the pleasure of the Board of
Supervisors.
A. The owner of a building or structure, officer or agency of the Township,
or any other person aggrieved, may appeal to the Richland Township
Administrative Board of Appeals any decision or interpretation of the
respective Codes Enforcement Officer(s), or his/its duly appointed
representatives, of the provisions or of the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, of
the building codes or that the provisions of the respective building
codes do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of
construction can be used.2
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision or interpretation of the Adult
Entertainment Ordinance (No. 262)3 providing for the licensing and
regulating of sexually oriented businesses and employees may appeal
said decision or interpretation to the Richland Township Administrative
Board of Appeals.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Construction Codes, Uniform.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 71, Adult Entertainment.
§ 1-15 ADMINISTRATIVE BOARD OF APPEALS § 6-4
6:9
§ 6-4. Qualifications of membership.
A member of the Board of Appeals shall be qualified by training and
experience to pass on matters pertaining to building construction. Training
and experience may consist of licensing as an architect or engineer,
experienced in the construction industry, in training or experience as an
inspector or plan reviewer. A member of the Township governing body
and its code administrators may not serve on the Board of Appeals. The
Township may fill a position on the Board of Appeals with a qualified person
who resides outside of the Township when they cannot find a person within
the Township who satisfies the requirements of this section.
§ 6-5. Organization and Operation; compensation.
§ 6-6. Powers.
A. The Board shall elect its own Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary,
who shall serve for one year.
B. The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem
necessary to effect the provisions of the respective building codes,4 the
Adult Entertainment Ordinance (No. 262)5 and this chapter.
C. The Board may employ secretaries, counsel and other personnel within
the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors.
D. The members of the Board shall not receive compensation for their
services unless the Supervisors fix a rate of compensation, by
resolution.
A. The Board shall have the power to hear and decide all appeals made
pursuant to § 6-2.
B. Except as prohibited in § 403.121 (g) of the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor & Industry (34 P.a.B 319) relating to
matters of accessibility, when hearing an appeal concerning the
building codes, and exercising the above power, the Board may reverse
or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from such order, requirement,
decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall
have all powers of the respective Codes Enforcement Officer from
whom the appeal was taken. Every change granted or denied by the
Board shall be accompanied by written findings of fact, based on sworn
testimony and evidence specifying the reason for granting or denying
the appeal and/or variation from the respective building code and/or
Adult Entertainment Ordinance requirement(s).6 In ruling upon appeals
from the building codes, the Board of Appeals may consider the
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Construction Codes, Uniform.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 71, Adult Entertainment.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 71, Adult
Entertainment, respectively.
§ 6-4 RICHLAND CODE § 6-6
6:10
§ 6-7. Procedure.
following factors when ruling upon the request for an extension of time
or a request for a variance:
(1) The reasonableness of the building codes application in a particular
case;
(2) The extent to which the granting of a variance or an extension of
time will pose a violation of the building codes or an unsafe
condition;
(3) The availability of professional or technical personnel needed to
come into compliance;
(4) The availability of materials and equipment needed to come into
compliance;
(5) The efforts being made to come into compliance as quickly as
possible;
(6) Compensatory features that will provide an equivalent degree of
protection to the building codes; and
(7) In matters of dealing with the interpretation of the building codes,
the Board of Appeals may:
(a) Deny the request in whole or in part;
(b) Grant the request in whole or in part;
(c) Grant the request upon certain conditions being satisfied.
C. The concurring vote of the majority of the members of the Board
present at the hearing shall be necessary to reverse an order,
requirement, decision or determination of the respective Codes
Enforcement Officer or to decide in favor of the appellant to grant a
variation from the respective requirement.
A. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedures.
B. The appellant shall file his appeal to the Board and the respective Codes
Enforcement Officer on the approved form within 30 days from the
decision or action of the respective Codes Enforcement Officer
specifying the reasons for the appeal and pay the appropriate appeal
fee. The appeal fee shall be established by the Township Supervisors, by
resolution.
C. Upon filing of an appeal and payment of the appeal fee, the Board shall
fix a reasonable time and place for a public hearing and render a
written decision within 60 days of the receipt of the appeal application.
Notice of said public hearing shall be given by mailing notice to the
applicant and the respective Codes Enforcement Officer, by publication
§ 6-6 ADMINISTRATIVE BOARD OF APPEALS § 6-7
6:11
§ 6-8. Appeals from action.
Any party before the Board, or any officer or agency of the Township, may
appeal the decision of the Board to the Cambria County Court of Common
Pleas within 30 days after the date of the mailing of the decision pursuant
to the Pennsylvania Judicial Code, 42 Pa. C.S.A. § 5571 et seq.
Chapter 11
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 198.
Solid waste — See Ch. 207.
Water — See Ch. 234.
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township and by posting
a copy of the notice prominently at the Township Municipal Building.
Public notice of the hearing shall be given at least three days prior
to the time of the first hearing and at least 24 hours in the case of a
rescheduled or continued hearing.
D. Notice of the written decision of the Board shall be given to the
applicant, the respective Codes Enforcement Officer or any party
requesting same, mailed not later than the day following its date.
E. Unless agreed to by the applicant in writing, if the board fails to
schedule a hearing and render a decision within 60 days of the date of
the receipt of the appeal application, it shall be deemed that the Board
decided in favor of the applicant.
§ 6-7 RICHLAND CODE § 6-8
11:12
ARTICLE I
Greater Johnstown Sewer Authority
[Adopted 7-27-1987 by Ord. No. 181]
§ 11-1. Creation.
The Chairman and Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of Richland
Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, are hereby authorized to execute
Articles of Incorporation for the creation of a regional sewer authority to be
known as the "Greater Johnstown Sewer Authority."
§ 11-2. Right to approve certain plans.
The Board of Supervisors of Richland Township specifically reserves the
right to approve any plan of the Authority if the Authority has as one of
its purposes making business improvements or providing administrative
services.
§ 11-3. Appointment of representatives.
The Board of Supervisors shall, from time to time, in accordance with the
appropriate legislation, appoint a representative or representatives to said
Authority to serve on the Authority's Board.
§ 11-1 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 11-3
11:13

ARTICLE II
Cambria/Somerset Recycling Authority
[Adopted 8-13-1990 by Ord. No. 211]
§ 11-4. Creation.
The Chairman and Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of Richland
Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, are hereby authorized to execute
Articles of Incorporation for the creation of a regional recycling authority to
be known as "Cambria/Somerset Recycling Authority."
§ 11-5. Right to approve certain plans.
The Board of Supervisors of Richland Township specifically reserves the
right to approve any plan of the Authority if the Authority has as one of
its purposes making business improvements or providing administrative
services.
§ 11-6. Appointment of representatives.
The Board of Supervisors shall, from time to time, in accordance with
appropriate legislation, appoint a representative to said Authority to serve
on the Authority's Board.
§ 11-4 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 11-6
11:15

ARTICLE III
Forest Hills Municipal Authority
[Adopted 1-30-1995 by Ord. No. 240]
§ 11-7. Membership on Authority.
The Township of Richland by adoption of this article requests membership
on the Forest Hills Municipal Authority and authorizes the Chairman and
Secretary of the township to present a copy of this article, as adopted, to
the Board of the Forest Hills Municipal Authority, and if said request is
acted upon favorably by said Forest Hills Municipal Authority, to publish
a notice required by § 304 of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as
amended,7 and to prepare, execute and file the application to the Secretary
of the Commonwealth.
7. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 11-7 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 11-7
11:17

ARTICLE IV
Highland Sewer and Water Authority
[The legislation establishing the Highland Sewer and Water
Authority in the Township of Richland is on file in the township
offices.
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 11-7
11:19

ARTICLE V
Windber Area Authority
[The legislation establishing the Windber Area Authority in the
Township of Richland is on file in the township offices.
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 11-7
11:21
Chapter 23
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 11-7 RICHLAND CODE § 11-7
23:22
ARTICLE I
Extension of Volunteer Fire and Ambulance Duties
[Adopted 4-29-1991 by Ord. No. 213]
§ 23-1. Authorization to perform additional duties.
The Township of Richland volunteer fire departments and their ambulance
associations and their membership are authorized by the Board of
Supervisors to perform the following duties, in addition to the normal firefighting,
rescue and emergency medical duties.
A. Participation in drills, practices, training sessions and pre-fire planning
activities authorized by the respective Fire Chief and supervised by a
qualified instructor.
B. Participation in community celebrations, ceremonial observances and
funerals for deceased fire fighters or other public figures where such
attendance is deemed appropriate and authorized, in writing, by the
respective Fire Chief.
C. While performing duties necessary to prepare the fire station for use as
a polling place for the primary and general elections. This is extended
to include like services performed at other municipal or school district
buildings for said elections.
D. Preparation for and responsible participation in parades, provided that
attendance has the prior written approval of the fire department and/or
ambulance association and written notice is provided to the
municipality prior to the event.
E. Any public service functions performed for the welfare of the
community as long as these activities are responsibly supervised and
are sanctioned by the fire department or ambulance association and
written notice is provided to the municipality prior to the function.
F. Any and all public safety activities undertaken by fire department or
ambulance association members to render care to the injured, prevent
loss of life, provide comfort and security to victims and limit or prevent
damage to or loss of property as circumstances may dictate.
G. While rendering assistance to police officers where such aid is
specifically requested or is done without request to protect our citizens
from imminent danger.
H. Participation in fire prevention inspection, post-fire investigations,
bomb searches and evacuation drills.
I. While participating in public programs to promote health and safety, to
enlist new members, solicit community support or conduct fund-raising
activities, so long as the activity is specifically sanctioned by the fire
department or the ambulance association with written notice to the
municipality prior to the activity or event.
§ 23-1 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 23-1
23:23
J. While safely and responsibly performing maintenance and remodeling
work on the fire department or ambulance association vehicles,
buildings, grounds or equipment.
K. While performing such other duties necessary for the efficient
operation of the volunteer services as may, from time to time, be
assigned by the Board of Supervisors, the officers of the fire
departments and the officers of the ambulance association.
§ 23-1 RICHLAND CODE § 23-1
23:24
Chapter 28
INTERMUNICIPAL AGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sanitary Board — See Ch. 62. Sewers — See Ch. 198.
§ 23-1 INTERMUNICIPAL AGENCIES § 23-1
28:25

ARTICLE I
County Sanitation Committee
[Adopted 1-18-1999 by Ord. No. 268]
§ 28-1. Purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Richland, Cambria County,
Pennsylvania, finds it desirable to enact this article to:
§ 28-2. Grant of power.
This article is adopted pursuant to power granted in:
§ 28-3. Definitions.
The following words or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACT — The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537 of 1966 (35 P.S.
§ 750.1 et seq.), as amended, or as it may be amended from time to time. 12
BOARD — The governing body of the Committee through which all policymaking
powers granted to the Committee are exercised.
CHAPTER 71, 72 OR 73 — Regulations adopted pursuant to the Act and
more specifically identified as Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Environmental
Resources.
COMMITTEE — The Cambria County Sanitation Committee, the entity
created by this article.
A. Protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents and landlords of
the township.
B. Create a multimunicipal local agency for the administration of the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as amended,8 and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
A. The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537 of 1966 (35 P.S. § 750.1
et seq.), as amended, or as it may be amended from time to time.9
B. The Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, Act 394 of 1937 (35 P.S. § 691.1
et seq.), as amended, or as it may be amended from time to time.10
C. The Pennsylvania Local Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105 et seq.), as
amended,11 or as it may be amended from time to time.
8. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
11.Editor's Note: See also 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 28-1 INTERMUNICIPAL AGENCIES § 28-3
28:27
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Richland, Cambria County, Pennsylvania.
MULTIMUNICIPAL LOCAL AGENCY (MMLA) — The Cambria County
Sanitation Committee, the entity created by the adoption of this article (the
"Committee").
TOWNSHIP — Richland Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania.
§ 28-4. Creation of Sanitation Committee.
The governing body hereby:
§ 28-5. Powers and duties of Committee.
In addition to the powers and duties enumerated above, the Sanitation
Committee shall:
A. Creates, constitutes and establishes the Sanitation Committee for the
purposes described above.
B. As soon as possible, but not later than 30 days after the adoption of this
article, every member shall, by action of its governing body, appoint a
representative and, at its option, may also appoint an alternate
representative to the Board. Each representative and alternate shall be
an individual who must be:
(1) A member of the governing body of the member municipality that
he or she represents; or
(2) The Municipal Secretary.
C. Conveys to the Sanitation Committee the enforcement and
administration of all three aspects of the Act and regulations.
D. Directs the Board to at all times act in a manner consistent with the Act
and regulations and the additional provisions in this article.
E. Authorizes and directs the Sanitation Committee to act on behalf of the
governing body through the appointed officers/Board to issue, deny or
revoke permits, conduct inspections, abate nuisances and health
hazards arising from malfunctioning on-lot disposal systems, conduct
hearings, prosecute violators and apply for operating grants from the
Department or any other entity.
F. Directs the Board to establish, and, further, pledges to pay in a timely
manner, initial and annual membership fees adequate to provide the
Sanitation Committee with liquid fiscal resources to establish itself and
continue to operate while awaiting receipt of reimbursement grants
from the Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 28-3 RICHLAND CODE § 28-5
28:28
§ 28-6. Term of participation; new members; amendments.
A. Prepare and adopt bylaws that:
(1) Define the method by which (future) Committee representatives
will be appointed.
(2) Set forth the method by which the Committee will conduct
business.
(3) Establish a quorum for the conduct of business.
(4) Establish meeting times and dates.
(5) Define the manner in which vacancies will be filled.
(6) Create any necessary subcommittees.
(7) Establish fees for the various permits and services performed by
the Committee or its staff.
(8) Create a Hearing Board to conduct hearings regarding permit
denials and other SEO actions.
B. Prepare and adopt an annual budget.
C. Prepare an annual application to obtain a reimbursement grant from
the Department.
D. Prepare and submit annual reports to participating municipalities.
E. Hire, fire, promote and discipline personnel necessary to conduct the
business of the Committee and set their rates of compensation.
F. Create a package of employee benefits, including:
(1) Sick and/or vacation leave and/or paid holidays.
(2) Health and/or life and/or disability insurance.
G. Create an employees' manual containing job descriptions, qualifications
for employment and pay scales.
H. Secure, by contract or other arrangement, legal counsel and the
services of other professionals as may be necessary or desirable to
advance the work of the Committee.
A. The participation in the Committee by the governing body shall begin
on the effective date of this article and shall continue for a period of at
least two years. Such participation shall include the fulfillment of all
responsibilities, including payment of assessments, costs, fees and
expenses.
§ 28-5 INTERMUNICIPAL AGENCIES § 28-6
28:29
B. After the expiration of the aforesaid two-year period, the governing
body may, upon 90 days' written notice to the Board, withdraw from the
Committee through the repeal of this article.
(1) During the intervals between receipt of written notice pursuant to
Subsection B and the actual date of withdrawal, the Committee
shall not accept, process or otherwise act upon new applications
for on-lot sewage disposal systems in the municipality which has
served notice of intent to withdraw.
(2) The Committee shall notify interested parties and applicants of the
impending change of administration and will, to the best of its
ability, refer interested parties to the succeeding SEO/MMLA.
(3) All applications in progress when notice of intent to withdraw is
received shall be advanced through issuance/denial in a timely
manner and, in all cases, before the withdrawal becomes effective.
(4) The repeal of this article shall take place five days after the
adoption or enactment of any repealing ordinance; however, it shall
be effective no less than 90 days following notice described in
Subsection B(1).
C. After the effective date of this article, any municipality may choose to
become a member by adopting this article in full.
(1) All work on an application for an on-lot sewage disposal system
permit then in progress where site testing has not been completed
or a design has been submitted but a permit has not been issued
shall be turned over to the Committee for completion by the
Committee's SEO. The new member will pay to the Committee any
moneys received from the permittee and/or the commonwealth or
any entity relative to any such applications for on-lot sewage
disposal systems. The permittee shall be responsible for all fees
and costs associated with the completion of the application which
the permittee has not already paid or which have not been paid on
the permittee's behalf.
(2) In the event that a system is installed using a valid permit issued by
a prior SEO, and in the event that the prior SEO has been
compensated for the installation inspection portion of the
application permitting process, the issuing SEO shall be
responsible for the installation inspection, provided that he/she is a
currently certified SEO.
(3) In the event that a system is installed using a valid permit issued by
a prior SEO, and the issuing SEO is no longer a certified SEO by
reason of retirement from the activities of SEO, then the matter
shall be turned over to the Committee's SEO. The member shall pay
to the Committee any moneys received from the permittee and/or
the commonwealth or any entity relative to such permit. The
permittee shall be responsible for all fees and costs associated with
§ 28-6 RICHLAND CODE § 28-6
28:30
the permit and/or completion of the system which the permittee
has not already paid or which have not been paid on the permittee's
behalf.
(4) In the event that a permit was issued by a prior SEO and the issuing
SEO is no longer a certified SEO, by reason of a certification
revocation action by the Department of Environmental Protection
or the voluntary surrender of his certification to avoid prosecution,
then the Committee shall, in its sole discretion, evaluate the
outstanding permits and may require testing and/or system
redesign by the Committee's employees, the costs of which shall be
borne by the member on behalf of the permittee.
(5) Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the member from
recovering any paid but unearned compensation or wages from the
prior SEO.
(6) Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the member from
recovering the costs of retesting or redesign when the actions of
the former SEO were contrary to the Act or regulations.
D. In the event that it becomes necessary to change this article in whole or
in part, no changes shall become effective and no new or altered
obligation or duty shall be placed upon the Committee, and no change
in the terms of this article shall become effective, until such time as
every participating municipality shall have adopted an identical
amendatory ordinance or duly adopted resolution.
§ 28-6 INTERMUNICIPAL AGENCIES § 28-6
28:31
Chapter 31
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST
§ 31-1. Intent.
This municipality shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act13 by becoming a settlor
of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (the "Trust") and
entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference with
the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy
of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this chapter
was adopted.
§ 31-2. Purchase and redemption of shares.
This municipality is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from time
to time with available municipal funds, and to redeem some or all of those
shares from time to time as funds are needed for municipal purposes. These
actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant
to general or specific instructions by the governing body adopting this
chapter.
§ 31-3. Custody of funds.
The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of this
municipality's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in the
Trust.
§ 31-4. Findings.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,14 the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 31-1.
B. This municipality's participation in the Trust shall be terminable at any
time by ordinance.
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this municipality's funds in obligations which are
otherwise legal investments as part of a pooled arrangement with other
governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages
of pooled investments.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
municipal funds except through the purchase of shares in the Trust.
13.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 28-6 RICHLAND CODE § 31-4
31:32
Chapter 34
MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Residency requirements — See Ch. 54.
§ 34-1. Creation.
The office of Township Manager of Richland Township, Cambria County,
Pennsylvania, is hereby created.
§ 34-2. Appointment.
The office of Township Manager shall be filled by one person appointed to
said office by a majority vote of the Supervisors.
§ 34-3. Removal.
The person appointed to the office of Township Manager shall be subject to
removal by a majority vote of the Supervisors.
§ 34-4. Term; residency requirements; eligibility.
The person appointed to the office of Township Manager shall, unless
removed in accordance with § 34-3 above or unless said person resigns,
serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. The Township Manager
need not be a resident of the township or of the State of Pennsylvania at
the time of his appointment, but must comply with Ordinance No. 105,15
requiring residency in the township within six months after his
appointment, and shall remain a resident of Richland Township during his
tenure as Manager. No Township Supervisor shall be appointed as Township
Manager during the term for which he was elected or appointed Supervisor,
nor within one year after the expiration of said term or resignation from
office. The Township Manager shall have no personal interest, direct or
indirect, in contracts with the township.
E. The Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
F. Shares may be purchased and redeemed from time to time as this
municipality may determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet its
cash investment requirements.
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 54, Residency Requirements.
§ 31-4 MANAGER § 34-5
34:33
§ 34-5. Powers and duties.
The Township Manager shall act as Chief Administrative Officer of the
township, subject to instructions issued by the Board of Supervisors.
Subject to recall by ordinance, the powers and duties of the Township
Manager shall include the following:
A. He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments, including the Police Department. However, the Board of
Supervisors reserves the right to appoint the Chief of Police of Richland
Township.
B. He shall issue such administrative and personnel rules and regulations
not in conflict with existing statutes or ordinances to properly carry out
the duties contained in this chapter. Such rules and regulations are to
be subject to revocation, revision and/or modification by the Board of
Supervisors by majority vote of its members at any regular public
meeting.
C. He shall recommend the hiring or suspension of all municipal
employees under his supervision in accordance with the rules and
regulations as are or may hereafter be established. He shall otherwise
discipline all employees, other than department heads under his
supervision, provided that he shall inform the Board of Supervisors of
all disciplinary actions. He shall not discipline a department head or
assistant department head without prior approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
D. He shall prepare and submit to the Board of Supervisors a
recommended budget for the ensuing fiscal year in sufficient time such
that said Board may review, amend and/or adopt the budget prior to the
close of the current fiscal year. Said budget is to be accompanied by an
explanatory message setting forth a summary of projected revenues
and proposed expenditures, together with any supporting data as may
be required to enable the Board of Supervisors to decide upon and
adopt the necessary taxation and appropriation legislation. He shall,
upon adoption of the budget by the Board of Supervisors, be
responsible for the efficient administration thereof so that the various
appropriations are not exceeded, except as may be authorized by the
Board according to law.
E. He shall supervise the enforcement of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and such ordinances and resolutions of the township as
the Board of Supervisors may prescribe.
F. He shall attend all meetings of the Township Board of Supervisors, and
other meetings of the Supervisors or committees, when directed. He
shall receive notice of all regular and special meetings of the Board of
Supervisors and its committees.
G. He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board of
Supervisors and supply facts pertinent thereto.
§ 34-5 RICHLAND CODE § 34-5
34:34
§ 34-6. Designation of alternate.
In case of illness or absence of the Manager from the township, the Board
of Supervisors shall designate a qualified individual to perform the duties of
the Manager during his absence or disability.
§ 34-7. Bond.
The Township Manager shall give bond to the township, with sufficient
surety, to be approved by the Supervisors, in the amount of $10,000,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties.
§ 34-8. Compensation.
The compensation of the Township Manager shall be set by resolution by
the Board of Supervisors.
§ 34-9. Termination of employment.
Subsequent to the appointment of the Township Manager, either the
township or the person appointed shall have the right to terminate the
employment contract by giving the other party 30 days' notice, in writing.
H. He shall keep the Board of Supervisors informed as to the conduct of
the township affairs; submit periodic reports on the conditions of the
township finances and such other reports as the Board of Supervisors
shall request and shall make such recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors as he deems necessary and advisable for the welfare of the
township.
I. He shall oversee the observance of the provisions of all franchises,
leases, permits and privileges granted by the township.
J. He shall see that all money owed to the township is promptly paid and
that proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all
claims of the township.
K. He shall be the Purchasing Officer of the township and he shall
supervise and coordinate, in accordance with the provisions of the
Second Class Township Code,16 the purchase of all supplies and
equipment for the various agencies, boards, departments and other
offices of the township as authorized by the Board of Supervisors in its
annual operating budget. He shall keep an account of all purchases and
shall periodically, or when directed by the Board of Supervisors, make a
full written report thereof.
L. He shall perform such other duties as may be required by the Board of
Supervisors not inconsistent with the Second Class Township Code or
other statutes or ordinances of the township.
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 34-5 MANAGER § 34-9
34:35
Chapter 37
PENNSYLVANIA TOWNSHIPS HEALTH INSURANCE
COOPERATIVE TRUST
GENERAL REFERENCES
Local Government Investment Trust — See
Ch. 31.
PSATS Unemployment Compensation Group
Trust — See Ch. 48.
§ 37-1. Agreement adopted.
§ 37-2. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the Trust is authorized for the purpose
of obtaining high-quality, cost-effective medical, prescription, dental, life,
disability, vision and/or other employee welfare benefit insurance at a
reasonable cost to the Township and its employees.
§ 37-3. Conditions of participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the restated trust agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Township in the Trust:
A. The Township adopts the restated trust agreement and agrees to
participate in the Trust in accordance with the amended and updated
terms of the restated trust agreement, and the Chairman of the Board
and Secretary of the Township are hereby authorized to sign the
restated trust agreement and any other agreements necessary for the
Township's participation in the Trust.
B. The restated trust agreement is on file for inspection and review at the
Township's offices at 322 Schoolhouse Road, Suite 110. The restated
trust agreement may be subsequently modified or amended in
accordance with its terms, but in no event shall such modifications or
amendments divert any of the trust funds from the purposes of the
Trust. The Township may withdraw from the Trust in accordance with
the restated trust agreement, including if the Board of Supervisors
determines the modifications or amendments are not in the best
interests of the Township.
A. Each participating employer must meet the admission and eligibility
requirements set forth therein;
B. Each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when due
as provided in the restated trust agreement or as otherwise established
by the Board of Trustees; and
§ 34-9 RICHLAND CODE § 37-3
34:36
§ 37-4. Withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the Trust and may withdraw for any
reason and in accordance with the restated trust agreement, provided that
it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the Trust upon withdrawal.
§ 37-5. Effective date of agreement and participation.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the
restated trust agreement and the participation of the Township in the Trust
pursuant to the terms of the restated trust agreement will be January 1,
2015.
§ 37-6. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the restated trust agreement.
§ 37-7. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of
Trustees. Under the restated trust agreement, the Board of Trustees is
authorized to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to
perform various services necessary for the administration of the Trust.
§ 37-8. Funds.
The funds required for the operation of the Trust shall be provided by the
participating employers through scheduled appropriations as determined
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 37-9. Insurance and benefits.
The Trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for employees of
the Trust, if any.
§ 37-10. Compliance with terms.
As a condition of participating in the Trust, the Township agrees to comply
with all of the terms and conditions in the restated trust agreement.
§ 37-11. Certified copy.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this chapter
upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the Trust.
C. Each participating employer complies with all other conditions of the
restated trust agreement.
§ 37-3 MANAGER § 37-12
34:37
§ 37-12. Authorization to take necessary action.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township is hereby authorized to take any
and all such other actions as may be necessary or appropriate to carry
out the purposes of this chapter and comply with the requirements of the
restated trust agreement and any duly adopted amendments thereto.
§ 37-13. Term of agreement.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the Trust and
obligations under the restated trust agreement shall continue until
withdrawal from the Trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of
the restated trust agreement.
§ 37-14. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as
follows:
A. The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the restated trust agreement incorporated by reference
herein.17
B. The Township shall participate in the Trust in accordance with the
restated trust agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the
Board of Trustees at least 90 days in advance to become effective on
either June 30 or December 31 of a given plan year; or in the case of an
initial year of participation in the Trust shall participate for a minimum
of one year.
C. The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the
Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated restated trust
agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing of the restated trust agreement are
that:
(1) Funds to implement the Township's obligations under the restated
trust agreement shall come from the normal and usual budgeted
amounts for Township employee compensation and employee
benefits; and
(2) No borrowing is anticipated to be required.
E. The Trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the restated trust agreement.
F. All assets and property, real or personal, of the Trust shall be titled to,
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the Trust, and its Board
17.Editor's Note: The restated trust agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 37-12 RICHLAND CODE § 37-14
34:38
§ 37-15. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable and in the event that any
provision is held invalid, void, illegal, or unconstitutional by any court, it
is the intent of the Township that such determination by the court shall
not affect or render void the remaining provisions of this chapter. It is
the declared intent of the Township that this chapter would have been
enacted if any provision subsequently declared to be void, invalid, illegal or
unconstitutional had not been included at the time of enactment.
§ 37-16. Rights and liabilities.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to affect any rights or liabilities
of the Township, or to affect any cause of action, existing prior to the
enactment of this chapter.
§ 37-17. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect five days from the date of adoption.
§ 37-18. Statutory authority.
This chapter is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, as
amended, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
Chapter 38
PENSIONS
of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
G. The Trust, in accordance with the restated trust agreement, shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee welfare benefits to be offered to participating employers for
their eligible employees and dependents.
§ 37-14 PENSIONS § 37-18
38:39

ARTICLE I
Board of Supervisors Defined Benefit Pension Plan
[Current provisions regarding the Board of Supervisors Defined
Benefit Pension Plan are on file in the township offices.]
PENSIONS § 37-18
38:41

ARTICLE II
Police Pension Fund
[Current provisions regarding the Police Pension Fund are on file in
the township offices.]
PENSIONS § 37-18
38:43
Chapter 42
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 42-1. Membership requirements.
The Richland Township Planning Commission is hereby increased in size
from five members to nine members. All members shall serve without
compensation, but may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable
expenses. All members must be residents of Richland Township, and at least
six members shall not be officers or employees of Richland Township.
§ 42-2. Appointment, term and vacancy.
All appointments to the Commission shall be made by the Richland
Township Supervisors. The term of each of the members of the Commission
shall be for four years, or until his successor is appointed and qualified;
excepting, however, that the terms of those members first appointed to
said Commission shall be such that, in any future calendar year, no more
than three members shall be reappointed or replaced. The Chairman of the
Commission shall promptly notify the Township Supervisors of any vacancy
on the Commission and the Township Supervisors shall fill said vacancy for
the unexpired term.
§ 42-3. Existing Commission members.18
Current lists of members are on file in the township offices.
§ 42-4. Conduct of business.
The Commission shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman and create
and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall serve annual
terms and may succeed themselves. The Commission may make and alter
bylaws and rules and regulations to govern its procedures consistent with
the ordinances of the township and the laws of the commonwealth. The
Commission shall keep a full record of its business and shall annually make
a written report by March 1 of each year of its activities to the governing
body. Interim reports may be made as often as may be necessary, or as
requested by the township body.
§ 42-5. Powers and duties.
All the authority, powers, duties, rights, responsibility and liability vested
in said Commission, and all authority, powers, duties and rights retained by
the Township Supervisors as provided for in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 1968, July 31, P.L. No. 247, as amended,19 are hereby
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
19.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 37-18 RICHLAND CODE § 42-5
42:44
conferred on said Commission and are hereby reserved in said Township
Supervisors.
Chapter 45
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 42-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 42-5
45:45

ARTICLE I
Code of Conduct
[The current Police Department Code of Conduct is on file in the
township offices.]
POLICE DEPARTMENT § 42-5
45:47

ARTICLE II
Drug Task Force
[Adopted 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 220]
§ 45-1. Adoption of intermunicipal agreement.
There is hereby adopted and ratified an agreement for intergovernmental
cooperation known as the "Municipal Drug Task Force Agreement,"
hereinafter referred to as the "agreement."
§ 45-2. Statutory authority. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 272]
This agreement is entered into pursuant to the provisions of 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 2301 et seq., relating to cooperation in governmental functions.
§ 45-3. Objectives.
The purposes and objectives of the agreement are as follows:
§ 45-4. Conditions; adoption of agreement by reference.
The agreement shall be subject to all the conditions and terms specified and
set forth in the Municipal Drug Task Force Agreement, which is attached
hereto and incorporated by reference herein,20 which include the manner
and extent of financing the agreement, the powers and scope of authority
delegated in the agreement and the manner in which property, real or
personal, shall be acquired, managed or disposed of.
§ 45-5. Duration of agreement.
The duration of the agreement shall be indefinite, subject to termination by
either municipality as provided in the agreement.
A. To enhance the coordination of drug investigations in the Cambria
County area.
B. To provide for mutual police aid across jurisdictional lines to enable
police to more effectively enforce the provisions of narcotics and illegal
drug laws and thereby preserve the safety and welfare of the entire
area.
C. To have available for use, throughout the territorial limits of all
municipalities signing the mutual agreement, the services of police
employed by any and all of said municipalities under the conditions set
forth and in compliance with the Municipal Police Jurisdiction Act, 42
Pa.C.S.A. § 8953.
20.Editor's Note: The Municipal Drug Task Force Agreement is on file in the township offices.
§ 45-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 45-5
45:49
Chapter 48
PSATS UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION GROUP TRUST
GENERAL REFERENCES
Local Government Investment Trust — See
Ch. 31.
Pennsylvania Townships Health Insurance
Cooperative Trust — See Ch. 37.
§ 48-1. Agreement adopted.
§ 48-2. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the Trust is authorized for the purpose
of pooling resources for the purpose of providing unemployment
compensation insurance for participating employers at reasonable cost.
§ 48-3. Conditions of participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the restated trust agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Township in the Trust:
A. The Township adopts the restated trust agreement and agrees to
participate in the Trust in accordance with the amended and updated
terms of the restated trust agreement, and the Chairman of the Board
and Secretary of the Township are hereby authorized to sign the
restated trust agreement and any other agreements necessary for the
Township's participation in the Trust.
B. The restated trust agreement is on file for inspection and review at the
Township's offices at 322 Schoolhouse Road, Suite 110, Johnstown,
Pennsylvania. The restated trust agreement may be subsequently
modified or amended in accordance with its terms, but in no event shall
such modifications or amendments divert any of the trust funds from
the purposes of the Trust. The Township may withdraw from the Trust
in accordance with the restated trust agreement, including if the Board
of Supervisors determines the modifications or amendments are not in
the best interests of the Township.
A. Each participating employer must meet the admission and eligibility
requirements set forth therein;
B. Each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when due
as provided in the restated trust agreement or as otherwise established
by the Board of Trustees; and
C. Each participating employer complies with all other conditions of the
restated trust agreement.
§ 45-5 RICHLAND CODE § 48-4
45:50
§ 48-4. Withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the Trust and may withdraw for any
reason and in accordance with the restated trust agreement, provided that
it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the Trust upon withdrawal.
§ 48-5. Effective date of agreement and participation.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the
restated trust agreement and the participation of the Township in the Trust
pursuant to the terms of the restated trust agreement will be January 1,
2015.
§ 48-6. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the restated trust agreement.
§ 48-7. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of
Trustees. Under the restated trust agreement, the Board of Trustees is
authorized to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to
perform various services necessary for the administration of the Trust.
§ 48-8. Funds.
The funds required for the operation of the Trust shall be provided by the
participating employers through scheduled appropriations as determined
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 48-9. Insurance and benefits.
The Trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for employees of
the Trust, if any.
§ 48-10. Compliance with terms.
As a condition of participating in the Trust, the Township agrees to comply
with all of the terms and conditions in the restated trust agreement.
§ 48-11. Certified copy.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this chapter
upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the Trust.
§ 48-12. Authorization to take necessary action.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township is hereby authorized to take any
and all such other actions as may be necessary or appropriate to carry
out the purposes of this chapter and comply with the requirements of the
§ 48-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 48-12
45:51
attached restated trust agreement21 and any duly adopted amendments
thereto.
§ 48-13. Term of agreement.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the Trust and
obligations under the restated trust agreement shall continue until
withdrawal from the Trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of
the restated trust agreement.
§ 48-14. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors of Richland Township hereby specifically finds and
determines as follows:
A. The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the restated trust agreement incorporated by reference herein.
B. The Township shall participate in the Trust in accordance with the
restated trust agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the
Board of Trustees in accordance with the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
C. The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the
Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated restated trust
agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing of the agreement are that:
(1) Funds to implement the Township's obligations under the
agreement shall come from the normal and usual budgeted
amounts for Township employee compensation and employee
benefits; and
(2) No borrowing is anticipated to be required.
E. The Trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the restated trust agreement.
F. All assets and property, real or personal, of the Trust shall be titled to,
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the Trust, and its Board
of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
G. The Trust, in accordance with the restated trust agreement, shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee welfare benefits to be offered to participating employers for
their eligible employees and dependents.
21.Editor’s Note: The restated trust agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 48-12 RICHLAND CODE § 48-15
45:52
§ 48-15. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable and in the event that any
provision is held invalid, void, illegal, or unconstitutional by any court, it
is the intent of the Township that such determination by the court shall
not affect or render void the remaining provisions of this chapter. It is
the declared intent of the Township that this chapter would have been
enacted if any provision subsequently declared to be void, invalid, illegal or
unconstitutional had not been included at the time of enactment.
§ 48-16. Rights and liabilities.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to affect any rights or liabilities
of the Township, or to affect any cause of action, existing prior to the
enactment of this chapter.
§ 48-17. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect five (5) days from the date of adoption.
§ 48-18. Statutory authority.
This chapter is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, as
amended, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
Chapter 51
RECREATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 173.
§ 51-1. Agreement authorized.
The Chairman and Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of Richland
Township are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to sign execute
and deliver the agreement between Geistown Borough, the Richland
Township School District, the Richland Township Supervisors and the
Stonycreek Township Commissioners, or any two of the same, whereby the
Highland Recreation Commission is created, said agreement to be effective
according to the terms and provisions thereof.
§ 51-2. Appointment of representatives.
The agreement authorized to be executed by this chapter establishing
the Highland Recreation Commission provides for the appointment of
representatives on said Commission by the Richland Township Supervisors,
§ 48-15 RECREATION COMMISSION § 51-2
51:53
and said appointments shall be made by the Richland Township Supervisors
in accordance with the terms and conditions of said agreement.
§ 51-3. Discontinuance of existing commissions.
All other existing recreation commissions shall be terminated and
discontinued as of the effective date of the agreement, to wit: January 1,
1969.
§ 51-4. Responsibilities; contributions.
The responsibility of establishing and thereafter maintaining recreation
areas shall be as provided for in said agreement and contributions to be
made by the Richland Township Supervisors in support of said Highland
Recreation Commission shall be made as provided for in said agreement.
Chapter 54
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Manager — See Ch. 34. Police Department — See Ch. 45.
§ 54-1. Present full-time employees.
All present, full-time employees of Richland Township and any and all
persons who shall hereafter be hired and employed by the township as fulltime
employees shall be bona fide residents of the township, who establish
legal, full-time and exclusive residence within the township.22
§ 54-2. Future full-time employees.
Any future full-time employee who is hired by the township and who does
not reside and live within the geographic limits of the township shall be
given six months to meet said residency requirement, said six-month period
to commence from the date said full-time employee is hired by the township.
§ 54-3. Failure to comply; suspension; removal.23
If any future full-time employee does not establish residency within six
months of his or her date of employment, or in the event that any full-time
employee removes his or her residency from the township, then the Board
of Supervisors may, in its discretion, either suspend the full-time employee
22.Editor's Note: Former Section 2, regarding a time limit to establish residency, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-2 RICHLAND CODE § 54-3
54:54
until he or she complies with the residency requirement or dismiss or
remove the full-time employee from employment.
§ 54-4. Residency of police officers.24
The residency requirements for full-time police officers shall be as set forth
in the Police Bargaining Unit Employment Contract, as amended from time
to time.
Chapter 59
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 54-3 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 54-4
59:55

ARTICLE I
Board of Supervisors
[Adopted 11-27-1995 by Ord. No. 244]
§ 59-1. Establishment of compensation.
Each Supervisor of Richland Township taking office by election or
appointment on or after the effective date of this article shall receive
compensation as a Supervisor in the annual amount of $3,250.
§ 59-2. Payments.
Such compensation shall be paid in monthly installments.
§ 59-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 59-2
59:57
Chapter 62
SANITARY BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
County Sanitation Committee — See Ch. 28,
Art. I.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 148.
§ 62-1. Members; terms; qualifications; compensation; designation
of Sanitary Officer.
§ 62-2. Duties of Secretary.
A. The Richland Township Sanitary Board is hereby created under the
terms of this chapter.
B. Five residents of Richland Township, one of whom shall be a reputable
physician of not less than two years' experience in the practice of his
profession, shall be appointed by the Richland Township Supervisors.
C. One member shall be appointed to serve for one year, one member for
two years, one member for three years, one member for four years and
one member for five years. Thereafter, one member shall in like manner
be appointed each year to serve for a period of five years.
D. The members of the Sanitary Board shall serve without compensation,
provided that if any member of the Board shall be elected to the office
of Secretary, hereinafter provided for, he shall be entitled to receive a
salary fixed by the Sanitary Board for that office.
E. The members of the Board shall, severally, take and subscribe to an
oath subscribed by § 501 of the Second Class Township Code.25
F. The Sanitary Board shall annually organize by electing a President from
among the members of the Board, a Secretary who may or may not be a
member of the Board and a Sanitary Officer who shall not be a member
of the Board.
G. The Secretary and the Sanitary Officer shall receive such salaries as
may be fixed by the Sanitary Board and ratified by the Township
Supervisors, and shall serve for a period of one year or until such time
thereafter as their successors may be elected and qualified.
H. The Secretary and the Sanitary Officer shall, severally, give bond to the
township in such sums as may be fixed by the Township Supervisors for
the faithful discharge of their duties, and shall also take and subscribe
to the oath required by members of the Board.
25.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65501.
§ 59-2 RICHLAND CODE § 62-2
62:58
§ 62-3. Powers and duties of Sanitary Officer.
§ 62-4. Powers of Sanitary Board.
A. The Secretary of the Sanitary Board shall keep minutes of the
proceedings of the Board, shall keep accurate accounts of the
expenditures of the Board, shall draw all requisitions for the payment of
moneys on account of the Sanitary Board from appropriations made by
the Township Supervisors to the Board and shall present the same to
the President of the Board for his approval.
B. The Secretary of the Sanitary Board shall render statements of the
expenditures to the Board at each stated meeting or as frequently as
the Board may require, shall prepare under the directions of the Board
the annual reports to the Township Supervisors, together with the
estimate of appropriation needed for the ensuing year, and shall make
such other reports and perform such other duties as the Board may
require.
A. It shall be the duty of the Sanitary Officer to attend all stated and
special meetings of the Sanitary Board and at times be ready and
available for the prompt performance of his official duties.
B. He shall make sanitary inspections and shall execute this chapter for
the Sanitary Board and shall, in the performance of his duties, have the
power and authority of a policeman.
A. The Sanitary Board shall have the power and it shall be its duty to
enforce the laws of the commonwealth, the regulations of the State
Department of Health and other agencies, boards and commissions of
state government pertaining to public health.
B. The Sanitary Board shall also make and enforce such additional rules
and regulations for abating and removing all nuisances which the
Sanitary Board shall deem prejudicial to the public health.
C. The Sanitary Board shall mark infected houses or places.
D. The Sanitary Board shall prescribe rules for the construction and
maintenance of house drains, wash pipes, soil pipes, and cesspools and
septic systems.
E. The Sanitary Board shall make all other rules and regulations that shall
be deemed necessary for the preservation of the public health.
F. Rules and regulations of the Sanitary Board must be approved by the
Township Supervisors and, when advertised in the same manner as
ordinances, shall have the force of ordinances of the township and all
penalties or punishment prescribed for the violation thereof, as well as
the expenses actually and necessary incurred in carrying such rules and
regulations into effect, shall be recoverable for the use of Richland
Township in the same manner as penalties for violation of the
§ 62-2 SANITARY BOARD § 62-4
62:59
§ 62-5. Abatement of nuisances.
§ 62-6. Estimates of expenditures report.
ordinances of Richland Township and subject to like limitations as to
the amount thereof.
G. The Sanitary Board shall have the power as a body or by committee, as
well as the Sanitary Officer, together with their assistants, subordinates
and workmen under and by order of said Board, to enter at any time
upon any premises in the Township of Richland upon which there is
suspected to be any nuisance detrimental to the public health for the
purpose of examining and abating the same.
H. The Sanitary Board may inspect house drains, waste and soil pipes,
cesspools, water closets, septic systems, slaughterhouses, hog pens,
stables, stable yards and any conditions or places whatsoever in the
township which may constitute a nuisance or a menace to the public
health.
A. Whenever any condition or place in the Township of Richland is found
by the Sanitary Board to be a nuisance or a menace to the health of the
people of the township, the Sanitary Board shall issue a written order of
abatement directed to the owner or agents of the owner of the premises
stating that the conditions specified therein constitute a nuisance or a
menace to health, and ordering an abatement thereof within such time
as may be specified by the Sanitary Board in such order.
B. In case such order of abatement is not obeyed within the time specified
therein, the Sanitary Board shall thereupon issue a further written
order to the Sanitary Officer directing him to remove or abate the same,
which order shall be executed by him and his subordinates and
workmen, and the expense thereof shall be recoverable from the owner
of the premises upon or from which the nuisance or menace to health is
abated or removed in the same manner as debts of like character are
now collected by law.
A. It shall be the duty of the Sanitary Board of Richland Township or its
officers to submit annually to the Richland Township Supervisors,
before the commencement of the fiscal year, an estimate of the
probable expenditures of the Board during the ensuing year.
B. The Richland Township Supervisors shall then proceed to make such
appropriations as may be deemed necessary.
C. The Sanitary Board or its officers shall, in the month of January of each
year, submit a report, in writing, to the Supervisors of its appropriation
and expenditures for the preceding year, together with such other
information on subjects relative to the sanitary conditions and
requirements of the Township of Richland as may be necessary, and the
§ 62-4 RICHLAND CODE § 62-6
62:60
§ 62-7. Cooperation with other governmental units.
Richland Township may cooperate with the County of Cambria or any
other municipality, as well as with the State Department of Health, in the
administration and enforcement of health laws.
§ 62-8. Violations and penalties.26
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 71
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Board of Appeals — See Ch. 6. Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 71-1. Purpose and findings.
Supervisors of Richland Township shall publish the same in their official
journal.
A. Purpose.
(1) Pursuant to the authority granted in the Second Class Township
Code27 to prohibit nuisances; to promote the health, welfare,
cleanliness, comfort and safety of the citizens of Richland
Township; to regulate buildings; and to regulate the time of
opening and closing and the conduct of places of public
entertainment, amusement and recreation, the Township of
Richland enacts this chapter to minimize and control the adverse
secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses and thereby
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
27.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 62-6 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 71-1
71:61
protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens; protect the
citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve
the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods;
and deter the spread of blight.
(2) The Board of Supervisors has determined that licensing is a
legitimate and reasonable means of accountability to ensure that
operators of sexually oriented businesses comply with reasonable
regulations and to ensure that operators do not knowingly allow
their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or
solicitation.
(3) The Board of Supervisors does not intend this chapter to suppress
any speech activities protected by the First Amendment, but to
enact a content-neutral ordinance which addresses the secondary
effects of sexually oriented businesses. It is not the intent of the
Board in enacting this legislation to deny any person rights of
speech protected by the Constitution of the United States or the
Constitution of Pennsylvania, or both, nor is it the intent of the
Board to impose by this chapter any additional limitations or
restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books and other
materials. Further, by enacting this legislation, the Board does not
intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain or view,
or both, any sexually oriented materials or conduct protected by
the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of
Pennsylvania, or both, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any
constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of
sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit
these materials.
B. Legislative findings. The Board of Supervisors finds:
(1) Statistics and studies performed in a substantial number of
communities in this commonwealth and in the United States
indicate that sexually oriented businesses have adverse secondary
effects, including those specified and recognized at 68 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5501(a), which secondary effects should be regulated to protect
the public health, safety and welfare. These secondary effects
include but are not limited to the spread of communicable diseases,
performance of sexual acts in public places, presence of discarded
sexually oriented materials on public and private property, sexual
harassment, obscenity, prostitution and other illegal sexual
activities, crime and neighborhood deterioration.
(2) Sexually oriented businesses have adverse secondary effects,
which secondary effects should be regulated to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
(3) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
§ 71-1 RICHLAND CODE § 71-1
71:62
the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a
licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive
on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run
in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its
patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the township. It
is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee
is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in
possession and control of the premises and activities occurring
therein.
(4) Removal of doors on viewing booths and requiring sufficient
lighting on premises with viewing booths advances a substantial
governmental interest in discouraging the illegal and unsanitary
sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.
(5) Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past
employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of
criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential
witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in
such establishments.
(6) The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the
sexually oriented business will help limit and control the adverse
secondary effects of such businesses.
(7) It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this
chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to
such activity.
(8) The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license,
or an employee thereof, has been convicted of a sexually related
crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant is likely to
engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter.
(9) The barring of such individuals from the management of sexually
oriented businesses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to
and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually
transmitted diseases.
(10) The general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the
township will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
(11) Limitation of operating hours of sexually oriented businesses to
8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. reduces the adverse secondary effects of
such businesses, including, particularly, but not limited to late
night noise levels, crime and sexually offensive materials and
activities in public areas, and promotes the public health, safety
and welfare.
§ 71-1 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 71-1
71:63
§ 71-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or for any form of consideration, or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players or other image-producing
devices are maintained, not located within viewing booths, to show images
to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE
— A commercial establishment which, as one of its substantial business
activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or
more of the following:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT —
(12) The reasonable regulation and supervision of such sexually
oriented businesses tends to discourage sexual acts and
prostitution and thereby promote the health, safety and welfare of
the patrons, clients and customers of these businesses.
(13) The continued unregulated operation of such sexually oriented
businesses is and would be detrimental to the general health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of Richland Township.
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides,
CD ROM discs or other computer software, or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
A.
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
B.
An exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures, meaning those
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
A.
A live performance, display or dance of any type which has as a
significant or substantial portion of the performance any actual or
simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and
viewing of specified anatomical areas or persons in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
B.
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions or visual presentations of any other kind which are
C.
§ 71-1 RICHLAND CODE § 71-2
71:64
ADULT THEATER — A theater, tavern, concert hall, banquet hall, party
room, conference center, restaurant, nightclub, club, bar, recreation center,
indoor amusement center, dance hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of
nudity or seminudity, or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
EMPLOYEE — A person who performs any service on the premises of
a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, lessee, lessee of a
dance floor, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not
said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator
of said business. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the
premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the
premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief
or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
D. A massage establishment.
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
A.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
B.
The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business or to a nonsexually oriented business; or
C.
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
The character and content of any material or performance described
herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by a licensee or
person; and
A.
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the licensee or person
made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such
minor.
B.
§ 71-2 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 71-2
71:65
LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in
a sexually oriented business.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or business which
provides the services of massage and body manipulation, including
exercises, heat and light treatments of the body and all forms or methods
of physiotherapy, unless operated by a medical practitioner, chiropractor or
professional physical or massage therapist duly licensed or certified. This
definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school gymnasium,
reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or similar
manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory
service.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears
seminude, in a state of nudity or who displays specified anatomical areas
and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any
form of consideration. "Nude model studio" shall not include a proprietary
school licensed by the State of Pennsylvania or a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college
or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than
a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple or areola or the showing of
the covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE or IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION — The state of dress in which
clothing nonopaquely covers specified anatomical areas.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing;
A.
Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class; and
B.
Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at
any one time.
C.
§ 71-2 RICHLAND CODE § 71-2
71:66
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, place of adult
entertainment, adult theater, escort agency, massage establishment, nude
model studio or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Every part of the human male and
female genitals, pubic region, anus, buttocks, the areola and nipple of the
female breast(s), or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even
if completely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following offenses:
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
B.
28Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity;
sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a child; possession or distribution of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a
child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault;
molestation of a child; gambling; distribution of a controlled substance;
or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or
penal code of this commonwealth or of other states or countries;
A.
For which:
Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor
offense;
(1)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
(2)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of
two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor
offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period.
(3)
B.
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant.
C.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts.
A.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 71-2 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 71-2
71:67
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
VIEWING BOOTHS — Booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, rooms
or other enclosures which are available for viewing:
§ 71-3. License required.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy.
B.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A and B above.
C.
D. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business.
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfer the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
Films, movies, videos or visual reproductions of any kind depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
A.
Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or who offer
performances or presentations characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
B.
A. It is unlawful:
(1) For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a
valid sexually oriented business license issued by the township
pursuant to this chapter.
(2) For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to
employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is
not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the
township pursuant to this chapter.
(3) For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented
business without having secured a sexually oriented business
employee license pursuant to this chapter.
(4) Beginning on the 60th day after enactment of this chapter, for any
person to continue to operate any sexually oriented business in
operation at the time of enactment of this chapter without a valid
sexually oriented business license pursuant to this chapter.
§ 71-2 RICHLAND CODE § 71-3
71:68
(5) Beginning on the 60th day after enactment of this chapter, for any
person who operates a sexually oriented business in operation at
the time of enactment of this chapter to employ a person to work
for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually
oriented business employee by the township pursuant to this
chapter.
(6) Beginning on the 60th day after enactment of this chapter, for any
person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business in
operation at the time of enactment of this chapter without having
secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to
this chapter.
B. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
township. For purposes of this chapter, the responsibility for conducting
any investigation and receiving and processing any application as
required under this chapter is hereby delegated to the Township Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee.
C. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide
such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the township to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in
this chapter.
D. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, the person must sign the application for a license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20% or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license
as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the following
section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
E. The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall
contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the
following documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
(a) An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit proof that he/she is at least 18 years of
age.
(b) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name
and the name of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if
any, and for each partner provide the information required
below at Subsection E(3), (4), (5), (8), (9) and (10).
(c) A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in
§ 71-3 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 71-3
71:69
good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation and
qualified and authorized to conduct business in Pennsylvania,
the names and capacity of all officers, directors and all owners
of more than 20% of the corporation stock, and the name of the
registered corporate agent and the address of the registered
office for service of process, and provide each officer, director
and owner of 20% or more of the corporate stock the
information required below at Subsection E(3), (4), (5), (8), (9)
and (10).
(d) Any entity other than a partnership or corporation, the entity
shall submit the information required below at Subsection
E(3), (4), (5), (8), (9) and (10) for each person exercising
control over the entity.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state
the sexually oriented business's fictitious name and submit the
required registration documents.
(3) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this
chapter, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved and the
date, place and jurisdiction of each.
(4) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has
had a previous license under this chapter or other similar sexually
oriented business ordinance from another municipality, state or
county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and
location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was
denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial,
suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person
residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or
an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is
licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of
the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension or
revocation.
(5) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds
any other licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually
oriented business ordinance from another municipality, state or
county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed
businesses.
(6) The specific classification of sexually oriented use for which the
applicant is filing, along with a detailed description of each and
every activity encompassed by the proposed sexually oriented use,
which description shall thoroughly demonstrate compliance and/or
intended compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
§ 71-3 RICHLAND CODE § 71-3
71:70
(7) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a
legal description of the property, street address and telephone
number(s), if any.
(8) The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
(9) A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
(10) The applicant's driver's permit number, social security number and
his/her state or federally issued tax identification number.
(11) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
(12) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting
the property lines, the property to be certified.
(13) If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business
which includes viewing booths, then the applicant shall also comply
with the application requirements set forth in § 71-11 and shall
separately apply for and obtain a building and occupancy permit for
the installation of the viewing booths.
(14) The application form shall inform the applicant that separate
applications are required for any necessary zoning permits,
subdivision and land development approvals or building and
occupancy permits and that the applicant may apply for such
permits by contacting the Township Code Enforcement Officer, and
that Department of Labor and Industry approval is required.
(15) An infectious control plan to protect employees and the public from
bodily fluids or infectious contamination. A copy of the plan shall be
attached to the application and shall be OSHA (Occupational Safety
and Health Act) compliant.
(16) Satisfactory proof through a dye test or other diagnostic test that
any public sewer service, on-lot sewage or septic system is free of
any malfunction and operating in compliance with the
requirements of the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer
("SEO"). The Township SEO shall be present during any such
testing.
F. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by
the township the following information:
(1) The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage" names)
or aliases used by the individual.
§ 71-3 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 71-3
71:71
§ 71-4. Issuance of license.
(2) Age, and date and place of birth.
(3) Height, weight and hair and eye color.
(4) Present residence address and telephone number.
(5) Present business address and telephone number.
(6) Date, issuing state and number of driver's license or other
identification card information.
(7) Social security number.
(8) Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
G. Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business
employee license, as provided above, shall be the following:
(1) A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's
face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by any
police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints
shall be paid by the applicant.
(2) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the
five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, including whether such applicant previously operated
or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, municipality,
state or country, any business or has ever had a license, permit or
authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or had
any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or
suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or
suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying
jurisdiction and describe in full the reason for the denial,
revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation
or suspension shall be attached to the application.
(3) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved and the date, place and
jurisdiction of each.
(4) An infectious control plan to protect employees and the public from
bodily fluids or infectious contamination. A copy of the plan shall be
attached to the application and shall be OSHA (Occupational Safety
and Health Act) compliant.
A. Upon the filing of said application in a fully completed form for a
sexually oriented business license or for a sexually oriented business
employee license, the application shall then be referred to the Township
Code Enforcement Officer for review and investigation. The Township
Code Enforcement Officer shall utilize any available resources through
§ 71-3 RICHLAND CODE § 71-4
71:72
the Pennsylvania State Police, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/
or other law enforcement agencies as may be necessary to complete
the review and investigation required by this chapter. Within 30 days
from the date the completed application is filed, the Township Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a license, unless it is determined by the
Township Code Enforcement Officer that one or more of the following
findings is true:
(1) The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;
(2) The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as
defined in this chapter;
(4) The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute,
rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this
chapter; or
(5) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee
license revoked by the township within two years of the date of the
current application. If the sexually oriented business employee
license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is
immediately deemed null and void. Denial, suspension or
revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be
subject to appeal as set forth in § 71-9.
(6) The required application, investigation and license fees have not
been paid.
(7) An applicant's license to operate a sexually oriented business,
issued by any jurisdiction, has been revoked within the preceding
12 months.
(8) The proposed sexually oriented business is in violation of or is not
in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the township that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified
criminal activity as defined in this chapter or committed any act during
the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny
the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be
subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in § 71-5.
C. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the
sexually oriented business and the specific classification of sexually
oriented use for which the license is issued. Licenses for sexually
§ 71-4 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 71-4
71:73
§ 71-5. Fees.
§ 71-6. Inspection.
oriented businesses shall state that the sexually oriented business shall
not commence until all necessary zoning, subdivision and land
development and/or building code approvals and Department of Labor
and Industry approvals are obtained. All licenses shall be posted in
a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented
business so that they may be easily read at any time.
D. Applications for building and occupancy permits shall be processed and
either denied or approved within 30 days of a complete application by
the township. A letter notifying the applicant of such denial or approval
shall be mailed to the applicant within 30 days of the submittal of a
completed application.
E. A sexually oriented business license shall issue for the specific
classification of sexually oriented use as permitted by ordinance and
applied for.
F. A license denial shall conform to the provisions of § 71-9.
G. Any person aggrieved by the denial of a license may appeal, in writing,
within 30 days from the date of the denial decision to the Richland
Township Administrative Board of Appeals in accordance with
procedures set forth in § 71-9.
A. Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a
new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee in an amount set
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
B. In addition to the application and investigation fee required above,
every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or
renewal) shall pay to the township an annual nonrefundable license fee
in an amount set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors within 30
days prior to the license issuance or renewal.
C. Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by an annual nonrefundable application, investigation and
license fee in an amount set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
D. All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the office of the
Township Manager and, thereafter, the applications shall be forwarded
to the Township Code Enforcement Officer for review and investigation
and approval or denial.
A. An applicant or licensee shall permit authorized township officials and
their agents or consultants to inspect the premises of a sexually
§ 71-4 RICHLAND CODE § 71-6
71:74
§ 71-7. Expiration of license.
§ 71-8. Suspension.
The Township Code Enforcement Officer shall suspend a license for a period
not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee has:
§ 71-9. Revocations and appeals of denials, suspensions or
revocations.
oriented business, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law,
at any time it is occupied or open for business.
B. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or
employee commits a violation of this chapter if he refuses to permit
such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open
for business.
A. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in § 71-3. Application
for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date,
and, when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the date
of expiration of the license will not be extended.
B. When the township denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not
be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent
to denial, the township finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became
final.
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this chapter;
B. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter; or
C. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises.
A. The Township Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke a license if a
cause of suspension in § 71-8 occurs and the license has been
suspended within the preceding 12 months.
B. The Township Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke a license if he
determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
(2) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
§ 71-6 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 71-9
71:75
(3) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business
during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
(5) A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in
or on the license premises;
(6) A licensee has failed to develop and follow an infectious control
plan to protect employees and the public; or
(7) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the township for any
licensing fees past due.
C. When the township revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for
one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented
business license for one year from the date the revocation became
effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the township finds that the basis
for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be
granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective.
D. All license application, renewal, suspension or revocation decisions
shall be sent, in writing, to the applicant or licensee. All such decisions
which deny, suspend or revoke a license shall state specifically the
ordinance requirement not met and any other basis for the decision.
After denial of an application or denial of a renewal of an application, or
after suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee
may appeal pursuant to the Local Agency Law to the Township
Administrative Board of Appeals pursuant to Chapter 6, Administrative
Board of Appeals, as amended. Any such appeal must be filed, in
writing, with the township within 30 days from the date of the filing of
the decision appealed from. Failure or refusal to file said appeal with
the township shall be deemed a conclusive determination as to the
issues or matters addressed by the written decision. The Administrative
Board of Appeals shall hold a local agency law hearing and render a
decision within 30 days, unless an extension is agreed to, in writing, by
the applicant, from the date the appeal was filed. In the case of a denial
of a license renewal, or in the case of a license suspension or
revocation, the licensee may continue to operate to the same extent as
immediately prior to the suspension or revocation until the earlier of:
the expiration of the thirty-day appeal period without filing of an
appeal; or the date of a decision dismissing any appeal.
E. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Administrative Board of
Appeals may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Cambria County,
Pennsylvania. The township shall, upon filing of such appeal, consent to
any request by a license applicant or licensee to the Court to give
expedited review to such appeal. The township shall certify any record
to the Court within 20 days of any request by the Court to do so.
§ 71-9 RICHLAND CODE § 71-10
71:76
§ 71-10. Transfer of license.
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application.
§ 71-11. Exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live
entertainment in viewing rooms.
A. A person who operates viewing booths or causes them to be operated
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations
and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating
any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted.
A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area.
The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will
be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall
not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the
north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn
to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show
the various internal dimensions of all areas of interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The township
may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and
certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered
since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(3) It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least
one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
(4) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from the manager's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose, excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain
video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more
manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the two manager's
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line
of sight from the manager's station. In addition, all viewing booths
shall have at least one side fully open so that all of the area inside
§ 71-10 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 71-11
71:77
the booth is open to the view of persons in the public area of the
establishment.
(5) It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the view area
specified in Subsection A(4) remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an
area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed
pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section.
(6) No viewing room or booth may be occupied by more than one
person at any time.
(7) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than 5.0 footcandles
as measured at the floor level.
(8) It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
(9) No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
(10)No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths or rooms.
(11) The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the
walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.
(12) The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be
nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
(13) The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by,
nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48
inches of the floor.
(14) Each viewing area and/or dance area shall be inspected regularly
for violations of this chapter. Each violation shall be corrected
immediately. Any infectious/bodily fluids found shall be properly
handled as per OSHA and the infectious control plans.
(15) The licensee shall brief all employees as to the approved infectious
control plan and OSHA regulations before and during employment
at intervals of at least six months.
§ 71-11 RICHLAND CODE § 71-11
71:78
§ 71-12. Additional regulations for escort agencies.
§ 71-13. Additional regulations for nude model studios.
§ 71-14. Additional regulations concerning public nudity.
B. A person having a duty under Subsection A(1) through (15) above
commits a violation of this chapter if he knowingly fails to fulfill that
duty.
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person acts as an
escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18
years.
A. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person under the age of 18 years commits a violation of this chapter if
the person appears seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the
premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under
this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a rest room not open
to public view or visible to any other person.
C. A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person appears in a
state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of
nudity, in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed
from the public right-of-way.
D. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in
any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to knowingly and
intentionally, in a public place:
(1) Engage in sexual intercourse or to engage in deviate sexual
intercourse as defined by the Pennsylvania Crimes Code;
(2) Appear in a state of nudity; or
(3) Fondle the genitals of himself, herself or another person.
B. For purposes of this chapter, "public place" includes all outdoor areas
owned by or open to the general public, and all buildings and enclosed
places owned by or open to the general public, including but not limited
to places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance
halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to specific members,
and party rooms or halls restricted to adults or to patrons invited to
attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied. This section shall
not apply to:
§ 71-11 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 71-14
71:79
§ 71-15. Prohibition against children in sexually oriented
businesses.
A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person knowingly allows
a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented
business.
§ 71-16. Hours of operation.
No sexually oriented business shall be open for business before 8:00 a.m.,
Monday through Sunday, or after 10:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday.
§ 71-17. Exemptions.
(1) Any child under 10 years of age;
(2) Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breast feeding an
infant under two years of age; or
(3) The exercise of free speech or free expression in the form of artistic
and theatrical performances. It is the intention of the township that
this section be construed, enforced and interpreted in such a
manner as will cause the least possible infringement of the
constitutional rights of free speech, free expression, due process,
equal protection or other fundamental rights.
C. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person who knowingly or
intentionally in a sexually oriented business appears in a seminude
condition unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, shall
be at least 10 feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least
two feet from the floor.
A. It is a defense to prosecution under § 71-14 that a person appearing in a
state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation.
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; and in a structure:
(a) Which leads no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is
available for viewing;
(b) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class; and
(c) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any
one time.
§ 71-14 RICHLAND CODE § 71-18
71:80
§ 71-18. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Chapter 75
ALARMS AND ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 75-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device designed for the detection of an
unauthorized entry of the premises or unlawful acts, and when activated
gives a signal, either visual or audible, or both, or transmits or causes to be
transmitted a signal.
CALENDAR YEAR — January 1 though December 31.
CHARGE — An amount assessed a subscriber protected by an alarm system
for a false alarm only.
FALSE ALARM — An alert by an alarm system which, upon investigation,
discloses that no burglary, attempted burglary, breaking and entering,
robbery or other acts for which it is designed to initiate police investigation
or action has occurred. It shall not include alerts caused by power outages,
weather conditions or when the alarm is canceled immediately after being
activated by a person responsible timely calling the 911 Center and giving
proper identification to cancel the police response.
SUBSCRIBER — An owner or lessee of a premises equipped with an alarm
system.
A. Any individual, firm, corporation or entity who violates, causes or
permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a criminal fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation and imprisonment to
the extent permitted by law for the punishment of summary offenses.
B. A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a
violation is found to exist or for each section of this chapter found to
have been violated.
C. Enforcement of this chapter shall be by action brought before the
District Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure.
D. In addition to any other remedy available under law, the township may
enforce this chapter by an action in equity.
E. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this chapter shall be
paid to the Township Treasurer.
F. The initial determination of ordinance violation and the service of
notice of violation are hereby delegated to the Township Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee.
§ 71-18 ALARMS AND ALARM SYSTEMS § 75-2
75:81
§ 75-2. False alarms; responsibility for costs.
Whenever a false alarm is received for a premises served by an alarm
system, the subscriber shall be charged an amount in accordance with the
following schedule:
Charge for False Alarm Received During a Calendar Year
False Alarms Charge
Less than 4 No charge
4 to 10 $25
11 or more $50
§ 75-3. Failure to pay charges.
The failure of a subscriber to pay a false alarm charge within 30 days after
receipt of a notice to do so shall result in a filing of a citation before the
issuing authority to institute a summary criminal proceeding.
§ 75-4. Violations and penalties.29
Any person, firm or corporation having an alarm system who violates any
of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding brought before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules
of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution.
In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 78
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 173.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 75-2 RICHLAND CODE § 75-4
78:82
ARTICLE I
Consumption in Public Places
[Adopted 6-16-1980 by Ord. No. 117]
§ 78-1. Consumption in public places prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages on
the sidewalks, streets, avenues, alleys, playgrounds, parks, parking lots or
other public places within the Township of Richland.
§ 78-2. Violations and penalties.30
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 78-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 78-2
78:83

ARTICLE II
Intermunicipal Liquor License Transfers
[Adopted 8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 285]
§ 78-3. Integration.
The whereas clauses set forth above and the provisions of Act 141 of 2000
are incorporated herein by reference.31
§ 78-4. Application procedure.
The applicant shall submit the appropriate fee and the application to the
Township supplying the information requested. The form of the application
is attached as Exhibit A and may be amended from time to time by
resolution.32
§ 78-5. Fee schedule.
In order for any application to be accepted by the Township, the applicant
must submit an application fee to defray the costs of public notices and
Township secretarial and administrative expenses with the written
application. The initial application fee will defray these costs up to and
including a maximum hearing of three hours. Each additional three hours of
hearing, or any part thereof, will constitute an additional hearing day with
resulting additional fees as set forth below:
§ 78-6. Notices.
Public notice of the hearing(s) shall be provided as per the requirements of
the Sunshine Act, 65 Pa. C.S.A. § 701 et seq., as follows:
A. Initial application fee: as set forth from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Fee for additional (extended) three hour hearing: as set forth from time
to time by the Board of Supervisors.
C. In addition to the application fee and additional (extended) hearing fees
set forth above, all costs incurred for providing a stenographic record
to the Township, including appearance fees, shall be the responsibility
of the applicant.
D. The initial application fee must accompany the application and is
nonrefundable.
E. The fees may be amended from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors.
31.Editor's Note: The whereas clauses can be found on file in the Township offices. See 47 P.S.
§ 4-401 et seq. for statutory provisions.
32.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 78-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 78-6
78:85
§ 78-7. Hearings.
A. Initial hearing, at least three days notice by:
(1) Publication in the Johnstown Tribune-Democrat;
(2) Posting in the Municipal Building;
(3) Written notice to the applicant at the address listed on the
application; and
(4) Written notice to all property owners within 500 feet of the
proposed location of the liquor license.
B. Continued hearings, at least 24 hours notice by:
(1) Publication in the Johnstown Tribune-Democrat;
(2) Posting in the Municipal Building;
(3) Written notice to the applicant at the address listed on the
application; and
(4) To parties who have requested in writing to be so notified by
providing their name(s) and address(es) at the initial hearing;
A. Procedure. The Board of Supervisors shall conduct the hearing
according to the following procedure which may be modified, on a caseby-
case basis, to insure an efficient use of time.
(1) Called to order and salute to the flag.
(2) Chairman/Solicitor' s introductory remarks.
(a) Statement of reason for the hearing;
(b) Identification of parties wishing to be heard; and
(c) Outline of procedures to be followed during hearing.
(3) Applicant's presentation of case.
(a) Board's/Solicitor's questions/cross examination; and
(b) Public's questions/cross examination.
(4) Objector's presentation of case.
(a) Board's/Solicitor's questions/cross examination;
(b) Applicant's questions/cross examination; and
(c) Public's questions/cross examination.
(5) Public comment and recommendations by interested residents of
the Township.
§ 78-6 RICHLAND CODE § 78-7
78:86
§ 78-8. Decision of Board.
(6) Rebuttal by applicant.
(7) Rebuttal by objectors.
(8) Closing remarks and notice of when decision is expected to be
made.
(9) Adjournment.
B. Conduct.
(1) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, however, irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(2) All persons who testify shall be placed under oath by the
stenographer.
(3) All parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
at argument and cross examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(4) There shall be a stenographic record kept of the proceedings.
A. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be rendered within 45
days of the request for approval of the applicant by resolution.
B. In determining whether the approval would adversely affect the
welfare, health, peace and morals of Richland Township, or its
residents, the Board may consider, in addition to the information
contained in the application, the following:
(1) The total number of existing liquor licenses in a Township and
whether the total number of existing liquor license exceeds one
license per 3,000 population of the Township, or the quota
established by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
(2) The population of Richland Township.
(3) The location of:
(a) The closest existing licensed establishment;
(b) Church;
(c) School; and
(d) Playground.
(4) Copy of the completed application required by the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board.
(5) Applicant's complete criminal history.
§ 78-7 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 78-8
78:87
(6) Concerns expressed by area residents, businesses and public
interest organizations.
(7) Recommendations of the Richland Township Police Department.
(8) Any other issue or fact that may adversely affect the welfare,
health, peace and morals of Richland Township, or its inhabitants.
C. A decision by the Board of Supervisors to deny the request may be
appealed to the Court of Common Pleas of Cambria County.
§ 78-8 RICHLAND CODE § 78-8
78:88
Chapter 82
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 82-1. Enacting clause.
Be it ordained and enacted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Richland, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the
same, that from and after the effective date of this chapter, the following
chapter shall be in full force and effect in the Township of Richland.
§ 82-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Richland Township Amusement Device
Ordinance."
§ 82-3. Conflict; repeal of other provisions.
Ordinance No. 76 is hereby repealed, as are all other ordinances or parts
of ordinances insofar as they conflict with the provisions of this chapter;
however, such repeal shall not affect any act done or any liability or violation
accrued under any such prior ordinance herein repealed or superseded, and
all such liabilities or violations shall continue and may be enforced in the
same manner as if such repeal or supersession had not been made; and any
offense or violation committed and any penalty or forfeiture incurred under
any such ordinance herein repealed or superseded may be prosecuted in
the same manner as if this chapter had not been approved.
§ 82-4. Rules of construction and word usage.
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future tense.
C. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
D. The word "shall" is always mandatory and is not discretionary.
E. The word "may" is permissive.
F. The Board of Supervisors intends to favor the public interest as against
any private interest.
G. The headings prefixed to sections and other divisions of this chapter
shall not be considered to control but may be used to aid in the
construction thereof.
§ 78-8 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 82-4
82:89
§ 82-5. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and
phrases, used in this chapter or in an application for license of amusement
devices,33 shall have the meaning given to them in this section:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — A video or mechanical amusement device, juke
box or pool table and/or other electronic device, machine or apparatus
whatsoever for the playing of games and amusement.
APPLICANT — Any individual, partnership or corporation who or which
seeks to obtain a license for a video or mechanical amusement device under
this chapter.
APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OF AMUSEMENT DEVICE — The document
filed by an applicant requesting a permit to possess in the Township of
Richland any video or mechanical amusement device, juke box or pool table
and/or other electronic device, machine or apparatus whatsoever for the
playing of games and amusement. 34
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any restaurant, bar, tavern, retail,
manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, educational, religious,
governmental or other nonresidential establishment, store or business,
whether or not in operation.
GAMBLING DEVICE — Any device, machine or apparatus used for the
playing of poker, blackjack, keno, bingo or other casino games by the
insertion therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token.
ILLEGAL GAMBLING DEVICE — Any device, machine or apparatus
designed and/or specifically equipped to be used for the playing of poker,
blackjack, keno, bingo, slots or other casino gambling games by the
insertion therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token which has
or is designed to facilitate the ready use of a knockoff or knockdown device
or other capability for erasing or eliminating playing credits.
JUKE BOX — Any device, machine or apparatus which plays recorded music,
whether by record, tape, compact disc or other means, by the insertion
therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token.
POOL TABLE — Any device or apparatus upon which is played the games
of 8-ball, billiards, pool, snooker or other similar games for which a fee is
charged, whether or not such device is operated through the insertion of
coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token.
PROPRIETOR — Any individual, partnership or corporation who or which
owns, leases or maintains the business establishment in which any juke box,
H. General words shall be construed to take their meanings and be
restricted by preceding particular words.
33.Editor's Note: A copy of an application for license of amusement devices is located at the
end of this chapter.
34.Editor's Note: A copy of an application for license of amusement devices is located at the
end of this chapter.
§ 82-4 RICHLAND CODE § 82-5
82:90
pool table or video or mechanical amusement device is placed for the use,
patronage, recreation or amusement of the public or of persons in or about
the business establishment.
VENDOR — Any individual, partnership or corporation who or which is the
lawful owner of any juke box, pool table or video or mechanical amusement
device for which a license is sought under this chapter, or any individual,
partnership or corporation who makes, assembles, sets up, maintains, sells,
lends, leases, gives away or offers for sale, loan, lease or gift any juke box,
pool table or video or mechanical amusement device for which a license is
sought under this chapter.
VIDEO OR MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any device, machine
or apparatus used for the playing of games or otherwise used for the
purpose of amusement or entertainment by the insertion therein of any
coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token, including but not limited to claw
machines, electric or electronic dart boards, pinball machines and video
games.
§ 82-6. License required.
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall at any time
have in his or its possession within the Township of Richland any video or
mechanical amusement device, juke box or pool table for the playing of
games and amusement without first having procured a license therefor as
hereinafter provided in this chapter.
§ 82-7. Application for license.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity desiring to procure a license
as required in § 82-6 of this chapter shall apply therefor, in writing, to
the Township Secretary. Said application shall set forth the following
information:
A. The name and residence of the vendor of each juke box, pool table or
video or mechanical amusement device to be licensed.
B. The name and residence of the proprietor of the business establishment
in which each juke box, pool table or video or mechanical amusement
device is to be located, used or installed.
C. If vendor and/or proprietor is a citizen of the United States.
D. The manufacturer, name of machine, serial number, type and fee for
each machine, video or mechanical device, pool table, juke box or
apparatus to be located on the premises, installed or used.
E. A verification by the vendor and proprietor that the facts set forth in the
application are true and correct to the vendor's and proprietor's
personal knowledge, information or belief and that any false statements
therein are made subject to the penalties of the Crimes Code, 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, relating to unsworn falsification to authorities.
§ 82-5 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 82-7
82:91
§ 82-8. Persons ineligible for licenses.
The Township Secretary shall not issue a license for any video or mechanical
amusement device to any person who:
§ 82-9. Condition for issuance.
No license shall be granted until a period of 10 days shall have elapsed from
the date of application, during which time the Township Secretary may, at
his/her discretion, investigate the facts set forth in the application.
§ 82-10. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize, license or permit
any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device, either per se or as modified,
F. That the vendor and proprietor have been provided a copy of this
chapter and that he/they have read and agree to be bound by all terms
and provisions hereof.
G. That a license does not sanction or condone the use or possession of any
illegal gambling device, whether illegal per se or as modified.
H. That the illegal use or possession of an unlawful gambling device, either
per se or as modified, may result in a criminal prosecution by law
enforcement officials.
A. Is not a citizen of the United States;
B. Is not 21 years of age; or
C. Has been found guilty of or accepted accelerated rehabilitative
disposition for possessing or using a video or mechanical amusement
device in violation of the Crimes Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania within three years of the date of application.
A. The Township Secretary shall refuse to issue a license for any device
that the applicant has not affirmed is not designed, or intended to be
used, for gambling purposes.
B. A license shall not be issued unless the applicant acknowledges:
(1) That obtaining or displaying an amusement license does not
sanction or permit the use of any device for gambling purposes or
possession of an illegal gambling device, either per se or as
modified.
(2) That if the applicant or licensee illegally uses or possesses an
unlawful gambling device, either per se or as modified, he may be
prosecuted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other law
enforcement officials.
§ 82-7 RICHLAND CODE § 82-10
82:92
or in any way contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States of America.
§ 82-11. License fees.
No license shall be issued until the annual fees set by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors shall have been paid by the applicant to the Township
of Richland Secretary for each and every device to be installed or used.
The annual fees paid shall be a license fee until December 31 of each year;
except, however, should any such device be installed after July 1 of any year,
and an application therefor is made after such date, then in such event the
license fee for that particular year, until December 31, shall be 1/2 of the
annual fee.
§ 82-12. Issuance and display.
Upon the payment of the license fee provided by this chapter, and if the
application fully complies with this chapter, the Township Secretary shall
issue a disc, plate or sticker setting forth the number of the license for
each machine so licensed, and said disc, plate or sticker shall be attached
and fastened to the respective machine or device so that the same may
be clearly observable and readable. Discs, plates or stickers issued for a
particular machine or device are not transferable to another machine or
device. All discs, plates or stickers issued by the Township of Richland
for video and mechanical amusement devices shall state that the video or
mechanical amusement device is for amusement purposes only, that it is not
a gambling device and that only games and not money may be won on the
machine or device.
§ 82-13. Inspection.
The Township of Richland or its agents may, during regular business hours
of the business establishment, conduct inspections of any business
establishment where any video or mechanical amusement device, juke box
or pool table licensed under this chapter is located, installed, placed or used
to ensure compliance with this chapter.
§ 82-14. Revocation; contraband declaration.
A. In the event that any applicant, owner or proprietor falsifies any
information on an application for license of amusement devices or
violates this chapter, the Township of Richland shall immediately revoke
all licenses issued under this chapter to such applicant, vendor or
proprietor.
B. Moreover, in the event that a vendor of a video or mechanical
amusement device or a proprietor of a business establishment is
convicted of possessing or using a video or mechanical amusement
device in violation of the Crimes Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the Township of Richland shall revoke each license issued
to such person as an applicant, vendor or proprietor.
§ 82-10 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 82-14
82:93
§ 82-15. Prohibition of suggestion or promise of nonprosecution.
Because the Township of Richland intends to foster compliance with the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United States regarding
illegal possession and/or use of gambling devices, no township employee or
agent may promise, suggest or insinuate, either expressly or by implication,
that the applicant, licensee, proprietor or owner, who either illegally
possesses any device used or intended to be used for gambling purposes,
shall not be prosecuted.
§ 82-16. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, any person or
persons, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall constitute a summary offense and, upon conviction by the
issuing authority for the magisterial district which includes the Township
of Richland, shall upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the township before a District Justice, pay a
fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney's fees, incurred by the township in the enforcement of this chapter.
No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
Chapter 85
ANIMALS
C. Additionally, the Township of Richland shall not issue a license of
amusement devices to any person who has been found guilty of or
accepted accelerated rehabilitative disposition for possessing or using
a video or mechanical amusement device in violation of the Crimes
Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania within three years of the
date of application.
D. Any video or mechanical amusement device used or possessed in
violation of the Crimes Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
this chapter may be deemed contraband and forfeited in accordance
with the provisions set forth in 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6501(d) (relating to
scattering rubbish).
§ 82-14 RICHLAND CODE § 82-16
85:94
ARTICLE I
Control of Dogs
[For current provisions regarding the control of dogs, see 3 P.S.
§ 459-101 et seq.]
ANIMALS § 82-16
85:95
Chapter 96
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Board of Appeals — See Ch. 6.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 138.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 82-16 RICHLAND CODE § 82-16
96:96
ARTICLE I
Building Code
§ 96-1. Adoption of Building Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of Richland Township, being marked
and designated as the "BOCA National Building Code, Fourteenth Edition,
1999," as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of
Richland Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA
National Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 96-2 of this article.
§ 96-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1 is revised as follows:
101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of
the Township of Richland, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, hereinafter
referred to as such or as "this code."
B. Section 112.3.1 is revised as follows:
112.3.1 Fee schedule: A fee for each plan examination, building
permit and inspection shall be paid in accordance with a schedule
adopted by the Board of Supervisors, from time to time, by resolution.
C. Section 116.4 is revised as follows:
116.4 Violation penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure
in violation of an approved plan or directive of a code official, or of
a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall
be guilty of a summary offense punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, and upon the default of the payment of the fine or penalty
imposed shall be subject to a sentence not exceeding 30 days in the
Cambria County Jail. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
D. Section 117.2 is revised as follows:
§ 96-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 96-2
96:97
§ 96-3. Saving clause.
Nothing in this article or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed by this
article; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this article.
117.2 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue in or
about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs of prosecution.
E. Section 121.0 shall be deleted in its entirety and amended to read as
follows:
"The owner of a building or structure, office or agency of the township,
or any other person aggrieved from a decision of the Codes Official,
may appeal to the Richland Township Administrative Board of Appeals
pursuant to the provisions of Richland Township Ordinance Number
133, as amended."35
F. A new section is added under Chapter 31, Section 3102.0, Signs.
"A person shall not erect, install, remove, rehang or maintain over
public property any sign for which a permit is required under the
provisions of this code until an approved bond shall have been filed
with the township in the amount of $100,000 as herein required or
until an insurance policy shall have been filed for public liability in
the amount of $100,000 per accident and for property damage in the
amount of $25,000 as herein required."
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Administrative Board of Appeals.
§ 96-2 RICHLAND CODE § 96-3
96:98
ARTICLE II
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code
§ 96-4. Adoption of International One- and Two-Family Dwelling
Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of Richland Township, being marked
and designated as the "International One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code,
1998 Edition," as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and
is hereby adopted as the One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code of Richland
Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International One- and
Two-Family Dwelling Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 96-5 this article.
§ 96-5. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1 is revised as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code of the Township of Richland,
Cambria County, Pennsylvania, hereinafter referred to as such or "this
code."
B. Section 106.4 is revised as follows:
106.4 Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of not more than $1,000, and upon the default of the payment
of the fine or penalty imposed shall be subject to a sentence not
exceeding 30 days in the Cambria County Jail. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Section 107 is revised as follows:
Section 107 Right of Appeal. The owner of a building or structure,
office or agency of the township, or any other person aggrieved from
a decision of the Codes Official, may appeal to the Richland Township
Administrative Board of Appeals pursuant to the provisions of Richland
Township Ordinance Number 133, as amended.36
D. Section 111.5 is revised as follows:
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Administrative Board of Appeals.
§ 96-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 96-5
96:99
§ 96-6. Saving clause.
Nothing in this article or in the One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed by this article; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
111.5 Permit fees. A fee for each plan examination, building permit
and inspection shall be paid in accordance with a schedule adopted by
the Board of Supervisors, from time to time, by resolution.
E. Section 111.6, Permit expiration, shall be deleted in its entirety and
shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 240, Zoning.
§ 96-5 RICHLAND CODE § 96-6
96:100
Chapter 99
BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Board of Appeals — See Ch. 6.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 134.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 186.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 99-1. Criteria for dangerous buildings.
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects
shall be deemed dangerous buildings:
A. Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
B. Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of damage
or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50% of
damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside
walls or covering.
C. Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient
strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
D. Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes as to
have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and
welfare of the occupants or the people of the Township of Richland.
E. Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to
cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals,
safety or general welfare of those living therein.
F. Those having light, air, and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to
protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings
who live or may live therein.
G. Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or
those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other
means of communication.
H. Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall
and injure members of the public or property.
§ 96-6 BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS § 99-1
99:101
§ 99-2. Dangerous buildings declared to be nuisances.
All dangerous buildings within the terms of § 99-1 of this chapter are
hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be repaired, vacated or
demolished as hereinbefore and hereinafter provided.
§ 99-3. Investigation procedures.
Whenever it shall be reported or come to the attention of any township
official or police officer that any building or structure, completed or in the
process of construction, or any portion thereof is in a dangerous condition,
such person having knowledge thereof shall report the same to the Board
of Supervisors, and the Board shall immediately cause an investigation
and examination to be made of such building or structure by the Codes
Enforcement Officer or Zoning Officer. If such investigation or examination
indicates such building or structure to be dangerous in accordance with the
standards of § 99-1 of this chapter, a written report of such investigation
shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors, specifying the exact
condition of such building or structure and setting forth whether or in what
respect the structure is dangerous and whether the structure is capable
of being properly repaired or whether it shall be removed as a dangerous
structure.
§ 99-4. Duties of enforcing officer.
The Codes Enforcement Officer or Zoning Officer shall:
I. Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people
of this township.
J. Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of Chapter 240,
Zoning, of this township or any other provisions of Chapter 134, Fire
Prevention, or other ordinances of the township.
A. Inspect or cause to be inspected all public buildings, schools, halls,
churches, theaters, hotels, taverns, commercial manufacturing, or loft
buildings for the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist
which render such places dangerous buildings within the terms of
§ 99-1 of this chapter.
B. Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed
by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be
existing in violation of this chapter.
C. Inspect any building, wall or structure reported (as hereinafter
provided for) by the Fire or Police Departments of this township as
probably existing in violation of the terms of this chapter.
D. Notify, in writing, the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all
other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land
records of the Recorder of Deeds of the County of Cambria, State of
§ 99-1 RICHLAND CODE § 99-4
99:102
§ 99-5. Hearing procedures.
The Board of Supervisors shall:
Pennsylvania, of any building found by him to be a dangerous building
within the standards set forth in § 99-1 of this chapter, that: the owner
must vacate or repair or demolish said building in accordance with the
terms of the notice and this chapter; the occupant or lessee must vacate
said building or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and
remain in possession; the mortgagee, agent or other persons having an
interest in said building as shown by the land records of the Recorder
of Deeds of Cambria County, or the township records, may, at his own
risk, repair, vacate or demolish said building or have such work or act
done; provided that any person notified under this subsection to repair,
vacate or demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time,
not exceeding 30 days, as may be necessary to do or have done the
work or act required by the notice provided for herein.
E. Set forth in the notice provided for in Subsection D hereof a description
of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the
particulars which make the building or structure a dangerous building
and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to
comply with the terms of this chapter within such length of time, not
exceeding 30 days, as is reasonable.
F. Report to the Township Supervisors any noncompliance with the notice
provided for in Subsections D and E hereof.
G. Appear at all hearings conducted by the Township Supervisors and
testify as to the condition of dangerous buildings.37
A. Upon receipt of a report of the Codes Enforcement Officer or Zoning
Officer as provided for in § 99-4F hereof, give written notice to the
owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having
an interest in said buildings as shown by the land records of the
Recorder of Deeds of the County of Cambria, State of Pennsylvania, to
appear before them on the date specified in the notice to show cause
why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building
should not be repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the
statement of particulars set forth in the Codes Enforcement Officer's or
Zoning Officer's notice provided for herein in § 99-4E.
B. Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the Codes Enforcement
Officer or Zoning Officer or the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or
any other person having an interest in said building as shown by the
land records of the Recorder of Deeds of the County of Cambria, State
of Pennsylvania, shall offer relative to the dangerous building.
37.Editor's Note: Former Section IV(h), regarding appointment of a Building Inspector, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 99-4 BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS § 99-5
99:103
§ 99-6. Appeals.38
Any person aggrieved may appeal to the Richland Administrative Board of
Appeals any decision or interpretation of the Codes Enforcement Officer or
other authorized representative of the township pursuant to the provisions
of Chapter 6, Administrative Board of Appeals, as amended.
§ 99-7. Standards for repair, vacation or demolition.
The following standards shall be followed in substance in ordering repair,
vacation or demolition:
§ 99-8. Enforcement procedures.
C. Make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant to
Subsection B as to whether or not the building in question is a
dangerous building within the terms of § 99-1 hereof.
D. Issue an order based upon findings of fact made pursuant to Subsection
C commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all
other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land
records of the Recorder of Deeds of the County of Cambria, State of
Pennsylvania, to repair, vacate or demolish any building found to be a
dangerous building within the terms of this chapter, and provided that
any person so notified, except the owners, shall have the privilege of
either vacating or repairing said dangerous building; or any person not
the owner of said dangerous building but having an interest in said
building as shown by the land records of the Recorder of Deeds of the
County of Cambria, State of Pennsylvania, may demolish said
dangerous building at his own risk to prevent the acquiring of a lien
against the land upon such said dangerous building stands by the
township.
A. If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no
longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered
repaired.
B. If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to
the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be
ordered to be vacated.
C. In any case where a dangerous building is 50% damaged or decayed, or
deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished,
and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no
longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be
demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard
existing or erected in violation of the terms of this chapter or any
ordinance of the township or statute of the State of Pennsylvania, it
shall be demolished.
38.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 99-5 RICHLAND CODE § 99-8
99:104
§ 99-9. Violations and penalties.
A. If any structure is deemed to be a dangerous building within the
standards set forth in § 99-1 of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors
shall forthwith cause written notice to be served upon the owner,
occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an
interest in said building as shown by the deed of registration of any
such dangerous building.
B. The notice required by this section shall be served personally upon the
owner of a dangerous building if the owner resides in the township or
personally upon his agent if such agent resides within the township. If
personal service as required herein cannot be obtained or if the owner
resides outside of the township, such notice shall be sent to the owner
of a dangerous building by registered mail at the last known address
thereof.
C. The notice shall identify the building or structure deemed dangerous
and contain a statement of the particulars which made this building or
structure a dangerous building and an order requiring the same to be
put in such condition as to comply with the terms of the order of this
chapter, provided that, in any case where the notice prescribed the
repair of any structure, the owner thereof shall have the option to
remove such structure in lieu of making the repairs thereto within the
above time limits.
D. Such notice shall require any person notified to repair, vacate or
demolish any building to commence the work or act required by the
notice within 10 days of such notice and to complete such repair
removal within 30 days thereof.
E. The Board of Supervisors shall cause to be placed on all dangerous
buildings a notice reading substantially as follows:
"This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the Board
of Supervisors of the Township of Richland. This notice is to remain on
this building until it is repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance
with the notice which has been given to the owner, occupant, lessee,
mortgagee or agent of this building. It is unlawful to remove this notice
until compliance is made under the terms contained and the notice
given to the above-named party."
A. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District
Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of
a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each
§ 99-8 BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS § 99-9
99:105
§ 99-10. Emergency cases.
In cases wherein it reasonably appears that there exists an immediate
danger to the life or safety of any person caused or created by a dangerous
building, as defined herein, the Board shall cause the immediate repair,
vacation or demolition of such dangerous building. The costs of such
emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall
be collected in the same manner as provided for in § 99-B.
§ 99-11. Administrative liability.
No officer, agent or employee of the Township of Richland shall render
himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties under this chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent
or employee of the Township of Richland as a result of any act required
or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this chapter shall be
defended by the Township Solicitor until final determination of the
proceedings therein.
Chapter 105
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 23.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 134.
Insurance for fire losses — See Ch. 151.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 173.
Solid waste — See Ch. 207.
section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.39
B. If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or any other person having
an interest in said building, as shown by the land records of the
Recorder of Deeds of the County of Cambria, fails to comply with any
notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish any dangerous building
within 30 days, the Board of Supervisors is empowered to cause such
building or structure to be repaired, vacated or demolished by the
township and to cause the costs of such repair, vacation or demolition,
together with a penalty of 10% to be charged against the land on which
the building existed as a municipal lien, or to recover such costs in a
suit at law against the owner or other such person having an interest in
the building; provided that the recovery of such cost and expense,
together with the penalty, may be in addition to the penalty imposed in
Subsection A of this section.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 99-9 RICHLAND CODE § 99-11
105:106
§ 105-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Richland Township
Open Burning Ordinance."
§ 105-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BONFIRE — An outdoor fire used for ceremonial purposes.
CLEARING AND GRUBBING WASTE — Trees, shrubs and other native
vegetation which are cleared from land during or prior to the process of
construction. The term does not include demolition wastes and dirt-laden
roots.
COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID — Any liquids having flash points at or above 100º
F.
FLAMMABLE — Subject to easy ignition and rapid-flame combustion.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID — Any liquid having a flash point below 100º F.
FLUE — Any duct, passage, stack, chimney or conduit permitting air
contaminants to be emitted into the open air.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
ODOR — That property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
OPEN BURNING — The burning of any materials wherein products of
combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing
through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber. For the purpose
of this definition, a chamber shall be regarded as enclosed when, during
the time combustion takes place, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or
chimneys necessary to provide combustion air and to permit the escape of
exhaust gas are open.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company,
firm, trust, corporation or other entity recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties, including any governmental agency.
RECREATIONAL FIRE — An outdoor fire which is used to cook food for
consumption.
REFUSE — Rubbish.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT — An individual 18 years or older who is not under
the influence of drugs or alcohol or suffering from any other disability which
would impair his or her ability to properly supervise a fire.
RUBBISH — Solids not considered too highly flammable or explosive,
including but not limited to rags, old clothes, garden residue, tree
§ 99-11 BURNING, OPEN § 105-2
105:107
trimmings, tree branches, untreated wood excelsior, nonrecyclable paper,
nonrecyclable cardboard, and shrubbery and other similar combustible
materials that will ignite through contact with flames or ordinary
temperatures.
SMOKE — Extremely small solid particles produced by incomplete
combustion of organic substance and includes but is not limited to fly
ash, tarry matter, unburned gases, soot or carbon and gaseous combustion
products.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected that requires location on
the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.
§ 105-3. Open burning restricted.
It shall be unlawful to build or kindle fires on either private or public
property in Richland Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, except in
strict conformity with the regulations of this chapter and other local, federal
or state law, as amended.
§ 105-4. Permissible and nonpermissible burning.
A. It shall be lawful to build or kindle a fire, subject to obtaining the
permit(s) provided for herein, to the following material within a
Residential or University Zoning District:
(1) Rubbish.
(2) Any fire set for the purpose of burning domestic refuse, when the
fire is on the premises of any structure occupied solely as a
dwelling by two families or less and when such refuse results from
the normal occupancy of said structure.
(3) Brush, trees and similar cuttings removed in the course of cleaning
a lot or parcel of ground for the purpose of selling the timber or
providing space for the erection of a building or other similar
structure or use permitted under the applicable ordinances of
Richland Township.
B. It shall be lawful to build or kindle a fire, subject to obtaining the
permit(s) provided for herein, to the following material within a
Commercial, Manufacturing and Light Industrial Zoning District:
(1) Any fire set for the purpose of burning domestic refuse, when the
fire is on the premises of any structure occupied solely as a
dwelling by two families or less and when such refuse results from
the normal occupancy of said structure.
(2) Brush, trees and similar cuttings removed in the course of cleaning
a lot or parcel of ground for the purpose of selling the timber or
providing space for the erection of a building or other similar
structure or use permitted under the applicable ordinances of
Richland Township.
§ 105-2 RICHLAND CODE § 105-4
105:108
(3) Rubbish.
C. It shall be unlawful to build, support, start, accelerate or kindle a fire,
with or without a permit, of the following materials:
(1) Rubber-based materials; natural or synthetic.
(2) Recyclable materials as are defined in Chapter 207, Solid Waste,
Article II, Recycling, as amended.
(3) Foam materials.
(4) Roofing shingles and materials.
(5) Garbage.
(6) Flammable and combustible liquids.
(7) Materials that may explode or release toxic materials.
(8) Batteries.
(9) Compostable leaves and grass.
(10) Asbestos-containing materials.
(11) Plastic and vinyl materials.
(12) Chlorine.
(13) Paint.
(14) Grease, oil and other petroleum products.
(15) Upholstered furniture.
(16) Aerosol containers.
(17) Disposable diapers (Pampers, etc.).
(18) Hazardous materials.
(19) Creosote and materials treated with creosote.
(20) Treated wood products.
(21) Fiberglass.
(22) Human and animal waste.
(23) Other materials prohibited by local, state and federal regulations,
as amended.
(24) Other materials adopted by resolution by the Richland Township
Supervisors, as amended.
§ 105-4 BURNING, OPEN § 105-4
105:109
§ 105-5. Permits.
§ 105-6. General requirements for open burning.
General regulations shall be as follows:
D. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit or encourage the burning
of any substance determined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
the Environmental Protection Agency to be a hazardous substance; nor
shall any fire be permitted to burn by any person if such burning is in
violation of the Air Pollution Control Act40 or other legislation of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States of America or any
other component body.
A. The permit criteria establishing the hours, type, fee, general
regulations, days and other items deemed necessary by Richland
Township shall be established by Richland Township Supervisors by
resolution, as amended.
B. The permits shall be issued by the Township Codes Official or a duly
authorized representative. The Township Codes Official or a duly
authorized representative may refuse to issue the permit if, in his or her
opinion, the contemplated fire(s) would create an undue risk of harm or
damage to persons or property within the township, and said Codes
Official, or a duly authorized representative, is authorized herein to
attach such specific restrictions or precautions as are necessary and
proper to ensure the safety of persons and property. The Codes Official
or duly authorized representative is authorized herein to attach such
specific restrictions or precautions as are necessary and proper under
the regulations of Chapter 134, Fire Prevention, of Richland Township,
as amended, and other local, state and federal regulations.
C. The Police Department, Codes Official or a duly authorized
representative may revoke a permit to burn if, upon inspection, any
violation of this chapter exists or if any conditions of a permit have been
violated, or there has been any false statement or misrepresentation.
D. An open burning permit is only applicable to the property for which it
was issued. Exception: When government entities require clearing of
land or rights-of-way for public improvement, when approved by the
Codes Official, this subsection does not apply, but the entity must
acquire the required permit and follow the regulations established in
the permit and this chapter.
E. The permit holder and property owner shall be liable for the costs of fire
fighting, police and other services rendered to extinguish an openburning
fire and costs of damage to others.
F. An issued permit shall be readily available for inspection.
40.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 4001 et seq.
§ 105-4 RICHLAND CODE § 105-6
105:110
§ 105-7. Bonfires and recreational fires.
A. All open burning activities shall be attended by a responsible adult
being present at all times.
B. All open burning fires shall not be permitted to burn, smolder or emit
smoke, flames, odor, heat and other forms of combustion during
unapproved days and hours established by the permit. The permit
holder is also responsible to ensure that the fire is maintained
extinguished.
C. No person may transport or carry onto any zoning district any material,
rubbish or waste to be burned which originates from outside of the
property owner's property.
D. All open burning shall be conducted in a safe manner and be kept under
control at all times. Precautions shall be taken to ensure that the fire
does not spread.
E. Open burning shall not be conducted that will be offensive or
objectionable due to smoke or odor emissions when atmospheric
conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. This
includes but is not limited to wind, humidity and drought.
F. Upon completion of open burning activities, all debris shall be removed
and disposed of properly.
G. Open burning shall not be less than 20 feet from any structure and be
not less than 20 feet from any property lines. Exception: The Township
Codes Official or duly authorized representative is authorized to
decrease the required distances, upon cause shown.
H. No person shall cause, suffer or permit any open burning operation
whatsoever if said open burning operation is contrary to 129.14
Chapter 129 of Title 25, Rules and Regulations, of the Department of
Environmental Protection, which are incorporated herein by reference.
I. Fire-extinguishing devices shall be readily available.
J. No open burning shall be permitted in a public right-of-way.
K. No garbage or offal may be burned at any time either indoors or out-ofdoors.
L. In the event that the fire gets out of control, the Fire Department shall
be contacted immediately.
M. No person shall use an open burning operation as a method of salvaging
any product or material.
N. Other general regulations established by resolution by Richland
Township Supervisors.
§ 105-6 BURNING, OPEN § 105-7
105:111
§ 105-8. Clearing and grubbing waste.
§ 105-9. Fire companies exempted.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to fires created by a duly
authorized fire company of the township for the purpose of training or
testing of equipment.
A. Outdoor fireplaces, barbecue pits, charcoal burners, recreational fires
and propane gas burners are permitted if used for cooking only and are
not used to circumvent the intent and prohibitions of this chapter; and:
(1) No permit is required.
(2) Shall only consist of seasoned dry firewood, charcoal, gas or other
approved fuels.
(3) Shall follow the requirements established in this chapter.
(4) Shall not be used for waste disposal purposes.
B. Schools and bona fide social and recreational organizations are
permitted, at the time authorized by the Township Codes Official or a
duly authorized representative, upon obtaining a permit as provided for
in § 105-4, to make a bonfire for use in conjunction with an
organization-sponsored pep rally or similar function and are exempt
from paying the permit fee; and:
(1) Said fire shall be extinguished after use.
(2) The Codes Official or a duly authorized representative is permitted
to attach requirements necessary to ensure safe conduct.
(3) Application for said shall be made 10 days before the fire is set and
shall be in such form and contain such information as required by
the Codes Official. Such application shall contain, as a minimum,
information regarding the purpose of the proposed burning; the
nature and quantities of material to be burned; the date when such
burning will take place; and the location of the burning site.
A. The site of the fire shall be controlled so as to prevent endangerment to
property or person. The site shall be chosen that is as far away as
possible from occupied dwellings.
B. No clearing and grubbing wastes from another site may be burned.
C. Said fire shall require a permit and follow the requirements established
in the permit and this chapter.
D. The Codes Official or a duly authorized representative is permitted to
attach requirements necessary to ensure safe conduct.
§ 105-7 RICHLAND CODE § 105-10
105:112
§ 105-10. Form of application and permit.
The Codes Official shall be authorized to designate a form of application and
permit to be used by the township.
§ 105-11. Enforcement.
§ 105-12. Violations and penalties.41
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
A. The Richland Township Police Department and Codes Official or a duly
authorized representative are authorized to enforce this chapter and
shall order the extinguishment, by the permit holder or the Fire
Department, of any open burning which creates or adds to a hazardous
or objectionable situation and/or is in violation of this chapter.
B. No person shall in any manner hinder, delay, obstruct, resist, prevent or
in any way interfere with the Police Department and/or Codes Official
or duly authorized representative in the performance of their duty
hereunder, or refuse such personnel, after proper identification,
entrance at reasonable hours to any premises. If such entry is refused,
the Codes Official and/or Police Department shall have recourse to
every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
C. No person shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any verbal or
written abatement notice served on such person either personally or by
registered or certified mail issued by the Police Department and/or
Codes Official or a duly authorized representative. Such notice shall set
forth a violation of this chapter and a time within which the violation is
to be abated.
D. Any person aggrieved may appeal to the Richland Administrative Board
of Appeals any decision or interpretation of the respective Codes
Official, duly authorized representative or police officer of Richland
Township pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6, Administrative Board
of Appeals, as amended.
E. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time specified
by the Codes Official, the Codes Official shall request the legal counsel
of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate legal proceedings to
restrain, correct or abate such violation of the provisions of this chapter
or any order or direction made pursuant thereto.
F. In all enforcement proceedings brought by the township to seek
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the township may
recover reasonable attorney's fees, costs and expenses.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 105-10 BURNING, OPEN § 105-12
105:113
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 105-13. Fees for use of fire companies.
In addition to the penalties for above, any violation of this chapter which
requires the services of a fire department within the geographic limits of
Richland Township to respond to control or put out a fire shall result in the
property owner paying a reasonable fee to said fire company(ies) for the
services rendered. Further, each fire company within the geographic limits
of Richland Township is hereby authorized to charge a reasonable fee to
reimburse it for costs incurred in sending fire apparatus and personnel to
control or put out a fire in violation of this chapter.
Chapter 108
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 105-12 RICHLAND CODE § 105-13
108:114
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 108-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Richland Cable
Communications Regulatory Code."
§ 108-2. Purpose.
A. The Township of Richland (the "municipality") finds that the further
development of cable communications may result in great benefits for
the people of the municipality. Because of the complex and rapidly
changing technology associated with cable communications, the
municipality further finds that the public convenience, safety and
general welfare can best be served by establishing certain regulatory
procedures and powers that are vested in the municipality or such
persons or agencies as the municipality shall designate. Any franchise
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding
as an integral part thereof.
B. Further, it is recognized that cable systems have the capacity to provide
not only entertainment and information services to the municipality's
residents, but can provide a variety of broadband, interactive
communications services to institutions and individuals. Many of these
services involve municipal agencies and other public institutions.
C. For these purposes, the following goals, among others, underlie the
regulations contained herein:
(1) Cable services should be provided to the maximum number of
municipal residents.
(2) Cable systems should be capable of accommodating both the
present and reasonably foreseeable future cable-related needs of
the municipality.
(3) A cable system should be improved and upgraded expeditiously
during the term of a franchise so that new facilities necessary for
the operation of the system may be integrated to the maximum
extent possible with existing facilities, subject to public demand
and economic and technical feasibility.
(4) Cable systems authorized by this chapter shall be responsive to the
needs and interests of the local community and shall provide the
widest possible diversity of information sources and service to the
public.
§ 108-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-2
108:115

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 108-3. Definitions and word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise
expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future tense; words in the plural number include
the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural
number; and the masculine gender includes the feminine gender. The words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Unless otherwise
expressly stated, words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set
forth in Title 47 of the United States Code, Chapter 5, Subchapter V-A, 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq. (the Cable Act), as amended, and, if not defined therein,
their common and ordinary meaning.
AFFILIATE — Any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by
or is under common ownership or control with a franchisee.
BASIC SERVICE — Any service tier which includes the retransmission of
local television broadcast signals.
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C.
§ 521 et seq., an amendment to the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection And Competition Act
of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be amended
from time to time.
CABLE SERVICE —
CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM — A facility consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable television service which
includes video programming and which is provided to multiple customers
within the municipality, but such term does not include:
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming services; and
A.
Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use
of such video programming or other programming service.
B.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations;
A.
A facility that serves customers without using any public right-of-way,
including streets or easements;
B.
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to
the provisions of Title II of the Cable Act, except that such facility shall
be considered a cable system if such facility is used in the transmission
of video programming, whether on a common-carrier or non-commoncarrier
basis, directly to customers; or
C.
§ 108-3 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-3
108:117
CABLE TELEVISION ADVISORY COMMITTEE or COMMITTEE — A
nonpolitical body to be known as the "Greater Johnstown Communications
Advisory Committee," which shall be administered by the Council of
Governments (COG) and created to advise member municipalities named in
Exhibit A42 regarding the means to recommend and promote future uses for
cable systems.
CHANNEL — A six Megahertz (MHz) frequency band which is capable of
carrying either one standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or
other nonvideo signals or some combination of such signals.
CONVERTER or HOME TERMINAL — An electronic device which may serve
as an interface between a system and a subscriber's television receiver or
other terminal equipment, and which may perform a variety of functions,
including signal security, descrambling, electronic polling, frequency
conversion and channel selection.
COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS or COG — The Cambria-Somerset Council
of Governments. The COG is empowered by resolution to serve as the
regulatory representative for the municipality.
DROP — A connection from feeder cable to the subscriber television set,
radio or other terminal equipment.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel on a cable system set
aside by a franchisee for educational use.
FAIR MARKET VALUE — The price that a willing buyer would pay to a
willing seller for a going concern at the time.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, its designee or any
successor governmental entity thereto.
FRANCHISE — A nonexclusive authorization granted pursuant to this
chapter to construct, operate and maintain a cable system along the public
rights-of-way within all or a specified area of the municipality. Any such
authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any
general license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and
carrying on a business within the municipality as required by other
ordinances and laws of the municipality.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — A contract entered into in accordance with
this chapter between the municipality and a franchisee that sets forth,
subject to this chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise
will be granted and exercised. Subject to applicable law, any franchise
agreement shall define the services any franchisee is so authorized to
provide.
FRANCHISE AREA — The area for which a franchise is granted under the
authority of a franchise agreement.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems.
D.
42.Editor's Note: Exhibit A, List of Participating Municipalities, is on file in the township
offices.
§ 108-3 RICHLAND CODE § 108-3
108:118
FRANCHISEE — A natural person, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, association, joint venture or organization of any kind that has
been granted a cable franchise by the municipality.
GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel on a cable system set
aside by a franchisee for government use.
INSTALLATION — The connection of the drop to subscribers' television
receivers or other terminal equipment.
LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL or COMMERCIAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any
channel on a cable system designated or dedicated for use by a person
unaffiliated with the franchisee.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Richland, Pennsylvania.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company,
organization, corporation or any lawful successor thereto or transferee
thereof, but such term does not include the municipality.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel on a cable system set aside
by a franchisee and designated or dedicated for use by the general public
or noncommercial organizations, which is made available for use without
charge and on an equitable nondiscriminatory basis.
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The surface, the air space above the surface
and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path,
alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway,
easement or similar property in which the municipality now or hereafter
holds any property interest, which, consistent with the purposes for which
it was dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing and maintaining
a cable system.
RESIDENT — Any person residing in the municipality as otherwise defined
by applicable law.
SECURITY FUND — A performance bond or letter of credit, or either or
both of these, to the extent applicable to a given franchisee.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who or which
elects to subscribe, for any purpose, to a service provided by a franchisee
by means of or in connection with a cable system.
USER — A person or organization utilizing a channel or equipment and
facilities for purposes of producing or transmitting material, as contrasted
with the receipt thereof in the capacity of a subscriber.
§ 108-3 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-3
108:119

ARTICLE III
Grant of Franchise
§ 108-4. Authority to grant; franchise agreement required.
§ 108-5. Franchise characteristics.
A franchise authorizes use of public rights-of-way for installing cables,
wires, lines, optical fibers, underground conduit and other devices
necessary and appurtenant to the operation of a cable system within a
franchise area, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize a franchisee
to provide service to, or install a cable system on, private property without
owner consent [except for use of compatible easements pursuant to Section
621 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 541(a)(2)], or to use publicly or privately
owned conduits without a separate agreement with the owners.
§ 108-6. Acceptance of franchise.
§ 108-7. Franchisee subject to other laws and police power.
A. The municipality may grant one or more franchises, and each such
franchise shall be awarded in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of this chapter. A franchise shall constitute both a right and
an obligation to provide the cable services regulated by the provisions
of this chapter and the franchise agreement.
B. No person may construct or operate a cable system without a franchise
granted by the municipality. No person may be granted a franchise
without having entered into a franchise agreement with the
municipality pursuant to this chapter.
A. Following approval by the municipality, any franchise granted pursuant
to this chapter, and the rights, privileges and authority granted by a
franchise agreement, shall take effect and be in force from and after the
first date on which both the franchisee and the municipality have
accepted and signed the franchise agreement.
B. All privileges prescribed by a franchise shall be subordinate to any prior
lawful occupancy of the public rights-of-way, and the municipality
reserves the right to reasonably designate where a franchisee's
facilities are to be placed within the public rights-of-way.
A. A franchisee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all
applicable federal, state and local laws. A franchisee shall at all times
be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the municipality,
including all rights the municipality may have under 47 U.S.C. § 552.
Nothing in a franchise agreement shall be deemed to waive the
requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the municipality
regarding permits, fees to be paid or manner of construction.
§ 108-4 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-7
108:121
§ 108-8. Interpretation of franchise terms.
§ 108-9. Operation of cable system without franchise.
Any person who occupies the public rights-of-way of the municipality for
the purpose of operating or constructing a cable system and who does not
hold a valid franchise from the municipality shall be subject to all provisions
of this chapter, including but not limited to its provisions regarding
construction and technical standards and franchise fees. In its discretion,
the municipality at any time may require such person to apply for a
franchise within 30 days of receipt of a written notice by the municipality
that a franchise agreement is required; require such person to remove its
property and restore the area to a condition satisfactory to the municipality
within a reasonable time period, as the municipality shall determine;
remove the property itself and restore the area to a satisfactory condition
and charge the person the costs therefor; and/or take any other action it
is entitled to take under applicable law, including filing for and seeking
damages under trespass. In no event shall a franchise be created unless it
is issued by action of the municipality and subject to a written franchise
agreement.
§ 108-10. Acts at franchisee's expense.
Subject to applicable federal or state law, any act that a franchisee is
required to perform under this chapter, a franchise agreement or applicable
law shall be performed at the franchisee's expense, unless expressly
provided to the contrary in this chapter, the franchise agreement or
applicable law.
B. No course of dealing between a franchisee and the municipality, or any
delay on the part of the municipality in exercising any rights hereunder,
or any acquiescence by the municipality in the actions of a franchisee
which are in contravention of such rights, except to the extent such
rights are preempted by federal or state law or are expressly waived by
the municipality, or are expressly provided for in a franchise
agreement, shall operate as a waiver of any such rights of the
municipality.
C. The municipality shall have the maximum authority to regulate cable
systems, franchisees and franchises as may now or hereafter be
lawfully permissible; except where rights are expressly waived by a
franchise agreement, or preempted by federal or state laws, rules or
regulations, they are reserved, whether expressly enumerated or not.
A. The provisions of this chapter and a franchise agreement will be
liberally construed in order to effectuate their purposes and objectives
and to promote the public interest.
B. Subject to federal law or regulation, a franchise agreement will be
governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of
Pennsylvania.
§ 108-7 RICHLAND CODE § 108-11
108:122
§ 108-11. Right of eminent domain.
Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way
or to any extent, the municipality's rights of eminent domain to the extent
to which they may apply to any public utility or cable system.
§ 108-11 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-11
108:123

ARTICLE IV
Applications for Franchises
§ 108-12. General application procedures.
§ 108-13. Application for grant of initial franchise.
A. A written application shall be filed with the municipality for grant of an
initial franchise or modification of a franchise agreement, in
accordance with applicable law.
B. To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application shall be
submitted, together with 12 copies. The application must be
accompanied by any required application filing fee as set forth in
§ 108-17, conform to any applicable request for proposals and contain
all required information. All applications shall include the names and
addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with
respect to the application.
C. All applications accepted for filing shall be made available by the
municipality for public inspection.
A. A person may apply for an initial franchise by submitting a request for
issuance of a request for proposals ("RFP") by the municipality. Upon
receipt of a request for an RFP, the municipality shall, if necessary,
commence a proceeding to identify the future cable-related needs and
interests of the community and, upon completion of that proceeding,
shall promptly issue an RFP, which shall be mailed to the person
requesting its issuance and made available to any other interested
party.
B. The applicant shall respond to the RFP by filing an application within
the time directed by the municipality, providing the information and
material set forth in § 108-15. The procedures, instructions and
requirements set forth in the RFP shall be followed by each applicant.
The municipality or its designee may seek additional information from
any applicant and establish deadlines for the submission of such
information.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A and B, a person may
apply for an initial franchise by submitting an unsolicited application
containing the information required in § 108-15 and requesting an
evaluation of that application pursuant to Subsection D of this section.
Prior to evaluating that application, the municipality may conduct such
investigations as are necessary to determine whether the application
satisfies the standards set forth in Subsection D of this section and may
seek additional applications.
D. In evaluating an application for a franchise, the municipality shall
consider, among other things, the following factors:
§ 108-12 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-13
108:125
(1) The extent to which the applicant has substantially complied with
the applicable law and the material terms of any existing cable
franchise for any municipality.
(2) Whether the quality of the applicant's service under any existing
franchise in any municipality, including signal quality, response to
customer complaints, billing practices and the like, has been
reasonable in light of the needs and interests of the communities
served.
(3) Whether the applicant has the financial, technical and legal
qualifications to provide cable service.
(4) Whether the application satisfies any minimum requirements
established by the municipality and is otherwise reasonable to
meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the
community, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and
interests.
(5) Whether, to the extent not considered under Subsection D(4), the
applicant will provide adequate public, educational and
governmental access channel capacity, facilities or financial
support.
(6) Whether issuance of a franchise is warranted in the public interest
considering the immediate and future effect on the public rights-ofway
and private property that would be used by the cable system,
including the extent to which installation or maintenance as
planned would require replacement of property or involve
disruption of property, public services or use of the public rights-ofway;
the effect of granting a franchise on the ability of cable
systems to meet the cable-related needs and interests of the
community; and the comparative superiority or inferiority of
competing applications.
(7) What effects a grant of the application may have on competition in
the delivery of cable service in the municipality.
E. If the municipality finds that it is in the public interest to issue a
franchise considering the factors set forth above, and subject to the
applicant's entry into an appropriate franchise agreement, it shall issue
a franchise. If the municipality denies a franchise, it will issue a written
decision explaining why the franchise was denied. Prior to deciding
whether or not to issue a franchise, the municipality may hold one or
more public hearings or implement other procedures under which
comments from the public on an application may be received. The
municipality also may grant or deny a request for a franchise based on
its review of an application without further proceedings and may reject
any application that is incomplete or fails to respond to an RFP. This
chapter is not intended and shall not be interpreted to grant any
applicant or existing franchisee standing to challenge the issuance of a
franchise to another.
§ 108-13 RICHLAND CODE § 108-14
108:126
§ 108-14. Application for grant of renewal franchise.
§ 108-15. Contents of applications for initial franchise.
A. The renewal of any franchise to provide cable service shall be
conducted in a manner consistent with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 47
U.S.C. § 546.
B. Subject to applicable law, the municipality may delegate to the COG the
authority to carry out any or all renewal procedures.
A. An RFP for the grant of an initial franchise shall require, and any such
application submitted shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant and identification of the
ownership and control of the applicant, including the names and
addresses of the 10 largest holders of an ownership interest in the
applicant and affiliates of the applicant, and all persons with 5% or
more ownership interest in the applicant and its affiliates; the
persons who control the applicant and its affiliates; all officers and
directors of the applicant and its affiliates; and any other business
affiliation and cable system ownership interest of each named
person.
(2) A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to construct
and/or operate the proposed cable system, including identification
of key personnel.
(3) A demonstration of the applicant's legal qualifications to construct
and/or operate the proposed cable system, including but not
limited to a demonstration that the applicant meets the following
criteria:
(a) The applicant must not have submitted an application for an
initial or renewal franchise to the municipality, which was
denied on the grounds that the applicant failed to propose a
cable system meeting the future cable-related needs and
interests of the community, or as to which any challenges to
such franchising decision were finally resolved adversely to the
applicant, within three years preceding the submission of the
application.
(b) The applicant must not have had any cable television franchise
validly revoked by any franchising authority within three years
preceding the submission of the application.
(c) The applicant must have the necessary authority under
Pennsylvania law to operate a cable system.
(d) The applicant must have the necessary authority under federal
law to hold the franchise and operate a cable system. An
§ 108-14 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-15
108:127
applicant must have, or show that it is qualified to obtain, any
necessary federal franchises or waivers required to operate
the system proposed.
(e) The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time
during the 10 years preceding the submission of the
application, the applicant was convicted of any act or omission
of such character that the applicant cannot be relied upon to
deal truthfully with the municipality and the subscribers of the
cable system, or to substantially comply with its lawful
obligations under applicable law, including obligations under
consumer protection laws and laws prohibiting anticompetitive
acts, fraud, racketeering or other similar conduct.
(f) The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it filed
materially misleading information in its application or
intentionally withheld information that the applicant lawfully is
required to provide.
(g) The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if an elected
official of the municipality holds a controlling interest in the
applicant or an affiliate of the applicant.
(h) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the municipality shall provide
an opportunity to an applicant to show that it would be
inappropriate to deny it a franchise by virtue of the particular
circumstances surrounding the matter and the steps taken by
the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent
their recurrence, the lack of involvement of the applicant's
principals or the remoteness of the matter from the operation
of cable systems.
(4) A statement prepared by a certified public accountant regarding
the applicant's financial ability to complete the construction and
operation of the cable system proposed.
(5) A description of the applicant's prior experience in cable system
ownership, construction and operation, and identification of
communities in which the applicant or any of its principals have, or
have had, a cable franchise or any interest therein, provided that
an applicant that holds a franchise for the municipality and is
seeking renewal of that franchise need only provide this
information for other communities where its franchise was
scheduled to expire in the two calendar years prior to and after its
application was submitted.
(6) Identification of the area of the municipality to be served by the
proposed cable system, including a description of the proposed
franchise area's boundaries.
§ 108-15 RICHLAND CODE § 108-15
108:128
(7) A detailed description of the physical facilities proposed, including
channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics,
head end and access facilities.
(8) Where applicable, a description of the construction of the proposed
system, including an estimate of plant mileage and its location; the
proposed construction schedule; a description, where appropriate,
of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new
facilities; and information on the availability of space in conduits,
including, where appropriate, an estimate of the cost of any
necessary rearrangement of existing facilities.
(9) The proposed rate structure, including projected charges for each
service, installation, converters and all other proposed equipment
or services.
(10) A demonstration of how the applicant will reasonably meet the
future cable-related needs and interests of the community,
including descriptions of how the applicant will meet the needs
described in any recent community needs assessment conducted by
or for the municipality, and how the applicant will provide adequate
public, educational and governmental access channel capacity,
facilities or financial support to meet the community's needs and
interests.
(11) Pro forma financial projections for the proposed franchise term,
including a statement of projected income and a schedule of
planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions
explained in notes or supporting schedules.
(12) If the applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area
already served by an existing cable franchisee, the identification of
the area where the overbuild would occur, the potential subscriber
density in the area that would encompass the overbuild and the
ability of the public rights-of-way and other property that would be
used by the applicant to accommodate an additional system.
(13) Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(14) Information that the municipality may request of the applicant that
is relevant to the municipality's consideration of the application.
(15) An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the
application, acknowledging the enforceability of application
commitments and certifying that the application meets all federal
and state law requirements.
B. The municipality may, at its discretion or upon request of an applicant,
waive, in writing, the provision of any of the information required by
this section.
§ 108-15 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-16
108:129
§ 108-16. Application for modification of franchise.
An application for modification of a franchise agreement pursuant to 47
U.S.C. § 545 shall include, at minimum, the following information:
§ 108-17. Filing fees.43
§ 108-18. Public hearings.
An applicant shall be notified of any public hearings held in connection with
the evaluation of its application and shall be given an opportunity to be
heard. In addition, prior to the issuance of a franchise, the municipality shall
provide for the holding of a public hearing within the proposed franchise
area, following reasonable notice to the public, at which every applicant and
its application shall be examined and the public and all interested parties
afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard. Reasonable notice to the
public shall include causing notice of the time and place of such hearing
to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the proposed
A. The specific modification requested.
B. The justification for the requested modification, including the impact of
the requested modification on subscribers and others, and the financial
impact on the applicant if the modification is approved or disapproved,
demonstrated through, inter alia, submission of financial pro formas.
C. A statement demonstrating that the requested modification meets the
standards set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 545.
D. Any other information that the applicant believes is necessary for the
municipality to make an informed determination on the application for
modification.
E. An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application,
and certifying that the application is consistent with all federal and
state law requirements.
A. To be acceptable for filing, an application submitted after the effective
date of this chapter shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors in the amount to cover
costs incidental to the awarding or enforcement of the franchise, as
appropriate.
B. In addition, the municipality may require an applicant for an initial
franchise to reimburse the municipality for its reasonable out-of-pocket
expenses in considering the application, including consultants' fees.
Payments made by a franchisee hereunder are not a franchise fee and
fall within one or more of the exceptions in 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2), and no
such payments may be passed through to subscribers in any form.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 108-16 RICHLAND CODE § 108-18
108:130
franchise area once a week for two consecutive weeks. The first publication
shall be not less than 14 days before the day of the hearing.
§ 108-18 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-18
108:131

ARTICLE V
Design and Construction
§ 108-19. System construction schedule.
Franchise agreements shall specify the construction schedule that will
apply to any required construction, upgrade or rebuild of a cable system.
§ 108-20. Construction procedures.
§ 108-21. Use of public property.
A. A franchisee shall construct, operate and maintain a cable system
subject to the supervision of the municipality or its designees, and in
strict compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations affecting the system.
B. A system, and all parts thereof, shall be subject to the right of periodic
inspection by the municipality.
C. No construction, reconstruction or relocation of a system or any part
thereof within the public rights-of-way shall be commenced until
written permits, where applicable, have been obtained from the proper
municipality officials. Such permits shall not be unreasonably withheld
or delayed and shall be issued in accordance with applicable ordinances
and codes of the municipality that apply to users of the municipality's
public rights-of-way. In any permit so issued, such officials may impose
such nondiscriminatory conditions and regulations as a condition of the
granting of the permit as are necessary for the purpose of protecting
any structures in the public rights-of-way and for the proper restoration
of such public rights-of-way and structures, and for the protection of the
public and the continuity of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
A. Should the grades or lines of the public rights-of-way that a franchisee
is authorized by franchise to use and occupy be changed at any time
during the term of a franchise, the franchisee shall, if necessary,
relocate or change its system so as to conform with the new grades or
lines.
B. Any alteration to the water mains, sewerage or drainage system or to
any municipality, state or other public structures in the public rights-ofway
that are required on account of the presence of a franchisee's
system in the public rights-of-way shall be made at the sole cost and
expense of the franchisee. During any work of constructing, operating
or maintaining of a system, a franchisee shall also protect any and all
existing.structures belonging to the municipality and any other person.
All work performed by the franchisee shall be done in the manner
prescribed by the municipality or other officials having jurisdiction
therein.
§ 108-19 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-22
108:133
§ 108-22. Interference with public projects.
Nothing in this chapter or any franchise agreement shall be in preference
or hindrance to the right of the municipality and any board, authority,
commission or public service corporation to perform or carry on any public
works or public improvements of any description, and should a franchisee's
system in any way interfere with the construction, maintenance or repair
of such public works or public improvements, a franchisee shall protect
or relocate its system or part thereof as reasonably directed by any
municipality official, board, authority, commission or public service
corporation.
§ 108-22 RICHLAND CODE § 108-22
108:134
ARTICLE VI
Consumer Protection
§ 108-23. Customer service obligations.
§ 108-24. Installations, connections and other franchisee services.
A. In addition to the provisions contained herein, a franchisee must
comply with the customer service obligations established by the FCC,
as may be amended from time to time, and which are set forth in
current form in Exhibit B44 and are incorporated herein by reference. In
addition, a franchisee shall at all times satisfy any additional or stricter
requirements established by a franchise agreement or other applicable
law or regulation.
B. Nothing in this chapter may be construed to prevent or prohibit the
municipality from waiving, for good cause, requirements established in
this article.
A. Standard installations. Except as federal rate regulations may
otherwise require, the franchisee shall not assess a subscriber any cost
other than a standard installation charge for service drops of 150 feet
or less, for a single outlet, unless the franchisee demonstrates to the
municipality's satisfaction that extraordinary circumstances justify a
higher charge.
B. Nonstandard installations. Except as applicable law may otherwise
require, where a drop exceeds 150 feet in length, a franchisee may
charge a subscriber for the franchisee's actual costs associated with
installing the longer drop, provided that drop length shall be the
shorter of: the actual length of the installed drop; or the shortest
distance to the point where the franchisee would be required to extend
its distribution system. The subscriber's preference as to the point of
entry into the residence shall be observed whenever feasible. Runs in
building interiors shall be as unobtrusive as possible. The franchisee
shall use due care in the process of installation and shall repair any
damage to the subscriber's property caused by said installation. Such
restoration shall be undertaken within no more than 30 days after the
damage is incurred and shall be completed as soon as possible
thereafter.
C. Location of drops. Except as federal rate regulations may otherwise
require, in any area where a franchisee would be entitled to install a
drop aboveground, the franchisee will provide the homeowner the
option, where feasible, to have the drop installed underground, if
requested, but may charge the homeowner the difference between the
actual cost of the aboveground installation and the actual cost of the
underground installation.
44.Editor's Note: Exhibit B, FCC Customer Service Obligations, is on file in the township
offices.
§ 108-23 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-24
108:135
§ 108-25. Telephone and office availability.
D. Time for extension. Except as a franchise agreement may otherwise
require, where a franchisee is required under this section to provide
service to a person, it must provide such service: within 30 days of the
person's request if such person resides no further than 150 feet from
the franchisee's distribution system; or within 60 days if the person
resides more than 150 feet from the franchisee's distribution system,
provided that the person agrees to reimburse the franchisee for the
cost of installing such service in accordance with Subsection B above;
but the distribution system need not be extended for 1/4 mile or more to
provide service.
E. Deposits. A franchisee may require a reasonable, nondiscriminatory
deposit on equipment provided to subscribers, in addition to any
allowable monthly rental fees. Any subscriber deposit required by the
franchisee shall bear interest in accordance with applicable law or at
the going rate, which shall be not less than the prime rate of the bank
being used by the municipality for the conduct of ordinary business. All
deposits, with interest, shall be returned to the subscriber within six
months or when the equipment is returned at time of disconnection of
reception of service (whichever is sooner).
F. Antennas and antenna switches. A franchisee shall not, as a condition to
providing cable service, require any subscriber or potential subscriber
to remove any existing antenna structures for the receipt of over-the-air
television signals.
G. Delinquent accounts. A franchisee shall use its best efforts to collect on
delinquent subscriber accounts before terminating service. In all cases,
the franchisee shall provide the customer with at least 10 days' written
notice prior to disconnection.
A. Each franchisee shall maintain an office at a convenient location in the
municipality, or in the general geographical area which includes the
municipality, that shall be open during normal business hours to allow
subscribers to request service, pay bills and conduct other business.
B. Each franchisee will maintain at least one local, toll-free or collect-call
telephone access line which will be available to subscribers 24 hours a
day, seven days a week. Trained representatives of a franchisee shall be
available to respond to subscriber telephone inquiries during normal
business hours.
C. A franchisee must hire sufficient staff so that it can adequately respond
to customer inquiries, complaints and requests for service in its office,
over the phone and at the subscriber's residence.
§ 108-24 RICHLAND CODE § 108-26
108:136
§ 108-26. Scheduling and completing service.
In addition to the customer service standards contained in Exhibit B,45
all franchisees shall meet the following service standards, under normal
operating conditions, at least 95% of the time, as measured on a quarterly
basis:
§ 108-27. Interruptions of service.
A franchisee may intentionally interrupt service on the cable system only
for good cause and for the shortest time possible and, except in emergency
situations or as necessary to fix a service problem, only after a minimum of
48 hours' prior notice to subscribers and the municipality of the anticipated
A. Prompt service. Repairs for service interruptions and other system
repairs not requiring work within a subscriber's premises must be
begun within 24 hours after the subscriber reports the problem to the
franchisee or its representative or the interruption or need for repairs
otherwise becomes known to the franchisee. All such work must be
completed within three days from the date of the initial request, except
installation requests, or in the shortest time possible where, for reasons
beyond the franchisee's control, the work could not be completed
within three days even with the exercise of all due diligence; the failure
of a franchisee to hire sufficient staff or to properly train its staff shall
not justify a franchisee's failure to comply with this provision. Except as
federal law permits, no charge shall be made to the subscriber for this
service or for the cost of repairs to the franchisee's equipment or
facilities, except where it can be shown that the equipment or facility
was damaged by a subscriber.
B. Emergency maintenance. A franchisee shall keep an emergency system
maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing
system malfunctions or interruptions, on a twenty-four-hour basis, and
shall respond to service interruptions 24 hours a day, seven days a
week, under normal operating conditions.
C. Other inquiries. Under normal operating conditions, requests for
service, repair and maintenance not involving service interruptions
must be acknowledged by a trained customer service representative
within 24 hours, or prior to the end of the next business day, whichever
is earlier. A franchisee shall respond to all other inquiries (including
billing inquiries) within five business days of the inquiry or complaint.
D. Mobility-limited subscribers. With regard to mobility-limited
subscribers, upon a subscriber request, each franchisee shall arrange
for pickup and/or replacement of converters or other franchisee
equipment at the subscriber's address or by a satisfactory equivalent
(such as the provision of a postage-prepaid mailer).
45.Editor's Note: Exhibit B, FCC Customer Service Obligations, is on file in the township
offices.
§ 108-26 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-27
108:137
service interruption; provided, however, that planned maintenance that
does not require more than two hours' interruption of service and that
occurs between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. shall not require
such notice to subscribers, but shall require notice to the municipality no
less than 24 hours prior to such an anticipated service interruption.
§ 108-28. Notice to subscribers.
§ 108-29. Billing.
A. In addition to the notification requirements contained within the
customer service standards in Exhibit B,46 a franchisee shall also
provide the following materials to each subscriber at the time cable
service is installed, at least annually thereafter, and at any time upon
request. Copies of all such subscriber materials shall also be provided
to the municipality, upon request.
(1) A schedule of rates and charges.
(2) A written description of the franchisee's delinquent subscriber
disconnect and reconnect procedures, and any other of its policies
applicable to its subscribers.
B. All promotional materials, announcements and advertising of
residential cable service to subscribers and the general public, where
price information is listed in any manner, shall clearly and accurately
disclose price terms. In the case of pay-per-view or pay-per-event
programming, all promotional materials must clearly and accurately
disclose price terms and, in the case of telephone orders, a franchisee
shall take appropriate steps to ensure that price terms are clearly and
accurately disclosed to potential subscribers before the order is
accepted.
C. Each franchisee shall maintain a public file containing all notices
provided to subscribers under these customer service standards.
Copies of all promotional or special offers made to subscribers shall be
filed promptly with the municipality, upon request.
A. A franchisee's first billing statement after a new installation or service
change shall be prorated as appropriate and shall reflect any security
deposit.
B. A franchisee's billing statement must show a specific payment due date
not earlier than the midpoint of the period for which the service being
billed is rendered (e.g., the 15th day of a thirty-day billing cycle). Any
balance not received by seven days after the end of the period for which
the service being billed is rendered may be assessed a late fee as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, or such
other amount as the municipality and the franchisee may agree,
46.Editor's Note: Exhibit B, FCC Customer Service Obligations, is on file in the township
offices.
§ 108-27 RICHLAND CODE § 108-29
108:138
§ 108-30. Disconnections and downgrades.
consistent with state and local law. The late fee shall appear on the
following month's billing statement.47
C. A franchisee must notify the subscriber that he or she can remit
payment in person at the franchisee's business office and inform the
subscriber of the address of that office.
D. Subscribers shall not be charged a late fee or otherwise be penalized
for any failure by a franchisee, including failure to timely or correctly
bill the subscriber, or failure to properly credit the subscriber for a
payment timely made.
E. The account of any subscriber shall be credited a prorated share of the
monthly charge for the service upon the subscriber's prompt request,
or where the franchisee can reasonably identify the affected
subscribers, if said subscriber is without service or if service is
substantially impaired for any reason for a period exceeding four hours
during any twenty-four-hour period, except where it can be shown that
a subscriber seeks a refund for an outage or impairment which that
subscriber caused, or in the case of a planned outage occurring
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
F. Except by reason of emergency, loss of programming signal, permanent
changes in programming or in the channel lineup on the system, or for
other legitimate and business reasons as permitted or required by
applicable law or programming contract, the franchisee shall not
deliberately interrupt the normal programming offered on the system to
subscribers without prior notification. Applicable federal or state law or
regulation shall govern whether subscribers are entitled to any refund
or credit for such interruptions.
A. A subscriber may terminate service at any time.
B. Upon request, a franchisee shall promptly disconnect or downgrade any
subscriber. No period of notice prior to voluntary termination or
downgrade of service may be required of subscribers by any franchisee.
No charge may be imposed for any voluntary disconnection or
downgrade, except to the extent that federal law specifically provides
that the franchisee must be permitted so to charge a subscriber. So long
as the subscriber returns any equipment necessary to receive a service
within five business days of the disconnection, no charge may be
imposed by any franchisee for any cable service delivered 24 hours
prior to the return of such equipment. However, if a subscriber does not
return, or permit the franchisee to retrieve, such equipment within five
business days after disconnection, a franchisee may charge a
subscriber for any cable service delivered until the equipment is
returned.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 108-29 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-30
108:139
§ 108-31. Parental control option.
A franchisee shall make available to any subscribers, upon request, the
option of blocking the video or audio portion of any channel or channels of
programming entering the subscriber's home. The control option described
herein shall be made available to all subscribers requesting it when any
cable service is provided, or reasonably soon thereafter.
C. Any security deposit and/or other funds due the subscriber shall be
refunded on disconnected accounts after any customer premises
equipment provided by the franchisee has been recovered by the
franchisee. The refund must be made within 30 days or by the end of
the next billing cycle, whichever is earlier, from the date disconnection
was requested (or, if later, the date on which any customer premises
equipment provided by the franchisee is returned).
D. If a subscriber fails to pay a monthly subscriber fee or other fee or
charge, a franchisee may disconnect the subscriber's service; however,
such disconnection shall not be effected until after 45 days from the
beginning of the period for which the service being billed is rendered,
plus at least 10 days' advance written notice to the subscriber in
question of intent to disconnect, given after the 45 days have elapsed. If
the subscriber pays all amounts due, including late charges, before the
date scheduled for disconnection, the franchisee shall not disconnect
service. After disconnection, upon payment by the subscriber in full of
all proper fees or charges, including the payment of the reconnection
charge, if any, the franchisee shall promptly reinstate service.
E. A franchisee may immediately disconnect a subscriber if the subscriber
is damaging or destroying the franchisee's cable system or equipment
and may pursue criminal or civil action against said subscriber as
appropriate. After disconnection, the franchisee shall restore service if
the subscriber provides adequate assurance, including monetary or
legal assurances, that it has ceased the practices that led to
disconnection, and paid all proper fees and charges, including any
reconnect fees and amounts owed the franchisee for damage to its
cable system or equipment.
F. A franchisee may also disconnect a subscriber that causes signal
leakage in excess of federal limits. Disconnection may be effected after
five days' written notice to the subscriber, if the subscriber fails to take
steps to correct the problem. In addition, a franchisee may disconnect a
subscriber without notice where signal leakage is detected originating
from the subscriber's premises in excess of federal limits, provided that
the franchisee shall immediately notify the subscriber of the problem
and, once the problem is corrected, reconnect the subscriber without
charge.
G. A franchisee shall reconnect service to customers wishing restoration
of service, provided that such a customer shall first satisfy any previous
obligations owed.
§ 108-30 RICHLAND CODE § 108-32
108:140
§ 108-32. Enforcement.
§ 108-33. Exclusive contracts and anticompetitive acts prohibited.
Except as authorized by federal or state law, no franchisee shall enter into
an exclusive contract for the provision of cable service with any person
(including but not limited to a building owner), or demand the exclusive
right to serve a person or location as a condition of providing or continuing
service.
A. A franchisee shall file annually with the municipality, in the franchisee's
annual report, a statement describing the extent of compliance with the
customer service standards contained in Exhibit B herein.48 If a
franchisee is in noncompliance with any element of such standards
during any calendar quarter, it shall include in its annual report a
description of such noncompliance, the reason for the noncompliance
and a remedial plan.
B. Subject to federal law, and after appropriate notice and a reasonable
period allowed for cure, a franchisee may be subject to penalties,
forfeitures and any other remedies or sanctions available under federal,
state or local law, including without limitation this chapter and a
franchisee's franchise agreement with the municipality, if it repeatedly
fails to comply with the standards herein.
48.Editor's Note: Exhibit B, FCC Customer Service Obligations, is on file in the township
offices.
§ 108-32 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-33
108:141

ARTICLE VII
Rate Regulation
§ 108-34. Regulation of rates by municipality.
The municipality reserves the right to regulate the rates and charges for
cable service to the maximum extent permitted by federal law or regulation.
Regardless of whether the municipality regulates rates for cable services,
a franchisee may not change its rates and charges unless it has first given
a minimum 30 calendar days' prior written notice of such change to the
municipality and to all subscribers.
§ 108-34 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-34
108:143

ARTICLE VIII
Franchise Fee
§ 108-35. Findings.
The municipality finds that public rights-of-way of the municipality and state
to be used by a franchisee for the operation of a cable system are valuable
public property acquired and maintained by the state and municipality at
great expense to the taxpayers. The municipality further finds that the grant
of a franchise to use public rights-of-way is a valuable property right.
§ 108-36. Franchise fee not a tax or in lieu of any other tax or fee.
§ 108-37. Acceptance of payment not construed as accord or
satisfaction.
No acceptance of any payment by the municipality shall be construed as a
release or an accord and satisfaction of any claim the municipality may have
for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under a franchise
agreement or for the performance of any other obligation of a franchisee.
A. Subject to federal law or regulation, payment of a franchise fee shall
not be considered in the nature of a tax or in lieu of other taxes or fees
imposed by the municipality.
B. The franchise fee shall be in addition to all other taxes and payments
that a franchisee may be required to pay under its franchise agreement,
any federal, state or local law, including any applicable amusement
taxes, except to the extent that such fees, taxes or assessments must be
treated as a franchise fee under 47 U.S.C. § 522.
§ 108-35 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-37
108:145

ARTICLE IX
Performance Guaranties and Remedies
§ 108-38. Violations and penalties.
A. For violation of provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement
granted pursuant to this chapter, the municipality may impose penalties
(chargeable to a franchisee's Security Fund, to the extent available), as
follows:
(1) For failure to submit any required plans indicating expected dates
of installation of various parts of the system: $400 per day for each
violation for each day the violation continues.
(2) For failure to commence operations in accordance with the
requirements of the franchise agreement: $1,000 per day for each
violation for each day the violation continues.
(3) For failure to complete construction of any system or upgrade in
accordance with the franchise agreement: $200 per day for each
day the violation continues.
(4) For transferring the franchise without approval: $1,000 per day for
each violation for each day the violation continues.
(5) For failure to comply with requirements for public, educational and
governmental use of the system: $100 per day for each violation for
each day the violation continues.
(6) For repeated failure to supply information, reports or filings
lawfully required under the franchise agreement or applicable law
or by the municipality: $50 per day for each violation for each day
the violation continues.
(7) For repeated violation of customer service standards: $100 per
violation.
(8) For failure, unless such failure is beyond the franchisee's control, of
the system to perform in the event of a public emergency or vital
information situation: $250 per occurrence.
(9) For failure to render payment for reimbursement of any franchise
expenses, or failure to pay franchise fees or liquidated damages:
$100 per day.
(10) For failure to file, obtain or maintain any required Security Fund in
a timely fashion: $50 per day.
(11) For failure to restore damaged property: $50 per day, in addition to
the cost of the restoration as required elsewhere herein or in a
franchise agreement.
§ 108-38 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-38
108:147
§ 108-39. Remedies to be cumulative.
All remedies under this chapter and the franchise agreement are cumulative
unless otherwise expressly stated. The exercise of one remedy shall not
foreclose use of another, nor shall the exercise of a remedy or the payment
of liquidated damages or penalties relieve a franchisee of its obligations to
comply with its franchise. Remedies may be used singly or in combination;
in addition, the municipality may exercise any rights it has at law or equity.
§ 108-40. Relation to insurance and indemnity requirements.
Recovery by the municipality of any amounts under insurance, a
performance bond or letter of credit, or otherwise, does not limit a
franchisee's duty to indemnify the municipality in any way; nor shall such
recovery relieve a franchisee of its obligations under a franchise or in any
respect prevent the municipality from exercising any other right or remedy
it may have.
(12) For any other violations: a fine of not more than $600, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
township in the enforcement of this chapter.49
B. To the extent that penalties are applied to a franchisee under this
section, a franchisee shall not be subject to liquidated damages payable
to the municipality for the same violation.
C. The municipality may reduce or waive any of the above-listed penalties
for good cause shown.
D. Before the remedies specified herein may be applied, the municipality
shall first notify the franchisee, in writing, of the violation, and the
franchisee shall have 30 days, or such additional time as the
municipality shall specify, to cure the violation without penalty.
E. Pending litigation or any appeal to any regulatory body or court having
jurisdiction over a franchisee shall not excuse the franchisee from the
performance of its obligations under this chapter or its franchise
agreement unless a stay is obtained from a forum of competent
jurisdiction.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 108-38 RICHLAND CODE § 108-40
108:148
ARTICLE X
Transfers
§ 108-41. Municipality's approval required.
§ 108-42. Approval not to constitute waiver.
Approval by the municipality of a transfer of a franchise does not constitute
a waiver or release of any of the rights of the municipality under this
chapter or a franchise agreement, whether arising before or after the date
of the transfer.
A. A franchise shall be a privilege that is in the public trust and personal to
the original franchisee. A franchisee's obligations under this franchise
involve personal services whose performance involves personal credit,
trust and confidence in the franchisee, and transfer without the prior
written approval of the municipality shall be considered to impair the
municipality's assurance of due performance.
B. No transfer (including but not limited to transfer by forced or voluntary
sale, merger, consolidation, receivership or any other means) shall
occur without prior written notice to and approval of the municipality,
and only then upon such reasonable terms and conditions as relate to
the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee, as the
municipality deems necessary and proper, as provided for in a franchise
agreement and subject to federal law or regulation. The granting of
approval for a transfer in one instance shall not render unnecessary
approval of any subsequent transfer.
§ 108-41 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-42
108:149

ARTICLE XI
Protection of Individuals' Rights
§ 108-43. Discriminatory practices prohibited.
§ 108-44. Protection of subscriber privacy.
Protection of subscriber privacy is mandatory. A franchisee shall at all times
protect the privacy of subscribers, consistent with Section 631 of the Cable
Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551, and other applicable federal, state and local laws.
A. A franchisee shall not deny service, deny access or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, programmers or residents of the
municipality on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex or
age.
B. A franchisee shall not discriminate among persons or take any
retaliatory action against a person because of that person's exercise of
any right it may have under federal, state or local law, nor may the
franchisee require a person to waive such rights as a condition of taking
service.
C. A franchisee shall not deny access or levy different rates and charges on
any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the
income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides.
D. Subject to applicable law and except to the extent the municipality may
waive such a requirement, a franchisee is prohibited from
discriminating in its rates or charges or from granting undue
preferences to any subscriber, potential subscriber or group of
subscribers or potential subscribers; provided, however, that a
franchisee may offer temporary, bona fide promotional discounts in
order to attract or maintain subscribers, so long as such discounts are
offered on a nondiscriminatory basis to similar classes of subscribers
throughout the municipality; and a franchisee may offer discounts for
the elderly, the handicapped, not-for-profit persons or organizations, or
the economically disadvantaged, and such other discounts as it is
expressly entitled to provide under federal law, if such discounts are
applied in a uniform and consistent manner. A franchisee shall comply
at all times with all applicable federal, state and municipality laws, and
all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.
E. Information accessibility. Each document required to be maintained,
filed or submitted under the provisions of this chapter or a franchise
agreement, or by federal or state law or regulation, except those
designated as confidential by a franchisee, pursuant to applicable law,
is a public document, available for public inspection and copying at the
requester's expense, at the office of the municipality or a franchisee.
§ 108-43 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-44
108:151

ARTICLE XII
Theft of Service
§ 108-45. Theft of service prohibited.
Subject to applicable law, it shall be unlawful for any person to make
any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically,
inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchisee's system within the
municipality for the purpose of enabling anyone to receive any services
of the system or gain profit thereby without authority of or payment to
the franchisee. Any such unlawful and unauthorized connection shall be
punishable as a misdemeanor of the first degree upon arrest by municipal
law enforcement agencies and conviction in municipal court.
§ 108-45 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-45
108:153

ARTICLE XIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 108-46. Compliance with laws.
Each franchisee shall comply with all federal and Pennsylvania laws, as well
as municipal ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, heretofore or
hereafter adopted or established during the entire term of its franchise.
§ 108-47. Captions.
The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to
facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this
chapter. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this
chapter.
§ 108-48. No recourse against municipality.
Without limiting such immunities as the municipality or other persons may
have under applicable law, a franchisee shall have no recourse whatsoever
against the municipality or its officials, boards, commissions, agents or
employees for any loss, costs, expense or damage arising out of any
provision or requirement of this chapter or because of the enforcement of
this chapter or the municipality's exercise of its authority pursuant to this
chapter, a franchise agreement or other applicable law, unless the same
shall be caused by criminal acts or by willful or gross negligence. Nothing
contained herein, however, shall preclude, restrict or limit any right the
franchisee may have to bring an action against the municipality seeking
injunctive and/or equitable relief.
§ 108-49. Rights and remedies.
A. The rights and remedies reserved to the municipality by this chapter
are cumulative and shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other rights and remedies which the municipality may have with
respect to the subject matter of this chapter.
B. The municipality hereby reserves to itself the right to intervene in any
suit, action or proceeding involving any provision of this chapter or a
franchise agreement.
C. Specific mention of the materiality of any of the provisions herein is not
intended to be exclusive of any others for the purpose of determining
whether any failure of compliance hereunder is material and
substantial.
D. No franchisee shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement by reason of any
failure of the municipality to enforce prompt compliance; nor shall any
inaction by the municipality be deemed to waive a provision voiding any
provision of this chapter.
§ 108-46 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-50
108:155
§ 108-50. Amendments.
In order to fulfill the public interest goals of this chapter, to provide
additional communications service to the municipality through the use of
cable systems and thereby to ensure the benefits which will result from
such service, the municipality specifically reserves the right lawfully to
amend this chapter to effectuate the public interest in the operation of
a cable system; provided, however, that any such amendment which has
the effect of directly or indirectly changing the provisions of any existing
franchise agreement shall not be enforceable by the municipality, excluding
general police powers, unless or until such changes have been effected by a
subsequent amendment to such franchise agreement.
§ 108-51. Public emergency.
In the event of a major public emergency or disaster as determined by
the municipality or declared by the Governor of Pennsylvania, a franchisee
shall immediately cooperate with the municipality or other civil defense or
governmental agency designated by the municipality for the term of such
emergency or disaster for the emergency purposes.
§ 108-52. Connections to system; use of antennas.
§ 108-53. Calculation of time.
Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act,
duty, matter or payment is required under this chapter or any franchise
agreement, and a period of time or duration for the fulfillment of doing
thereof is prescribed and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as
to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period
of duration time.
A. Subscribers shall have the right to attach devices to a franchisee's
cable system to allow them to convey signals or services for which they
have paid to VCR's, televisions, other receivers and other terminal
equipment, so long as such devices do not interfere with the operation
of the cable system or the reception of any cable subscriber, nor serve
to circumvent the security procedures established by the franchisee,
nor for any purpose to obtain services illegally. Subscribers also shall
have the right to use their own remote control devices and converters
and other similar equipment, where applicable and compatible, and a
franchisee shall provide information to consumers which will allow
them to adjust such devices so that they may be used with the
franchisee's system.
B. A franchisee shall not, as a condition of providing service, require a
subscriber or potential subscriber to remove any existing antenna or
disconnect an antenna, or prohibit or discourage a subscriber from
installing an antenna switch, provided that such equipment and
installations are consistent with applicable codes and technically able
to shield the cable system from any interference.
§ 108-50 RICHLAND CODE § 108-54
108:156
§ 108-54. Force majeure.
A franchisee granted a franchise under the provisions of this chapter shall
not be deemed in default of this chapter where performance of the
provisions and obligations herein are rendered impossible by causes,
circumstances or other reasons beyond the control of the franchisee, and
the franchise shall not be revoked nor the franchisee penalized for such
noncompliance, provided that the franchisee takes immediate and diligent
steps to restore its compliance as soon as possible under the circumstances
of its franchise without unduly endangering the health, safety and integrity
of the franchisee's employees or property, the public, the public rights-ofway
or public or private property.
§ 108-54 CABLE TELEVISION § 108-54
108:157
Chapter 112
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Board of Appeals — See Ch. 6.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 112-1. Statement of intent.
Richland Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Uniform Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. § 7210.101
through § 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 112-2. Adoption by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, and its regulations contained in 34 Pa.
Code, Chapters 401 through 407, except as provided for below, as amended
from time to time, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference
as the municipal building code of Richland Township. The following
regulations, as permitted by the UCC, are amended for implementation in
Richland Township:
A. Commercial construction.
(1) Section 403.42(c)(1)(i) is hereby amended to require permits for
fences of any height for commercial properties.
(2) Section 403.42(c)(1)(iv) is hereby amended to require permits for
water tanks supported on grade and any appurtenant structures
that exceed 500 gallons.
(3) Section 403.42(c)(1)(viii) is hereby amended to require permits for
prefabricated swimming pools for any use classification having a
diameter or any inside dimension in excess of 10 feet and
containing or normally capable of containing water to a depth at
any point greater than 1 1/2 feet.
(4) Section 403.43(g) is hereby amended to establish the valid length
of a permit to be one year from the date of issuance. A permit shall
become invalid automatically, without further notice by the
Township, if construction work authorized does not commence
within 90 days from the date of issuance or is suspended or
abandoned for a period of 180 days after work has commenced,
unless extended by the Township for good cause shown.
B. Residential (one- and two-family) construction.
§ 108-54 RICHLAND CODE § 112-2
112:158
§ 112-3. Administration.
(1) Section 403.62(c)(1)(i) is hereby amended to require permits for
fences of any height for residential properties.
(2) Section 403.62(c)(1)(iii) is hereby amended to require permits for
water tanks supported on grade and any appurtenant structures
that exceed 500 gallons.
(3) Section 403.62(c)(1)(vi) is hereby amended to require permits for
prefabricated swimming pools for any residential use having a
diameter or any inside dimension in excess of 10 feet and
containing or normally capable of containing water to a depth at
any point greater than 1 1/2 feet.
(4) Section 403.62(c)(1)(xiii) is hereby amended to require permits for
the replacement of existing siding materials on one- and two-family
dwellings. Permits shall not be required for the replacement of
siding materials on detached accessory structures that do not
exceed 400 square feet in size.
(5) Section 403 62(c)(1)(xvi) is hereby amended to require a permit for
the replacement of rain gutters and leaders on one- and two-family
dwellings. Permits shall not be required for the replacement of
gutters and leaders on detached accessory structures that do not
exceed 400 square feet.
(6) Section 403.62(c)(1)(xvii) is hereby amended to require permits for
the installation or construction of any uncovered deck.
(7) Section 403.63(g) is hereby amended to establish the valid length
of a permit to be one year from the date of issuance. A permit shall
become invalid automatically, without further notice by the
Township, if construction work authorized does not commence
within 90 days from the date of issuance or is suspended or
abandoned for a period of 180 days after work has commenced,
unless extended by the Township for good cause shown.
A. Administration and enforcement of the building code within Richland
Township shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as
determined by the Board of Supervisors of Richland Township, from
time to time, by resolution:
(1) By the designation of an employee of Richland Township to serve as
the Municipal Building Code Enforcement Officer to act on behalf
of Richland Township;
(2) By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Richland Township and/or to
assist the employee of Richland Township designated in Subsection
A above;
§ 112-2 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 112-3
112:159
§ 112-4. Appeals.
All appeals from a decision of the Codes Enforcement Officer(s) shall be
to the Richland Township Administrative Board of Appeals pursuant to the
procedures set forth by the ordinance establishing the Board and its rules
and regulations.50
§ 112-5. Existing codes and ordinances.
§ 112-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by Richland Township for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the building code
shall be established by the Board of Supervisors by resolution, from time to
time.
§ 112-7. Violations and penalties.
(3) By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an
intermunicipal agreement;
(4) By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of Richland
Township; and
(5) By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department
of Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement
of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and
utility and miscellaneous use structures.
B. Any person or entity so designated by the Board of Supervisors shall be
referred to as the "Building Code Enforcement Officer(s)."
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by Richland Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the UCC shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the UCC, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the UCC are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the UCC.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Richland Township
not regulated by the UCC shall remain in full force and effect. It is the
intention of Richland Township that the provisions of the zoning
ordinance, as set forth in Chapter 240 of the Richland Township Code,
shall continue to apply to all construction and land uses.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Administrative Board of Appeals.
§ 112-3 RICHLAND CODE § 112-7
112:160
A. For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter or the terms
of a building permit issued, the owner, general agent or contractor of a
building or premises where such violation has been committed or shall
exist, and the owners, general agent, contractor, lessee or tenant of any
part of a building or premises in which part such violation has been
committed or shall exist, and the general agent, architect, builder,
contractor or any other person who knowingly commits, takes part or
assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises
in which any such violation shall exist, shall, upon being found liable
therefor, in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced in the name of
Richland Township, pay a judgment of not more than $1,000, plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by Richland
Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of the
violation by a District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment. Richland Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation unless the
District Justice determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person, partnership
or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was no
such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All
judgments, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to Richland Township.
B. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this chapter
or any regulations made pursuant thereto, the proper township
authorities, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute
any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to
prevent the use of said building or structure or to prevent any illegal act
or conduct in or about such premises.
§ 112-7 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 112-7
112:161
Chapter 114
CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Board of Appeals — See Ch. 6.
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 126.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 134.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 160.
Plumbing — See Ch. 181.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 186.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
§ 112-7 RICHLAND CODE § 112-7
114:162
ARTICLE I
Licensing Procedures
[Adopted 4-3-1989 by Ord. No. 194]
§ 114-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Richland Township Contractor's
Registration Ordinance."
§ 114-2. Intent and purpose.
In order to promote the public safety and the general welfare of the citizens
of Richland Township by ensuring that all contractors doing business in
Richland Township are aware of the rules and regulations governing the
construction, alterations and/or repair of buildings and structures in
Richland Township, including site preparation, excavation and paving, it is
the intent of this article to require the yearly licensing of contractors.
§ 114-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for
the shelter of persons, animals, chattels or property.
BUILDING PERMIT — An official document or certificate issued by the
Codes Enforcement Officer pursuant to the Richland Township BOCA
National Building Code, as amended,51 authorizing the construction of a
specific building or structure or the performance of a specific activity.
CODES — The BOCA National Building, Fire Prevention, Mechanical,
Plumbing, Property Maintenance and National Electrical Code, and the
CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling, as amended, duly adopted by the
Richland Township Board of Supervisors. 52
CONTRACTOR — Any person, partnership or corporation engaged in the
business of constructing, altering or repairing any building or structure or
engaged in the transport and setup of a prefabricated structure delivered
to a site in Richland Township or engaged in site preparation, excavation or
paving for a fee.
DOING BUSINESS - Engaging in the construction, alteration or repair of
any building or structure in Richland Township for which a building permit
is required under the ordinances of Richland Township or engaging in site
preparation, excavation or paving in Richland Township. PREFABRICATED
— Construction materials or assembled units fabricated prior to erection or
installation in a building or structure.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 96, Building Construction, Article I, Building Code.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 96, Art. I; Ch. 134; Ch. 160; Ch. 181; Ch. 186; Ch. 126; and Ch. 96,
Art. II, respectively.
§ 114-1 CONTRACTORS § 114-3
114:163
REGISTRATION FORM — The form prepared by the Codes Enforcement
Officer for obtaining information about the contractor.
REPEATED VIOLATIONS — More than one infraction of the codes of
Richland Township which has not been corrected after due notice has been
given by the Codes Enforcement Officer of Richland Township.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground.
SUBCONTRACTOR — A contractor. The term shall not include an employee
of a contractor or subcontractor.
§ 114-4. Registration required.
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for
a contractor or subcontractor doing business in Richland Township to
construct, alter or repair any building or structure or perform site
preparation, excavation or paving unless the contractor or subcontractor
has registered with the township and has paid the required registration or
renewal fee.
§ 114-5. Registration fee.53
The fee for the registration shall be as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors, and all registrations shall be for the calendar year,
or such portion thereof as shall remain after registration. There shall be
no reduction in the fee for registration after the beginning of any calendar
year. The registration shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year.
Said fee may be changed by the Board of Supervisors by resolution.
§ 114-6. Information to be supplied.
The contractor or subcontractor shall supply such information as shall be
required to complete the registration form attached hereto and made a part
hereof as it may be amended from time to time by the Codes Enforcement
Officer.
§ 114-7. Issuance of decals.54
At the time of registration and payment of the registration/renewal fee,
the contractor or subcontractor shall be issued two decals, which decals
shall be prominently displayed on all vehicles used by the contractor or
subcontractor during the registration year in Richland Township. All decals
in excess of two shall cost the contractor an amount per decal as set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 114-3 RICHLAND CODE § 114-8
114:164
§ 114-8. Compliance with ordinances and codes.
It shall be the duty of all contractors and subcontractors to comply with all
ordinances and codes relating to the construction, alteration and repair of
all buildings and structures located within Richland Township, and all site
preparation, excavation and paving in Richland Township, and all laws or
ordinances pertaining to or regulating the activities engaged in.
§ 114-9. Revocation.
Any contractor's or subcontractor's registration may be revoked by the
Codes Enforcement Officer for repeated violations of any ordinances related
to the construction, alterations or repair of any building or structure within
Richland Township, or to site preparation, excavation or paving, or any laws
or ordinances pertaining to or regulating the activities engaged in. Such
revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed for violating this article.
§ 114-10. Appeal.
Any contractor or subcontractor whose registration has been revoked by the
Codes Enforcement Officer shall have the right of appeal to the Richland
Township Administrative Board of Appeals (Chapter 6, Administrative Board
of Appeals) pursuant to the procedure outlined therein within 30 days after
notice of the revocation.
§ 114-11. Violations and penalties.55
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 114-12. Abatement of violation.
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
legal officer of Richland Township from instituting appropriate action to
restrain the unlawful construction, alteration or repair of a building or
structure or site preparation, excavation or paving in Richland Township.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 114-8 CONTRACTORS § 114-12
114:165
Chapter 117
CURFEW
§ 117-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the below terms shall have the following meanings:
CURFEW HOURS —
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not
limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of
amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN —
MINOR — Any person under 18 years of age.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of
a corporation.
PARENT — A person who is:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access, and includes but is not limited to streets, highways
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities and shops and malls.
REMAIN — To:
11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday
until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and
A.
B. 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
A.
A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
B.
A. A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person; or
At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have
the care and custody of a minor.
B.
A. Linger or stay; or
Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the
owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
B.
§ 114-12 RICHLAND CODE § 117-1
117:166
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY — Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
TOWNSHIP — Richland Township.
§ 117-2. Enumeration of offenses.
§ 117-3. Defenses.
A. A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the township during curfew
hours.
B. A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, a minor to remain in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the
township during curfew hours after having received notice from the
Township Police Department of a prior violation. A conviction before a
District Justice shall not be required to constitute notice of a prior
violation for purposes of this chapter.
C. The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours.
A. It is a defense to prosecution under § 117-2 that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain
to the Police Department about the minor's presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the township, Richland
School District, a civic organization or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home
from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or
other recreational activity supervised by adults, a civic
organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for
the minor;
§ 117-1 CURFEW § 117-3
117:167
§ 117-4. Enforcement.
Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public
place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this
chapter unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred
and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
§ 117-3 is present.
§ 117-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 117-6. Title.
This chapter shall be cited as the "Richland Township Curfew Ordinance."
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly; or
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority
removed in accordance with Pennsylvania law.
B. It is a defense to prosecution under § 117-2 that the owner, operator or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police Department
that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours and refused to leave.
A. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District
Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of
a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each
section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.56
B. When required by the Juvenile Act of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the magisterial court shall refer the matter to the juvenile
court.
C. All fines imposed and collected shall be paid to Richland Township.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 117-3 RICHLAND CODE § 117-6
117:168
Chapter 126
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Board of Appeals — See Ch. 6. Building construction — See Ch. 96.
§ 126-1. Adoption of electrical code.57
That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of Richland Township, being
marked and designated as the "National Electrical Code, 1993 Edition,"
as published by the National Fire Protection Association, be and is hereby
adopted as the Electrical Code of Richland Township, Cambria County,
Pennsylvania, for the installation of electrical conductors and equipment
within or on public and private buildings or other structures within Richland
Township, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said National Electrical Code are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 126-2 of
this chapter.
§ 126-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby added:
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 117-6 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-2
126:169
Section 900.1 Electrical Permit for Electrical Work. The Codes Official
shall require that all applicants for permits for electrical work shall furnish
proof that an application for inspection of the proposed electrical wiring
or electrical apparatus has been made to an organization (hereinafter
referred to as the "approved electrical organization") with the payment
of all inspection fees and charges of such organization being done by the
applicant.
Section 900.2 Electrical Certificate of Approval. All applicants shall,
within 30 days of the completion of the building structure or premises,
obtain an electrical certificate of approval from the office of the Codes
Official of proof that the approved electrical organization has made an
inspection of the applicant's building structure or premises and that the
electrical wiring conforms with the applicable provisions of the National
Electrical Code, 1993 Edition. Whenever the inspection of the approved
electrical organization shows that the provisions of the National Electric
Code have not been complied with, said organization shall so inform the
office of the Codes Official. The Codes Official shall then notify the
applicant of these steps which must be taken to achieve compliance with
the National Electrical Code before an electrical certificate of approval can
be issued.
Section 900.3 Exemptions. This chapter shall not apply to the following
electrical work:
a. Minor repair work such as repairing or replacing fuses, switches,
receptacles, lamps and lighting fixture parts.
Section 900.4 Fees at the Time of Application. At the time of the
application for an electrical permit, the applicant shall pay a fee in
accordance with the schedule adopted by the Board of Supervisors, by
resolution.
Section 900.5 Appeal. The owner of a building or structure, office or
agency of the township, or any other person aggrieved from a decision of
the Codes Official, may appeal to the Richland Township Administrative
Board of Appeals pursuant to the provisions of Richland Township
Ordinance No. 133, as amended.58
§ 126-3. Saving clause.59
Nothing in this chapter or in the National Electrical Code hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court,
or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall
any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this chapter.
Chapter 131
58.Editor's Note: See Chapter 6, Administrative Board of Appeals.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 126-2 RICHLAND CODE § 126-3
131:170
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 23. Police Department — See Ch. 45.
§ 126-3 FEES § 126-3
131:171

ARTICLE I
Emergency Response User Fees
[Adopted 2-7-2005 by Ord. No. 292]
§ 131-1. Fees established; rates. [Amended 11-28-2005 by Ord. No.
298]
The Police Department and the Richland Fire Department shall initiate
user fees for the delivery of police and fire services, personnel, supplies
and equipment to the scene of motor vehicle accidents, structural fires, or
emergency incidents. It is the specific intent of the Board of Supervisors
that the term “emergency incident” shall include, among other types of
recognized emergency incidents, the delivery of police and fire services,
personnel, supplies and equipment at the scene of hazardous material spills
as that term is generally recognized in police and fire services. The rates of
the user fees shall be that which is usual, customary and reasonable (UCR),
which include any services, personnel, supplies and equipment, and may
fluctuate based upon the needs of the accident, fire or emergency incident.
§ 131-2. Filing of fees and claims.
The user fees shall be filed to the motor vehicle insurance or commercial or
homeowners' insurance, representing an add-on cost of claims for damages
of the vehicles, property and/or injuries. The claim(s) shall be filed with the
insurance company of the owner of a vehicle, owner of property, lessee or
party responsible for the emergency incident(s).
§ 131-3. Rules and regulations.
The Richland Township Police Chief and the Richland Fire Department
Administration may make reasonable rules and regulations, from time to
time, and can amend, revoke or add such rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with the intent of this article, as each may determine necessary
or expedient for the respective department heads in regard to the billing
and collection of user fees authorized herein, including the use of
independent private collection agencies.
§ 131-4. Fees to be deposited in separate accounts.
All amounts collected as a result of this article shall be placed in two
separate accounts: one for police user fees under the control of the Board
of Supervisors and one for fire user fees under the control of the duly
elected officers of the lire company, to be used exclusively for the personnel,
supplies and equipment of each respective department.
§ 131-5. Annual reports.
Annual reports, subject to audit at the discretion of the Board of
Supervisors, due by January 31 of the subsequent year, shall be rendered
§ 131-1 FEES § 131-5
131:173
to the Board of Supervisors setting forth, in detail, the revenues and
expenditures attributed to such accounts.
§ 131-5 RICHLAND CODE § 131-5
131:174
Chapter 134
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Board of Appeals — See Ch. 6. Open burning — See Ch. 105.
§ 134-1. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of Richland Township, being marked
and designated as the "BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Eleventh
Edition, 1999," as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Fire
Prevention Code of Richland Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA
National Fire Prevention Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 134-2 of this chapter.
§ 134-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The BOCA National Fire Prevention Code is amended and changed in the
following respects:
A. Section F-101.1 is revised as follows:
F-101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Fire
Prevention Code of the Township of Richland, Cambria County,
Pennsylvania, hereinafter referred to as such or as "this code."
B. Section F-112.3 is revised as follows:
F-112.3 Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who shall erect, construct, alter or repair equipment or systems in
violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of
a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall
be guilty of a summary offense punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, and upon default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed
shall be subject to a sentence of 30 days in the Cambria County Jail.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Sections F-113.1 through F-113.7 shall be deleted in their entirety and
amended to read as follows:
§ 131-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 134-2
134:175
§ 134-3. Establishment of limits.
The limits referred to in Section F-3003.2 of the BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code in which the storage of explosives, ammunition and
blasting agents is prohibited are hereby established as follows: No
explosives, ammunition and/or blasting agents shall be stored on a site
overnight. Only such amounts as shall be used on a work shift shall be
maintained at a site.
§ 134-4. Saving clause.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed by this
chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 138
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 112.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 146.
Soil erosion and grading — See Ch. 204.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 210.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
"The owner of a building or structure, office or agency of the township,
or any other person aggrieved from a decision of the Codes Official,
may appeal to the Richland Township Administrative Board of Appeals
pursuant to the provisions of Richland Township Ordinance Number
133, as amended."60
D. Sections F-403.1 through F-403.8 are hereby deleted in their entirety
and Ordinance Number 241 regulating outdoor burning, adopted
March 6, 1995, is hereby incorporated by reference.61
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Administrative Board of Appeals.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Open Burning.
§ 134-2 RICHLAND CODE § 134-4
134:176
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 138-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,62 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of the Township of Richland does hereby
order as follows.
62.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 138-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-1
134:177

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 138-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 138-3. Applicability.
§ 138-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 138-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Township of Richland unless a permit
has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Richland or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
§ 138-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-5
134:179
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 138-5 RICHLAND CODE § 138-5
134:180
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 138-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Zoning Officer of the Township of Richland is hereby appointed to
administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to herein as the
Floodplain Administrator.
§ 138-7. Permit required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Township of Richland.
§ 138-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);63 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);64 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);65 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
63.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
64.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
65.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 138-6 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-8
134:181
§ 138-9. Application procedures and requirements.
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board for whatever action
it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa.Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC66 or latest revisions
thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Township of
Richland. Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of the owner of the land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
66.Editor's Note: The International Building Code and the Intimation Residential Code for
One- and Two-Family Dwellings, respectively.
§ 138-8 RICHLAND CODE § 138-9
134:182
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant.
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used.
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
§ 138-9 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-9
134:183
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood; and
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway
(§ 138-18B), when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 138-24F, Storage, and § 138-25 Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 138-24F and 138-25 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 138-25
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 138-9 RICHLAND CODE § 138-10
134:184
§ 138-10. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 138-11. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 138-12. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 138-13. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date of
its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 138-14. Start of construction.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The "actual start of construction" means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
§ 138-10 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-14
134:185
§ 138-15. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 138-16. Appeals.
structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of
construction" means the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for
the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a fine to
Township of Richland of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
the Board to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
§ 138-14 RICHLAND CODE § 138-16
134:186
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Board of Supervisors of Richland Township.
Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision,
determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Board of Supervisors of Richland
Township shall set a time and place, within not less than 10 or not more
than 30 days, for the purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the
time and place at which the appeal will be considered shall be given to
all parties.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Supervisors of
Richland Township may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as
provided by the laws of this state, including the Pennsylvania Flood
Plain Management Act.67
67.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 138-16 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-16
134:187

ARTICLE IV
Floodplain Areas
§ 138-17. Identification.
§ 138-18. Description and special requirements.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the Township of
Richland classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) dated June 19, 2012, and issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision
thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study; and
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by the Township of Richland and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway Area/District identified as floodway in the FIS which
represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one
foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas which
have been identified in other available studies or sources of information
for those special floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified
in the FIS.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection regional office.
B. The AE Area/District without floodway shall be those areas identified as
an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for
which base flood elevations have been provided in the FIS but no
floodway has been delineated.
(1) In an AE Area/District without floodway, no new development shall
be permitted unless it can be demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of all past and projected development will not increase the
BFE by more than one foot.
§ 138-17 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-18
134:189
§ 138-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board
of Richland Township Supervisors where studies or information provided
by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision.
However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after
the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify the
FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 138-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Richland Township Planning
Commission, and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may
(2) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use,
or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development would not, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one foot at
any point.
C. A Area/District.
(1) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
one-percent-annual-chance flood elevations have been provided.
For these areas, elevation and floodway information from other
federal, state, or other acceptable source shall be used when
available. Where other acceptable information is not available, the
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
(2) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
D. The Shallow Flooding Area/District shall be those areas identified as
Zones AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are subject
to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance shallow flooding where
average depths are between one foot and three feet. In Zones AO and
AH, drainage paths shall be established to guide floodwaters around
and away from structures on slopes.
§ 138-18 RICHLAND CODE § 138-20
134:190
appeal to the Board of Supervisors of Richland Township. The burden of
proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 138-21. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 138-20 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-21
134:191

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 138-22. General.
§ 138-23. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by the applicant to FEMA
for a letter of map revision (LOMR) as soon as practicable but within six
months of any new construction, development, or other activity
resulting in changes in the BFE. The situations when a LOMR or a
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) are required are:
(1) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or
(2) Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a
designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one foot
in the base flood elevation; or
(3) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges).
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
D. Within any identified floodplain area (see § 138-18), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
regional office.
A. Residential structures.
§ 138-22 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-23
134:193
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 138-18C of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to
405, as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 138-18C of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have its lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
§ 138-23 RICHLAND CODE § 138-23
134:194
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
(5) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa.Code (Chapters 401 to
405, as amended) shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. See § 138-38, definition of "substantial
improvement," for requirements for the substantial improvement of any
historic structures.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
§ 138-23 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-23
134:195
§ 138-24. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill.
(1) If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes, are submitted to
and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
§ 138-23 RICHLAND CODE § 138-24
134:196
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages, and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 138-25, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
§ 138-24 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-24
134:197
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are "water-resistant"
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other "water-resistant"
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of "marine" or "water-resistant" quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a
"marine" or "water-resistant" paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
§ 138-24 RICHLAND CODE § 138-24
134:198
§ 138-25. Development which may endanger human life.
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix
AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,68
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which 1) will be used for the production or storage
of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or 2) will be
used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than
550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or 3) will involve
the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive
substances, shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition
to all other applicable provisions. The following materials and
substances are considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
68.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 138-24 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-25
134:199
§ 138-26. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 138-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved structure of the kind described in Subsection A,
above, shall be:
(1) Elevated, or, in the case of a nonresidential structure, elevated or
designed, and constructed to remain completely dry up to at least
1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
(3) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
§ 138-25 RICHLAND CODE § 138-27
134:200
§ 138-28. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
B. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, shall apply and
34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 to 405.
C. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
Pa. Code, as amended where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the (units') proposed installation.
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
C. Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 138-27.
§ 138-27 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-28
134:201

ARTICLE VI
Activities Requiring Special Permits
§ 138-29. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,69 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit
has been issued by the Township of Richland:
§ 138-30. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request including a completed permit application form.
B. A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 138-29 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-30
134:203
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information
concerning the flow of water, including direction and velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the base flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
§ 138-30 RICHLAND CODE § 138-30
134:204
§ 138-31. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the Township of
Richland, the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of Article
III:
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base
flood;
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood, including a statement concerning
the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(4) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevation and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development";
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits, such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166;70 and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Township of Richland
Planning Commission and Township of Richland Engineer for review
and comment.
70.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 138-30 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-31
134:205
§ 138-32. Special technical requirements.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Township of
Richland shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect
the application is deficient.
C. If the Township of Richland decides to disapprove an application, it
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Township of Richland approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information,
with the Department of Community and Economic Development, by
registered or certified mail, within five working days after the date of
approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Township of Richland shall allow
the Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days,
after receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the
application and decision made by the Township of Richland.
F. If the Township of Richland does not receive any communication from
the Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Township of
Richland and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval, and the Township of Richland shall not issue the special
permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of Article V of this chapter, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development
requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between any of the
following requirements and those in Article V of this chapter or in any
other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive provision
shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the
structure itself or to any of its equipment or contents below the
BFE.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
§ 138-31 RICHLAND CODE § 138-32
134:206
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood.
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Township of Richland and the Department of Community
and Economic Development.
§ 138-32 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-32
134:207

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 138-33. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 138-34 shall apply.
§ 138-34. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in
BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within an AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with
all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.71
71.Editor's Note: The International Building Code and the International Residential Code,
respectively.
§ 138-33 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-34
134:209

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 138-35. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Township of Richland may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 138-36. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Township of Richland
in accordance with the procedures contained in § 138-16 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause
any increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by special permit (or prohibited activities) (Article VI) or
to development which may endanger human life (§ 138-25).
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, the Township of Richland shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, the Township of Richland shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township of Richland
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
§ 138-35 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-36
134:211
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will neither:
[1] Result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense; nor
[2] Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public
or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Township of Richland. In addition, a report of
all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to the FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 138-36 RICHLAND CODE § 138-36
134:212
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 138-37. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 138-38. Definitions.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same lot
with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXISTING STRUCTURE — A structure for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1,
1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing structure" may also be
referred to as "existing construction."
§ 138-37 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-38
134:213
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
D.
§ 138-38 RICHLAND CODE § 138-38
134:214
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, floor-resistant, partially enclosed area,
used solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after June 19, 2012, adopted by the community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction
started after December 4, 1985, and before June 19, 2012, is subject to the
ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided that the start
of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 138-38 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-38
134:215
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated 12/4/1985,
whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated 12/4/1985,
whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with
the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all or a designated portion of a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 138-38 RICHLAND CODE § 138-38
134:216
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above the ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement.
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does
not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure
safe living conditions.
A.
Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this chapter must
comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
B.
§ 138-38 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-38
134:217
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by, the
municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry.
Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the
International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code
(IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state
floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above
are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4) and (10), (d)(3), or (e)(2), (4), or (5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
§ 138-38 RICHLAND CODE § 138-38
134:218
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 138-39. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on June 19, 2012, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended or rescinded by the Township of Richland, Cambria
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 138-39 FIRE PREVENTION § 138-39
134:219
Chapter 146
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 138.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 148.
Sewers — See Ch. 198.
Solid waste — See Ch. 207.
§ 146-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Township of Richland
Hazardous Substance Ordinance."
§ 146-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABATEMENT — The restoration, reclamation and recovery of a natural
resource adversely affected by the activity of a person.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, disposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of hazardous substances into or on the land or water in
a manner that the hazardous substance or a constituent of the hazardous
substance enters the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged
into the waters of the township.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any flammable liquid, flammable solid,
oxidizing substance, corrosive liquid, compressed gas, poisonous substance,
explosive, radioactive or nuclear material and any other material, including
solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, or any combination
of the above, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
organization, institution, cooperative enterprise, federal government or
agency, state government, institution or agency.
STORAGE — The containment of any hazardous substance on a temporary
basis in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such substance.
It shall be presumed that the containment of any hazardous substance in
excess of 30 days constitutes disposal. This presumption can be overcome
by clear and convincing evidence to the contrary; however, it shall be
conclusively presumed that the storage of hazardous substances in excess
Contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in morbidity in
either an individual or the total population; or
A.
Pose a present or potential hazard to human health or the environment
when disposed of.
B.
§ 138-39 RICHLAND CODE § 146-2
146:220
of 90 days constitutes disposal; provided, however, that this definition shall
not apply to the storage of petroleum products for sale by commercial
gas stations, nor to the storage of petroleum products used for household
heating, nor to the storage of petroleum products in an aggregate quantity
of five gallons or less for personal, family or household use.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Richland of the County of Cambria,
Pennsylvania.
§ 146-3. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of or to permit the disposal of
hazardous substances in the township.
§ 146-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 148
A. Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance.
B. Any person violating this chapter shall be liable for the costs of
abatement of any public nuisance caused by such violation. The
township may cause such work to be done as is necessary to abate the
nuisance and all labor and material and incidental expenses thereto
shall be collected from said person for the use of the township as debts
are by law collectible.
C. In addition to any other remedies provided for in this chapter, the
township may bring an action in equity in a court of competent
jurisdiction for an injunction to restrain any and all violations of this
chapter or to restrain any public nuisance or detriment to health.
D. In addition to any other remedies provided for in this chapter, the
township may assess a civil penalty upon a person for such violation.
Such penalty may be assessed whether or not the violation was willful
or negligent. The amount of such assessment shall not exceed $600.72
E. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District
Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of
a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each
section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense. In the case of corporations and other legal entities having
officers and directors, the penalties herein may be imposed upon said
directors and officers.73
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 146-2 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 146-4
148:221
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sanitary Board — See Ch. 62.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 146.
Solid waste — See Ch. 207.
§ 148-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Richland Township Sanitary Board
Rules and Regulations Ordinance."
§ 148-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings herein indicated:
BOARD — The Richland Township Sanitary Board.
OCCUPANT — A person or persons who use or occupy a building or
structure whether as owner or tenant. A tenant who uses a part of a building
or structure shall be deemed the occupant of that part of which he has
actual or constructive possession. The owner, agent or other person having
custody or control of a building or structure shall be deemed an occupant of
that part that is vacant for common usage of two or more tenants.
OWNER — The agent operating and managing the building or structure, as
well as the legal owner.
PEST — Any organism (plant or animal) that adversely influences the health
or best interests of man. Pests of special significance in this light are:
Norway rats, Rattus norvegicus (Berkenhout); black rats, Rattus rattus
linnaeus; house mice, Mus musculus linnaeus; pigeons, Columba livia
gmelin; the housefly, Musca domestica linnaeus; mosquitoes, Culicidae; and
ragweeds of the genus Ambrosia, family compositae.
PEST CONTROL OPERATOR — Any person or company who engages for
compensation in the act of controlling pests.
PEST HARBORAGE — A place that provides shelter or protection for pests
and favorable conditions for their breeding.
PESTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances intended for
preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any insects, rodents, fungi,
weeds or other pests.
SANITARY OFFICER — The person employed by the Richland Township
Sanitary Board who is designated as the Sanitary Officer for the purposes
outlined in Chapter 62, Sanitary Board.
§ 146-4 RICHLAND CODE § 148-3
148:222
§ 148-3. Pest infestation.
Whenever a complaint of a dangerous or unsanitary health condition related
to rodents or other pests, or disease organisms borne by pest species, is
reported to the Sanitary Board of Richland Township, the Sanitary Officer
shall make an investigation of the same and shall seek advice from
specialists or from the Pennsylvania Departments of Agriculture,
Environmental Protection or Health as to the necessity and means of
dealing with the complaint within 30 days after the complaint has been
received.
§ 148-4. Powers of Sanitary Board to order abatement.
Whenever the Sanitary Board of the Township of Richland has received a
complaint as set forth in § 148-3 of this chapter, and as a result of the
investigation by the Sanitary Board Officer has determined that a building,
structure and/or premises represents a pest harborage, it shall serve a
notice upon the owner or any other persons in possession of said building,
structure or premises, stating the complaint and that they have determined
that the same constitutes a pest harborage and shall require the owner
or persons in possession of the same to show cause, if any they have, at
time and place specified, not to exceed 30 days thereafter, why it should
not be determined that said condition is a health menace and constitutes a
public nuisance. The owner and/or persons in possession of said building,
structure or premises have a right to file an answer to the complaint and
to appear in person or otherwise and give such testimony at such hearing
as they so desire. The Board shall hear the answer to such complaint and
shall make a determination whether or not the condition constitutes a public
nuisance by reason of the pest infestation. If the Board determines that such
a building, structure or premises constitutes a public nuisance by reason
of a pest infestation, the Board shall order the owner and/or persons in
possession of said premises to abate the same within a specified period
of time. If the owner and or persons in possession fail to comply with
said order by the date specified, then the Board may employ pest control
operators to abate such nuisance and they shall have the right to enter upon
private premises for such purposes, and the costs of the same may be placed
upon the owner and/or person in possession of such premises and the Board
shall have the right to file a lien for the costs of abating such nuisance in
the same manner as other township liens are filed and collected as now
provided by law.
§ 148-5. Reporting pest harborage or dangerous or unsanitary
health condition.
It shall be the responsibility of the citizens of Richland Township to request
the Sanitary Board of the township to undertake an investigation of the pest
problem that any citizen considers to be a health hazard; such complaint
must be in writing and bear the signatures of five or more residents and
taxpayers of the Township of Richland, and such complaint shall contain all
of the relevant facts relating to the pest control problem. Such complaint
§ 148-3 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 148-5
148:223
shall be presented the Sanitary Board of said township at any of its regular
meetings.
§ 148-6. Use of pesticides by pest control operators and others.
It shall be the responsibility of all pest control operators and others using
pesticides in Richland Township to follow label recommendations approved
by the United States Food and Drug Administration and the Department
of Agriculture of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. It is suggested that
those using pesticides with which they are unfamiliar should contact their
State Agricultural Experiment Station or their county farm agent for
instructions on the safe use of such materials.
§ 148-7. Inspection of premises; enforcement; remedial measures.
The duly appointed representatives of the Sanitary Board of Richland
Township have a right to inspect a building, structure or premises reported
to be a pest harborage as described in § 148-5 of this chapter. A pest control
operator employed by the Supervisors of Richland Township to abate a
pest infestation shall have the right to carry out the necessary remedial
program without interference from owners or occupants. The township
police officials shall make the necessary legal arrangements if they are
required.
§ 148-8. Unlawful to permit nuisances to exist.
From and after the passage of this chapter, no person or municipality shall
cause or permit to exist upon land which he or it owns, or cause to exist
upon public lands, or lands which are leased or occupied, any nuisance
declared to be illegal by the various ordinances of the Township of Richland,
including but not limited to accumulations of garbage and rubbish, the
carrying on of offensive manufacturing or business, the maintenance of a
building or structure built or located in violation of the provisions of the
ordinance relating to buildings and other structures within the township,
and excavation incident thereto.
A. No pest control operator or other person shall use potentially explosive
pesticides for pest control within any building or structure without first
notifying the township police official and the Fire Department.
B. No pest control operator or other persons shall undertake a pest control
program without observing proper precautions. These precautions shall
include notifying persons having immediate charge and/or occupants of
a building, structure or premises of the pesticide used; marking
containers "Poison" when they contain a hazardous pesticide;
accounting for all poison containers upon completion of a treatment;
disposal of all empty and partially used poison containers so that they
pose no hazard to humans, animals or other valuable plants; and closing
and posting buildings, structures and premises with warning signs that
are undergoing treatment with hazardous pesticides.
§ 148-5 RICHLAND CODE § 148-9
148:224
§ 148-9. Nuisances to be abated following notice.
It shall be the duty of any person creating a nuisance or responsible for the
creation of a nuisance, or any owner of land upon which a nuisance exists,
to remove such nuisance upon notice by the Sanitary Officer to do so.
§ 148-10. Penalty for failure to remove nuisances within time
limit.74
A person having the duty to remove a nuisance under the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon failure to do so within a reasonable time after notice has
been given by the Sanitary Officer, be liable to the township for the costs
of removal of such nuisance, and, upon conviction in a summary proceeding
brought before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, shall be guilty of a summary offense punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof,
the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section
of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 148-11. Other actions and proceedings authorized.
The Township Sanitary Board is further authorized, in addition to the
penalties above provided, to institute appropriate actions or proceedings at
law or in equity to prevent and restrain and to abate any nuisance in the
township.
§ 148-12. Adoption of Pennsylvania Public Health Act.
The township hereby enacts and ordains, and adopts as part of this chapter,
the Pennsylvania Public Health Act, being the Act of May 23, 1945, P.L.
926, as amended.75 In addition to the definitions as set forth in the Act, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ACT — The Pennsylvania Public Health Act, the Act of May 23, 1945, P.L.
926, as amended.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — The rules and regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection,
Title 25, Chapter 151, cited as 25 Pa. Code § 151.1 et seq.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Richland, County of Cambria, Pennsylvania.
§ 148-13. Inspections.
The township shall have the right of inspection to determine compliance
with the terms of this Act. The Township Sanitary Board shall from time to
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
75.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 655.1 et seq.
§ 148-9 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 148-13
148:225
time designate and appoint an inspector who shall carry out the inspection
in accordance with this chapter, with this Act and also with the rules
and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, which are incorporated herein.
§ 148-14. Adoption of rules and regulations of Department of
Environmental Protection. [Amended 11-30-1981 by Ord. No. 140]
The township hereby enacts and ordains, and adopts as part of this chapter,
the rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Department of Environmental Protection, Title 25, Chapter 151, issued
under the Act of the 23rd day of May 1945, as amended, P.L. 926, known as
"An Act for the protection of the public health by regulating the conduct and
operations of public eating and drinking places within this commonwealth;
requiring the licensing; imposing certain duties on the Department of
Health of this commonwealth and on local health authorities; and providing
penalties." All such rules, regulations and standards are incorporated in
this chapter by reference. The Township further hereby enacts, ordains
and adopts as part of the ordinance, the Rules and Regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection,
Title 25, Part I, Subpart D, Article VI, Chapter 243, issued under AC
Sections 1917-A and 1920-A (71 P.S. §§ 510-17 and 510-20) adopted
November 5, 1971, effective December 1, 1971, 1 Pa. B. 2162.
§ 148-15. Restraining violations.
The township shall have the power to institute in the Court of Common
Pleas of Cambria County, Pennsylvania, proceedings in law or in equity
to restrain any and all violations of the Act and the provisions of this
chapter. Such proceedings shall be instituted in the name of the Township
of Richland.
§ 148-16. Violations and penalties.76
Any person, as defined in the Act or the rules and regulations, who shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the Act or the rules,
regulations or standards promulgated hereunder, or who resist or interfere
with any officer, agent or employee of the township in the performance of
his duties, shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before
a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section
of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 151
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 148-13 RICHLAND CODE § 148-16
151:226
INSURANCE
§ 148-16 INSURANCE § 148-16
151:227

ARTICLE I
Fire Losses
[Adopted 11-28-1994 by Ord. No. 239]
§ 151-1. Designation of officer.
The Municipal Secretary or such official's designee is hereby appointed as
the designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 151-2. Restriction on maximum recoverable amount.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
the Township of Richland, Cambria County, Pennsylvania (hereinafter the
"municipality"), where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the
structure under all policies exceeds $7,500 unless the insuring agent is
furnished by the Municipal Treasurer with a municipal certificate pursuant
to Section 508(b) of Act 98 of 1992 and unless there is compliance with
Section 508(c) and (d) of Act 98 of 199277 and the provisions of this article.
§ 151-3. Payment of claims; procedures.
Where, pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992,78 the Municipal
Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are no delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties or user charges against real property, the insuring
agent shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided, however, that
if the loss is agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring agent
and equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire
policies covering the building restructure, the following procedures must be
followed:
A. Transfer of proceeds.
(1) The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to
the designated officer of the municipality in the aggregate of
$2,000 for each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that
amount of a claim, this section to be applied such that if the claim is
$15,000 or less, the amount transferred to the municipality shall be
$2,000; or
(2) If, at the time of a proof of loss report, the named insured has
submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure, in an amount
less than the amount calculated under the foregoing transfer
formula, the insuring agent shall transfer to the municipality from
the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
77.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
78.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 151-1 INSURANCE § 151-3
151:229
B. Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to the municipality shall be
disbursed in accordance with the policy terms.
C. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the designated officer shall return the amount of
the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of the estimate to the
named insured, if the municipality has not commenced to remove,
repair or secure the building or other structure.
D. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall do
the following:
(1) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in the separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the municipality. Such costs shall include, without limitations,
any engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the
municipality in connection with such removal, repair or securing of
the building or any proceedings related thereto; and
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the municipality with the name and address of
the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred fund and the
name and address of the named insured, the designated officer
shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have
been received by the municipality and notify the named insured
that the procedures under this subsection shall be followed; and
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the municipality and the required proof of
such completion received by the designated officer, and if the
municipality has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the
municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund, and if excess funds remain, the municipality shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured; and
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to this section, and not returned to the
named insured, such interest shall belong to the municipality, to
the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named
insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
E. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
§ 151-3 RICHLAND CODE § 151-3
151:230
§ 151-4. Adoption of procedures and fees.
The municipality may by resolution adopt procedures and regulations to
implement Act 98 of 1922 and amendments thereto and this article and may,
by resolution, fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or
services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992 and amendments thereto and
this article; including but not limited to issuance of certificates and bills,
performance or inspections and opening separate fund accounts.
§ 151-5. Violations and penalties.
Any owner or property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per
violation.
§ 151-6. Filing of article.
An exact copy of this article shall be filed with the Department of
Community and Economic Development, with the name, position and phone
number of the municipal official responsible for compliance with this article.
transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 151-3 INSURANCE § 151-6
151:231
Chapter 160
MECHANICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Board of Appeals — See Ch. 6.
§ 160-1. Adoption of Mechanical Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of Richland Township, being marked
and designated as the "International Mechanical Code, 1998 Edition," as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted
as the Mechanical Code of Richland Township, Cambria County,
Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided,
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of the said International Mechanical Code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a party hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 160-2 of
this chapter.
§ 160-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1 is revised as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical
Code of the Township of Richland, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, and
referred to as such or as "this code."
B. Section 106.5.2 is revised as follows:
106.5.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all mechanical work shall be as
indicated and paid in advance with a schedule adopted by the Board of
Supervisors, from time to time, by resolution.
C. Section 108.4 is revised as follows:
108.4 Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code
or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair mechanical equipment or systems
in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of
a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall
be guilty of a summary offense punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, and upon default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed
shall be subject to a sentence of 30 days in the Cambria County Jail.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 151-6 RICHLAND CODE § 160-2
160:232
§ 160-3. Saving clause.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Mechanical Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed by this
chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 164
MOVING PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rental occupancy reports — See Ch. 192.
§ 164-1. Definitions.
The following words when used in this chapter shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning:
LESSOR or LANDLORD — One who grants a lease or rents real estate to
another either for business or dwelling purposes.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm or corporation. The singular shall
include the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
PERSONAL PROPERTY or HOUSEHOLD GOODS — Any tangible property
that is the subject of ownership and is possible of being moved, and which
D. Section 108.5, Unlawful continuance, is revised as follows:
"Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure
after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine of no more than $1,000."
E. Section 109 shall be deleted in its entirety and amended to read as
follows:
"The owner of a building or structure, office or agency of the township,
or any other person aggrieved from the decision of the Codes Official,
may appeal to the Richland Township Administrative Board of Appeals
pursuant to the provisions of Richland Township Ordinance Number
133, as amended."79
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Administrative Board of Appeals.
§ 160-2 MOVING PERMITS § 164-1
164:233
is generally used in the operation of a business or for the maintenance of
the household.
TRANSPORTATION — The moving of personal property or household goods
by way of public streets or highways.
§ 164-2. Permit required.
No person shall move or transport, or cause to be moved or transported,
from place to place within the Township of Richland to another place
therein, or places beyond the limits thereof, any personal property or
household goods in bulk without first securing from the Township Secretary
or his designee a permit for such moving or transportation.
§ 164-3. Application for permit.80
Any person desiring such a permit for the removal or transportation of
personal property or household goods in the manner herein described shall
make application to the Township Secretary or his designee, setting forth
his name and address and also setting forth the name of the owners or
reputed owners of the personal property or household goods to be moved or
transported, the address and location from which the personal property or
household goods are to be moved or transported. All occupants over the age
of 17 shall be listed on the application as well as their occupation status.
§ 164-4. Issuance of permit; fee.81
The Township Secretary or his designee shall, upon application, issue a
permit setting forth the name of the permittee as well as the name or
names and addresses of the owners of the personal property or household
goods to be moved or transported, and the address from which the personal
property or household goods are to be moved, and the new address to which
the personal property or household goods are to be delivered. A copy of
said permit shall be delivered to the Police Department of the Township of
Richland.
§ 164-5. Notification by landlord.
Any lessor or landlord leasing or renting any premises or part thereof within
the Township of Richland to another person for the purpose of either a
business or as a dwelling shall give the Township Secretary or his designee
at least five days' notice of the intention of the lessee or tenant to remove
the leased or rented premises. Any lessor or landlord leasing or renting any
premises or part thereof within the Township of Richland to another person
for the purpose of either a business or as a dwelling shall also give to the
Township Secretary or his designee the names of the new occupant leasing
or renting the premises.
80.Editor's Note: The Application for Moving Permit and the Moving Permit for Personal
Property forms are on file in the township offices.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 164-1 RICHLAND CODE § 164-6
164:234
§ 164-6. Responsibilities of movers.
Any person who is in the business of transportation, rental of equipment
or moving personal property or household goods in bulk from one location
to another, as hereinbefore described, shall be obligated to verify that
the proper permit has been issued prior to the moving or transporting of
any personal property or household goods either within the Township of
Richland or to a point outside the Township of Richland.
§ 164-7. Payment of taxes and fees.
The Township Secretary or his designee shall not issue any permit until all
taxes and fees levied are satisfied. The Township Tax Collector and Special
Tax Collector shall be contacted to verify that all taxes and fees have been
paid.
§ 164-8. Violations and penalties.82
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
Chapter 168
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms and alarm systems — See Ch. 75. Animals — See Ch. 85.
§ 168-1. Title.
This Ordinance shall be known as the "Richland Township Noise
Ordinance."
§ 168-2. Authority.
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the Second Class Township Code.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 164-6 MOVING PERMITS § 168-3
164:235
§ 168-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure that public health, safety and
welfare shall not be abridged by the making and creating of noise pollution
or of public nuisances from disturbing, excessive or offensive noises in the
Township. The residents of the Township recognize that uncontrolled noise
represents a danger to the health and welfare of their neighbors and that
each person in the community is entitled to live in an environment in which
the level of impulsive and amplified noise is minimized for the community
good. It is the purpose and scope of this chapter to provide regulations
defining the maximum sound levels that vehicles, appliances and equipment
shall be allowed to produce at specified distances from these devices, and
also to provide for the prohibition of other kinds of offensive noises. These
regulations and prohibitions are intended to protect the physical, mental
and social well-being of the residents of Richland Township.
§ 168-4. Legislative findings.
The Board of Supervisors finds that failure of individuals, businesses,
industries, persons maintaining animals, social gatherings and other
activities to regulate the noise emanating from their premises constitutes a
violation of the peace and enjoyment of the residents of the Township and a
public nuisance. Specifically, such noise emanating from home occupations,
businesses, industries, sound amplification equipment, radios, electronic
sound-recording equipment, vehicles, persons maintaining animals, social
gatherings, and other activities:
§ 168-5. Definitions; interpretation.
The following words and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them
in this section.
A. Creates a nuisance in that residents are deprived of the enjoyment of
their homes, disturbed in their sleep, and otherwise prevented from the
quiet enjoyment of their residential premises;
B. Affects the property values of residences in the Township;
C. Affects the public welfare by reflecting negatively on the quality of life
in residential areas of the Township;
D. Disturbs the peace and good order of the Township; and
E. Creates noise pollution.
A. All acoustical terminology shall be interpreted in accordance with that
contained in ANSI S1.1, Acoustical Terminology. All other words and
terms not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard
usage.
ANSI — American National Standards Institute, or its successors.
§ 168-3 RICHLAND CODE § 168-5
164:236
DECIBEL (dB) — A unit of sound level which is a division of a
logarithmic scale used to express the ration of sound pressure of the
source to the pressure of an arbitrarily chosen reference pressure;
the ratio is expressed on the decibel scale by multiplying its base 10
logarithm by 20.
EXCESSIVE NOISE — Excessive noise is that sound which is:
NIGHTTIME — Nine p.m. to 7:00 a.m., prevailing time; conversely,
daytime is 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., prevailing time.
NOISE — Any sound emitted by a person, animal, appliance,
equipment, instrument or other device.
NOISE LEVEL — Airborne sound levels expressed in dB and obtained
by the use of specific frequency-dependent weighting networks, as
specified in the reference standards and indicated by proper notation;
if all weighting is employed, the sound level is identified as dB(A).
NOISE POLLUTION — Noise of such loudness and character from a
single source or from multiple sources, which is or may be predicted
with reasonable certainty to be, injurious to health or which
unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of property or with any
lawful business or activity. Noise/sound pressure levels exceeding those
permitted in any district shall constitute noise pollution.
PERIOD OF OBSERVATION — The time interval during which
acoustical data are obtained. The period of observation is determined
by the characteristics of the noise being measured and the
instrumentation being used. The period of observation must be at least
as long as the response time of the instrumentation. The greater the
variance in individual sound level, the longer must be the observation
time for a given expected accuracy of measurement.
PERSON — Includes an individual, firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, corporation or any other similar entity.
SOUND LEVEL — Noise level.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument or combination of instruments
which meets or exceeds the requirements for an ANSI Type SIA or Type
S2A sound level meter.
TOWNSHIP — Township of Richland, Cambria County, Pennsylvania.
VEHICLE — Any device, or combination of devices, used for or capable
of being used for transporting persons or property. Vehicles include,
but are not limited to, the following: automobiles, trucks, buses,
motorcycles, motorized bicycles, snowmobiles, scooters, all-terrain
Injurious or which unreasonably interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property. Measured noise levels in excess of
limits established in these regulations or those specified in valid
permits are declared to be excessive noise;
(1)
(2) Annoying to a person of ordinary sensibilities.
§ 168-5 MOVING PERMITS § 168-5
164:237
§ 168-6. Noise limit.
No person shall create or allow the creation of any noise or operate or cause
to be operated any source of sound on property owned, leased, occupied or
otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the sound level, when
measured at or beyond the boundaries of the lot, parcel, tract or property,
on which such activities take place to exceed the noise levels specified
below:
§ 168-7. Exemptions.
Noise emitted from the following sources shall be exempt from the noise
standards specified herein:
vehicles, go-carts, racers, and life devices, farm machinery, industrial
machinery, highway graders, trailers, graders and semi-trailers.
A. Seventy decibels [dB(A)] between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
prevailing time.
B. Sixty decibels [dB(A)] between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
prevailing time.
A. All safety signals and warning devices (e.g., intrusion alarms, backup
alarms on trucks); authorized vehicles when responding to emergencies
(e.g., police, fire, ambulance sirens or any other device used to alert
persons to an emergency or used during the conduct of emergency
work).
B. The provision, repair and maintenance of municipal service or public
utilities.
C. Bells, chimes and carillons used for religious purposes or in conjunction
with national celebrations or public holidays.
D. Appliances, lawn and garden equipment, chain saws, snow removal
equipment and power tools in use between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
(prevailing time) and 9:00 p.m. (prevailing time), provided such are
operated within the manufacturer's specifications and with all standard
noise-reducing equipment in use, unmodified, and in proper operating
condition.
E. Heavy construction equipment when being used on a specific shortterm
project (such as constructing a building: constructing, repairing
or cleaning a road, drilling a well; and other similar short-term, specific
construction, demolition, or repair projects) in use between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., prevailing time, for the duration of such shortterm,
specific project; provided, such heavy construction equipment is
operated within the manufacturer's specifications and with all standard
noise-reducing equipment in use, unmodified and in proper operating
condition.
§ 168-5 RICHLAND CODE § 168-7
164:238
§ 168-8. Special waiver.
A temporary waiver from strict compliance with the noise standards
specified herein may be granted to persons during emergency
circumstances, as determined by the Board of Supervisors, to permit
reasonable time to effect repairs.
§ 168-9. Policy.
It is the policy of the Board of Supervisors in adopting this chapter not to
force any industrial or commercial enterprise out of business, but rather to
work with any industrial or commercial enterprise to find ways to reduce
noise levels to the level permitted by this ordinance.
§ 168-10. Enforcement officers.
This chapter may be enforced by any police officer or by any person affected
by noise as defined herein.
F. Air conditioners, fans, heating units and similar comfort devices,
provided such are operated within the manufacturer's specifications
and with all standard noise-reducing equipment in use, unmodified, and
in proper operating condition.
G. Airplanes, helicopters and normal activities of properly licensed
airports; trains operating on railroads; and the operations of the
Cambria County Humane Society.
H. Musical, recreational and athletic events conducted by or permitted by
schools, local government, community or community association or
village festivals, or events sponsored by nonprofit organizations.
I. Existing weapons firing ranges during daytime, as defined herein.
J. All motor vehicles being operated on the public road in Richland
Township, provided such are operated within the manufacturer's
specifications and with all standard noise-reducing equipment in use,
unmodified and in proper working condition.
K. Activities permitted by special waiver, as provided herein, according to
the terms and conditions of said waiver.
L. All farm-related operations and activities.
M. Any existing legitimate or licensed business, commercial or industrial
operation between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., prevailing
time; provided, any appliances, equipment, machinery or devices used
in such operation are operated within the manufacturer's specifications
and with all standard noise-reducing equipment in use, unmodified and
in proper operating condition.
§ 168-7 MOVING PERMITS § 168-11
164:239
§ 168-11. Enforcement procedures.
The following procedures and penalties are prescribed for enforcement of
this chapter:
§ 168-12. Relationship with other restrictions.
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to interfere with, abrogate
or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, including Title 18 (Crimes
Code) and Title 75. (Vehicle Code), Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes. If
more stringent requirements concerning noise abatement are contained
in other statutes, rules, regulations or ordinances, the more stringent
regulation shall apply.
§ 168-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, as a summary offense, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000; and in default of payment, to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of
this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offence.
A. Warnings. If it is determined by a sound level meter reading that a noise
level is in excess of the levels prescribed by this chapter, the Township
shall, upon written complaint by the affected person who resides in
Richland Township, issue a written warning to the person responsible.
Any such warning shall be in effect for six months.
B. Offenses. If it is determined by a sound level meter reading that a noise
level in excess of the levels permitted by this chapter shall have been
caused or permitted by any person within six months after the issuance
of a warning, any person affected thereby, who resides in Richland
Township, may prosecute such person causing or. permitting said noise
level before the District Magistrate.
C. Injunctions. In addition, any person affected thereby may file legal or
equitable actions in court to abate or enjoin violations of this chapter.
D. Public nuisance. Any emission of noise from any source in excess of the
limitations established herein is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and may be abated by administrative or judicial proceedings,
fines and penalties herein provided.
E. Other remedies. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair
any cause of action or legal remedy thereof, of any person or the public
for injury or damage arising from the emission or release into the
atmosphere or ground from any source whatever of noise on such place
or manner, or at such levels which may give rise to such cause of action.
§ 168-11 RICHLAND CODE § 168-13
164:240
Chapter 173
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 78.
§ 168-13 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 168-13
173:241

ARTICLE I
Highland Regional Park
[Adopted 6-23-1975 by Ord. No. 87]
§ 173-1. Hours.
The Highland Regional Park shall be closed to the public between the hours
of sunset to sunrise and it shall be illegal for any person or persons to be
upon the premises of said park without specific permission therefor.
§ 173-2. Violations and penalties.83
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 173-3. Enforcement.
The Police Departments of Richland Township, Geistown Borough and
Stonycreek Township are hereby authorized to enforce this article, other
applicable ordinances of the Township of Richland and the penal laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for offenses committed in and upon
said Highland Regional Park, and each of said Police Departments is hereby
authorized to arrest on view for offenses committed in and upon said
Highland Regional Park.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 173-1 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 173-3
173:243
Chapter 177
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 173-3 RICHLAND CODE § 173-3
177:244
ARTICLE I
Transient Retail Merchants
[Adopted 7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 209]
§ 177-1. Definitions.
§ 177-2. License required.
No person shall engage in a transient retail business in the Township of
Richland without first having obtained a license, as herein provided.
§ 177-3. Form and content of application.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LICENSE — The written authorization by the Township Supervisors
conferring the right to operate a transient retail business within the
township.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm,
organization or corporation. For the purpose of this article, each person
in an association who sells or exhibits any goods, wares or merchandise
is individually subject to the terms of this article.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — Any business conducted in Richland
Township for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever for a
period of less than 90 calendar days.
TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANT — Every person, whether principal
or agent, entering into, beginning or desiring to begin a transient
retail business in Richland Township for the sale of any goods, wares
or merchandise whatsoever, and who hires, leases, occupies or uses
any room, apartment, store, shop, building, railway car or other place
or structure for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares or
merchandise or who sells such goods, wares or merchandise door to
door. Said terms shall include a participant as a vendor in a flea market
and a door-to-door peddler.
B. Nothing contained herein shall apply to farmers selling their own
produce, or to any sale of goods, wares or merchandise, the proceeds
whereof are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose.
A. Every person desiring to engage in business as a transient retail
merchant in the Township of Richland shall first make application to the
Township Supervisors for a license. Said application shall be on a blank
form provided by the Township Supervisors and shall contain at least
the following information, verified by oath or affirmation:
(1) The full name of the applicant and local address, if any.
(2) The name of employer or a statement that such applicant is selfemployed.
§ 177-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 177-3
177:245
§ 177-4. Time period for issuance of license.
At the discretion of the township officials, no license may be issued under
this article until a period of 24 hours has elapsed from the time the
application has been filed with the Supervisors, in order to give the
Supervisors sufficient time to make any investigation deemed necessary by
the officials of Richland Township before issuing a license.
§ 177-5. Investigation and decision by Supervisors.
The Township Supervisors, during the twenty-four-hour period following the
application, may investigate the applicant to determine whether it is against
the interest of the township to issue a license. A decision to issue a license
shall be rendered within 72 hours from the time the application has been
filed.
§ 177-6. License fees.84
§ 177-7. Display of license.
The license issued by the Township Supervisors shall be posted by the
applicant in a conspicuous place on the premises or booth for which it has
been granted or be carried on the person of a door-to-door peddler.
(3) Permanent address and telephone number.
(4) The nature of goods, wares or merchandise offered for sale.
(5) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of any crime and, if the answer is in the affirmative, the
nature of the offense or offenses and the punishment or
punishments imposed.
(6) The type of vehicle to be used, if any.
B. If the applicant intends to sell any goods, wares or merchandise
whatsoever door to door in the township, then the applicant shall
submit to fingerprinting by the Richland Township Police Department
and furnish a photograph of him- or herself.
A. The license fee imposed by this article shall be paid to Richland
Township in the amounts as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
B. At the expiration of any license, if the person holding the same shall
desire to continue the transient merchant business he or she should be
required to file a new application for a license and pay a license fee in
an amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 177-3 RICHLAND CODE § 177-8
177:246
§ 177-8. Duties of lessor.
It shall be the duty of every person who leases property to a transient retail
merchant, by either an oral or written lease:
§ 177-9. Violations and penalties.85
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
A. To notify the transient retail merchant of the existence of said article;
and
B. To report to the Township Supervisors, in writing, the name, permanent
address and dates that the transient retail merchant shall be renting or
leasing property in the township at least 24 hours prior to the transient
retail merchant actually taking possession of the leased property.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 177-8 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 177-9
177:247

ARTICLE II
Peddling, Canvassing and Soliciting
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 177-10. Title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Richland Township
Peddling, Canvassing and Soliciting Ordinance."
§ 177-11. Definitions and word usage.
The following words shall be construed to have the meanings set forth
below. The singular number includes the plural, and the masculine includes
the feminine and the neuter.
PEDDLING, CANVASSING AND SOLICITING — The taking of orders for
goods, wares or merchandise, including subscriptions for magazines or
other printed matter, the obtaining of contracts for home and building
devices, repairs and improvements and the securing of contributions to
various causes and organizations, from house to house, or upon any street
or sidewalk in the township.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
TOWNSHIP — Richland Township.
§ 177-12. Registration and identification card required.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall engage in
peddling, canvassing and soliciting in the township without first having
registered with the township and having obtained an identification card
from the township.
§ 177-13. Application procedure.
A. Any person desiring to engage in peddling, canvassing and soliciting
shall submit a written application to the township on a form to be
furnished by the township, accompanied by two photographs, no larger
than two inches by two inches, of himself, taken within six months prior
to the date of application.
B. The applicant shall state his name, age, sex, home address, business
address, name and address of employer, if any, what he desires to
canvass, peddle and solicit for, the length of time he wishes to engage in
this work and the make and type of vehicle, if any, he will use, its
registration number and whether he has ever been convicted of a
felony, misdemeanor or a crime of any kind involving moral turpitude.
C. The township will issue to the applicant an identification card (to which
one of the applicant's photographs will be affixed) within 10 days from
§ 177-10 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 177-13
177:249
§ 177-14. Standards of conduct.
Every person engaged in peddling, canvassing or soliciting within the
confines of Richland Township shall, in the conduct of his activities, comply
with the following standards of conduct:
the date of filing of the application, unless the application is rejected
by the township based on findings made by Richland Township Police
Department.
D. An identification card will not be issued to any person who has been
convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or a crime of any kind involving
moral turpitude, and such person shall not be allowed to engage in
canvassing, peddling and soliciting in the township.
E. An identification card will be valid for the period of time for which the
applicant has paid the required license fee. Such card may not be
transferred from one person to another.
A. He shall conduct himself at all times in an orderly and lawful manner.
B. He shall carry his identification card at all times and exhibit it upon
request to any police officer or to any person on whom he shall call or
with whom he shall talk, or, if not registered and licensed under this
article, he shall identify himself by means of a firm or corporate
identification card or a valid Pennsylvania State motor vehicle driver's
license.
C. He shall not permit any person to have possession of his identification
card and shall immediately report its loss to the township. He shall not
cause or permit his identification card to be altered or defaced in any
way.
D. He shall not engage in peddling, canvassing and soliciting before 8:00
a.m. nor after 9:00 p.m., prevailing time.
E. He shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling without the
invitation or permission of the occupant and shall immediately leave
any premises upon request of the occupant.
F. He shall not be guilty of any false pretense or misrepresentation, and
particularly, he shall not represent his identification card to be an
endorsement of himself or his goods or services or of the goods or
services of his employer by the township.
G. He shall immediately surrender his identification card to the township
upon revocation thereof.
H. He shall give a written receipt for all orders taken within Richland
Township where a down payment is received, which receipt shall be
signed by the solicitor and shall set forth a brief description of the
goods, wares, merchandise or services ordered, the total purchase
§ 177-13 RICHLAND CODE § 177-14
177:250
§ 177-15. Revocation of identification card.
Any identification card may be revoked by the township if the holder fails to
comply with the standards of conduct contained in § 177-14 hereof or any of
them or upon ascertainment by the Police Department that the holder has
made a false statement in his application.
§ 177-16. Exceptions.
The township reserves the right to have all the following named groups be
subject to the registration and licensing requirements of this article, except
that the license fee shall be waived. All other provisions of this article will
be applicable to the following:
§ 177-17. License fee.
The license fee shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors. The township shall indicate on the identification card the
period of time for which the required license fee shall have been paid.
price thereof and the amount of the down payment received by the
solicitor from the purchaser.
A. Boys or girls under 19 years of age who take orders for and deliver
newspapers, greeting cards, candy, submarine sandwiches and the like
for Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, schools, churches or other charitable and
civic organizations.
B. Persons delivering or distributing goods or services previously ordered
or contracted for by the person to whom they are delivered or
distributed.
C. Persons who deliver milk, bread, gasoline, kerosene or other heating
and/or cooking fuels.
D. Persons who work for an organization which has registered with the
Pennsylvania Department of State under the Solicitation of Charitable
Funds Act, Act of August 9, 1963, P.L. 628,86 and produce proof of such
current registration.
E. Persons who are acting as representatives of accredited war veterans
organizations.
F. Farmers who are selling their own produce that is raised or produced
on their farm.
G. Persons engaged in interstate commerce.
86.Editor's Note: See now 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq.
§ 177-14 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 177-18
177:251
§ 177-18. Transient retail merchants.
This article shall not apply to any person to whom a transient retail
merchant's license has been issued.
§ 177-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall engage in peddling, canvassing or soliciting without
registering with the appropriate township officer or any person, whether
or not required to be registered and licensed under this article, who shall
violate any of the other provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense
and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of
prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion
thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated
shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 177-18 RICHLAND CODE § 177-19
177:252
Chapter 181
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Board of Appeals — See Ch. 6. Building construction — See Ch. 96.
§ 181-1. Adoption of Plumbing Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of Richland Township, being marked
and designated as the "International Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition," as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted
as the Plumbing Code of Richland Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania,
for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
International Plumbing Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 181-2 of this chapter.
§ 181-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1 is revised as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Plumbing Code
of the Township of Richland, Cambria County, Pennsylvania,
hereinafter referred to as such or as "this code."
B. Section 102.2 is revised as follows:
102.2 Continuation. The legal use and occupancy of any structure
existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, or which has been
heretofore approved, shall be continued without change except to it
shall be specifically covered in this code.
C. Section 106.5.2 is revised as follows:
106.5.2 Fee schedule. The permit fees for all plumbing work shall
be paid in accordance with a schedule adopted by the Board of
Supervisors, from time to time, by resolution.
D. Section 108.4 is revised as follows:
§ 177-19 PLUMBING § 181-2
181:253
108.4 Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who shall install plumbing work in violation of an approved plan or
directive of a code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a summary offense punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, and upon the default of the payment
of the fine or penalty imposed shall be subject to a sentence not
exceeding 30 days in the Cambria County Jail. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
E. Section 108.5, Unlawful continuance, is revised as follows:
"Any person who shall continue any plumbing work in or about the
structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not more than $1,000."
F. Section 109 shall be deleted in its entirety and amended to read as
follows:
"The owner of a building or structure, office or agency of the township,
or any other person aggrieved from a decision of the Codes Official,
may appeal to the Richland Township Administrative Board of Appeals
pursuant to the provisions of Richland Township Ordinance Number
133, as amended."87
G. Section 301.3, Public systems available, is revised as follows:
"A public water main or public sewer system shall be considered
available to a building when the building is located within 200 feet of
the public water main or sewer."
H. Section 305.6, Freezing, is revised as follows:
"Water service piping shall be installed below recorded frost
penetration but not less than 4 1/2 feet (54 inches) below grade. In
climates with freezing temperatures, plumbing piping and exterior
building wall or areas subjected to freezing temperatures shall be
protected against freezing by insulation or heat, or both."
I. Section 305.6.1 is revised as follows:
305.6.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage
disposal systems shall be a minimum of four feet (48 inches) below
finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers
shall be a minimum of four feet (48 inches) below grade unless prior
approval is obtained from the Sewage Enforcement Officer for
Richland Township.
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Administrative Board of Appeals.
§ 181-2 RICHLAND CODE § 181-3
181:254
§ 181-3. Saving clause.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Plumbing Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed by this
chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 186
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Board of Appeals — See Ch. 6.
§ 186-1. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code. [Amended
11-3-2014 by Ord. No. 329]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of Richland Township, being marked
and designated as the "International Property Maintenance Code, 2003
Edition, and all subsequent editions, as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance
Code of Richland Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, for the control
of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
International Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 186-2 of this
chapter.
§ 186-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The International Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised in
the following respects:
A. Section 101.1 is revised as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Township of Richland, Cambria County,
Pennsylvania, hereinafter referred to as such or "this code."
B. Section 106.4 is revised as follows: [Amended 11-3-2014 by Ord. No.
329]
§ 181-3 PLUMBING § 186-2
181:255
106.4 Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than $1,000, and upon the default of the payment
of the fine or penalty imposed shall be subject to a sentence not
exceeding 30 days in the Cambria County Jail. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with the
terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense,
unless the District Justice determining that there was a good faith
basis for the defendant to have believed there was no violation, in
which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the fifth day following the date of the termination of
a violation by the District Justice and thereafter each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Section 107.4, Unlawful continuance, is revised as follows:
"Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure
after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine of not more than $1,000."
D. Sections 111.1 through 111.8 shall be deleted in their entirety and
amended to read as follows:
"The owner of a building or structure, office or agency of the township,
or any other person aggrieved from a decision of the Codes Official,
may appeal to the Richland Township Administrative Board of Appeals
pursuant to the provisions of Richland Township Ordinance Number
133, as amended."88
E. Section 302.8 is revised as follows:
302.8 Motor vehicles. Except as provided in other regulations, no
currently unregistered and/or uninspected motor vehicles shall be
parked, kept or stored on any property and no vehicles shall at any
time be in a state of major disassembly, repair or in the process of
being stripped or dismantled. A vehicle of any type is permitted to
undergo major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work
is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and
approved for such purposes.
F. Section 304.14 is revised as follows: [Amended 11-3-2014 by Ord.
No. 329]
88.Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Administrative Board of Appeals.
§ 186-2 RICHLAND CODE § 186-2
181:256
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from April 1 to December
1, every door, window and other outside opening used or required for
ventilation purposes serving any building containing habitable rooms,
food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products
used in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured,
packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting
screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch, and every swinging door
shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. Screen
doors shall not be required for out-swinging doors or other types
of openings which make screening impractical, provided that other
approved means, such as air curtains or insect-repellent fans, are
employed.
G. Section 602.3 is revised as follows: [Amended 11-3-2014 by Ord. No.
329]
602.3 Heat Supply. Every dwelling shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 65° F. (18° C.)
at a level of three feet (914 mm) above the floor and a distance of
three feet (914 mm) from the exterior walls in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the outside design temperature
required for the locality by the mechanical code listed in Appendix D
of the International Plumbing Code.
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets
one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guest room
on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the period from October 1
to May 15 to maintain a room temperature of not less than 65° F. (18°
C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms during the hours
between 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and not less than 60° F.
(16° C.) during other hours. The temperature shall be measured at a
point three feet (914 mm) above the floor and three feet (914 mm) from
the exterior walls. When the outdoor temperature is below the outdoor
design temperature required for the locality by the mechanical code
listed in Appendix D, the owner or operator shall not be required to
maintain the minimum room temperatures, provided that the heating
system is operating at full capacity, with supply valves and dampers in
a full open position.
H. Section 602.4 is revised as follows: [Amended 11-3-2014 by Ord. No.
329]
§ 186-2 PLUMBING § 186-2
181:257
§ 186-3. Saving clause.
Nothing in this chapter or in the International Property Maintenance Code
hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance
hereby repealed by this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy
of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 192
RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving permits — See Ch. 164.
§ 192-1. Annual report.
All persons who rent or lease property in Richland Township shall hereafter
make an annual report to the Township Tax Collector on forms to be
provided listing all their tenants or lessees as of the date indicated on the
report forms. Said annual reports shall be filed on or before the 31st day of
April of this year and each and every year thereafter.
§ 192-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association who
stands in the relation of landlord or who rent or lease.
§ 192-3. Violations and penalties.89
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Every enclosed occupied work
space shall be supplied with sufficient heat during the period from
October 1 to May 15 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°
(18° C.) during all working hours. The temperature shall be measured
at a point three feet (914 mm) above the floor and three feet (914 mm)
from the exterior walls. Exceptions: processing, storage and operation
areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions; areas in
which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 186-2 RICHLAND CODE § 192-3
192:258
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
Chapter 198
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal authorities — See Ch. 11.
County Sanitation Committee — See Ch. 28,
Art. I.
Sanitary Board — See Ch. 62.
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
Solid waste — See Ch. 207.
Water — See Ch. 234.
§ 192-3 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 192-3
192:259

Part 1
[Adopted As IndCiocnatneedc tIino nAsrticle Histories]
ARTICLE I
Individual Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 11-30-1956 by Ord. No. 3]
§ 198-1. Adoption of provisions.
The following are the resolutions of the Board of Supervisors of Richland
Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, to further protect the health and
welfare of its residents, and on the 30th day of November 1956, said Board
adopted the resolutions regulating individual sewage disposal systems,
effective the date of adoption.
§ 198-2. Purpose.
The following regulations for individual sewage disposal systems are to be
designed based on the information available and/or developed during the
construction of the same. The minimum standards established are extended
as a guide for a sewage disposal system and are not to be construed
as guaranteeing that the system will function satisfactorily. Requirements
other than those outlined may be necessary in order to obtain satisfactory
results. The rules and regulations herein are subject to change and where
there is any ambiguity or dispute as to the rules and regulations, the
regulations and recommendation of the Pennsylvania Department of Health
shall be binding and control.
§ 198-3. Location of system.
The location of the sewage disposal system shall be determined by the size
and shape of lot, gradience, depth of groundwater and the location of any
streams, lakes or ponds.
§ 198-4. Lot size.
The lots shall be of a sufficient size to permit proper location, installation
and operation of an individual sewage disposal system in a sanitary manner
not to create a nuisance nor contaminate any water supply.
§ 198-5. Flooding and drainage restrictions.
The installation of an individual sewage disposal system shall not be made
on any low land subject to periodic flooding, or areas with a high water
table, nor land subject to poor drainage which would preclude the
installation of a sewage disposal system operation properly.
§ 198-6. Type of system.
The sewage disposal system shall be designed to receive all sanitary sewage
and laundry waste, and can be any of the following type:
§ 198-1 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-6
192:261
§ 198-7. Septic tank separation distances.
The location of the septic tank shall not be less that 15 feet from building
nor less than 15 feet from any property line nor less than 50 feet from any
water supply.
§ 198-8. Termination of laterals.
The termination of any laterals shall not be less than 15 feet from any
property line or main building.
§ 198-9. Sewer line specifications.
The pipe which is to be used for the construction of the house sewer line
connected to the septic tank shall be of the bill and spigot joint type, of
cast iron, vitrified clay or concrete, of proper size. Watertight joints shall be
assured and a grade of not less than 1/8 inch per foot, nor more than 1/4
inch per foot, is allowable to the septic tank. No ninety-degree ells shall be
permitted and accessible cleanouts should be provided for the house sewer
line.
§ 198-10. Septic tank construction specifications.
The construction of the septic tank can be of concrete, or steel properly
coated to prevent excessive corrosion, and shall comply with commercial
standards.
§ 198-11. Inspections and cleanout; tank to be watertight.
Provisions shall be made for inspection and cleanout openings. The tank
should be made tight to prevent the entrance of rain, surface water or
groundwater.
§ 198-12. Septic tank capacity.
A. Septic tanks with field tile laterals.
B. Septic tanks with cesspools.
C. A combination of septic tank, cesspool and field tile laterals.
A. The minimum capacity of septic tanks shall be as follows:
(1) There shall be no septic tank installed of less than 500 gallons'
liquid capacity.
(2) Three or less bedrooms: 500 gallons' liquid capacity.
(3) Four bedrooms: 750 gallons' liquid capacity.
(4) Five bedrooms: 900 gallons' liquid capacity.
(5) Six bedrooms: 1,100 gallons' liquid capacity.
§ 198-6 RICHLAND CODE § 198-12
192:262
§ 198-13. Nonresidential systems.
Commercial, business, institutional or public systems shall fall under a
separate category and shall be designed according to the determined
requirements of the particular application in line with the ruling and all of
the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Health.
§ 198-14. Distribution of effluent.
In order to provide information relating to the best method of disseminating
the effluent from the septic tank, percolation tests may be required to
provide information as to whether field tile laterals, cesspools or a
combination of both is required.
§ 198-15. Location of field tile lateral.
The location of the field tile lateral shall be in an open, unshaded area and
should be located 50 feet from any water supply, 25 feet from any stream,
lake or pond and 15 feet from any dwelling or property line.
§ 198-16. Distribution box.
A distribution box of the proper size to accommodate the lateral lines shall
be constructed at the head of the lateral lines. Each lateral line shall be
connected separately to the distribution box. The connection between the
septic tank and the distribution box shall be the same as for the construction
of the house sewer line. (See § 198-9.)
§ 198-17. Lateral trenches.
Lateral trenches are not acceptable in filled ground.
§ 198-18. Installation requirements.
A minimum length of 250 feet of laterals is required, with a minimum of
three lines from each individual septic/distribution box. The minimum width
of the field tile trench shall be 18 inches, the maximum depth 36 inches
(preferred depth 18 inches), the maximum grade of field tile lines shall not
exceed six inches for 100 feet, and the preferred would be two inches to
four inches per 100 feet. The filter material depth under the field tile shall
be a minimum of six inches, and over the field tile a minimum of two inches
in depth. The field tile for the lateral lines shall not be less than four inches
(6) Seven bedrooms: 1,300 gallons' liquid capacity.
(7) Eight bedrooms: 1,300 gallons' liquid capacity.
(8) Twelve bedrooms: 2,000 gallons' liquid capacity.
B. The minimum liquid capacity of any septic tank shall be increased by
50% of the above schedule when household garbage grinders or
disposal units discharge into the individual sewage system.
§ 198-12 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-18
192:263
in diameter and be laid with one-fourth-inch open joints. All open joints are
to be protected by strips of asphalt building paper at least three inches wide
and sufficiently long to make cover for field tile. The filter material for the
field tile shall be clean crushed stone, gravel or slag a minimum of 1/2 inch
in size.
§ 198-19. Use of cesspools in lieu of laterals.
Cesspools can be used in conjunction with septic tanks in lieu of laterals
when soil conditions or topography make them best adapted to the proper
functioning of the sewage system.
§ 198-20. Diameter and depth of cesspool.
The cesspool shall not be less than six feet in inside diameter and have
a minimum depth of 10 feet. However, the depth of the cesspool used in
conjunction with a septic tank shall be determined by the soil conditions
encountered in digging for the preparation of the cesspool, and the cesspool
must be of sufficient depth to encounter a sandy or porous soil condition
to assure proper leaching. In the event that more than one cesspool is
used with a septic tank installation, a distribution box will be required as
described in the preceding sections. (See § 198-16.)
§ 198-21. Distance between cesspool and septic tank.
The cesspool shall be located not less than 10 feet from the septic tank,
and the connection between the septic tank and the cesspool shall be of the
same construction as the house sewer line to the septic tank. (See § 198-9.)
§ 198-22. Location of cesspool in relation to water supply, water
table and other property.
The location of the cesspool shall be not less than 100 feet from any water
supply, 25 feet from any dwelling and 15 feet from any property line; in no
case shall any cesspool excavation extend into the water table and, in the
event that groundwater is encountered, the bottom of the cesspool shall be
raised with gravel or coarse sand at least two feet above the water table.
§ 198-23. Cesspool installation requirements.
The lining of the cesspool can be of stone, cinder block or brick. The
thickness of materials used must be at least eight inches. The lining above
the inlet is to be laid in cement mortar, and below the inlets the joints are to
be left open. Where necessary because of soil conditions, the annular space
between the lining and the earth wall shall be filled with crushed rock or
gravel. The lining of the cesspool may be corbeled to permit use of a smaller
cover than the full diameter of the cesspool. A weight-bearing flagstone or
reinforced concrete top, with a manhole and cover, shall be provided. The
cover and manhole are to be made watertight. The top of the cesspool shall
be a minimum of 12 inches below the ground surface.
§ 198-18 RICHLAND CODE § 198-24
192:264
§ 198-24. Compliance with regulations; inspections.
All individual sewage disposal systems installed or constructed in Richland
Township from and after the date of the adoption of this article shall be in
full and complete compliance of the above regulations. The township may
from time to time have said installation of said individual sewage disposal
system inspected during the construction and installation of the same or
said township may accept the inspection and approval of the same by the
Pennsylvania Department of Health; but said approval in no wise carries any
assurance or guarantee of the efficient and satisfactory operation of said
individual sewage disposal system.
§ 198-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No.
272]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 198-24 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-25
192:265

ARTICLE II
Connection to Highland and Johnstown Systems
[Adopted 9-28-1961 by Ord. No. 14]
§ 198-26. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — Highland Sewer and Water Authority, as presently or
hereafter constituted.
BUILDING — Any structure, occupied or vacant, erected and
maintained for continuous or periodic occupation, occupancy or use by
a human being or animals, or from which structure sanitary sewage or
industrial wastes, or both thereof, is or may be discharged; but the term
"building" shall not include such a structure which is abandoned for use
or occupancy.
BUILDING DRAIN or HOUSE DRAIN — The part of the lowest lateral
piping of the building drainage system which receives the sewage or
discharge of solid wastes, or other drainage pipes inside the walls of a
building, and conveys it to the sewer system.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation and disposing of food,
and from the handling and storage or sale of produce.
INSPECTOR — The person appointed by the Authority to inspect
sewage works, including public and semiprivate sewers, and including
also the inspection of building sewers and other connections between
occupied homes and other buildings and the public sewers.
PERSONS — Includes natural persons, partnerships, organizations,
corporations and associations.
PREMISES ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWER SYSTEM — Any real estate
which adjoins, abuts or is adjacent to the sewer system upon which
is erected a building which might be connected to that system by
construction of a building sewer of not more than 150 feet in length,
or any real estate upon which is erected a building which might be
connected to that system by construction of a building sewer of not
more than 150 feet in length.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER — A sanitary sewer which has been
constructed or is owned by the Authority, or has been constructed by
private parties and has been accepted by the Authority as a sanitary
sewer.
REGULATIONS OF THE AUTHORITY — Such rules and regulations
as the Authority may from time to time adopt or promulgate with
respect to any matter affecting the maintenance and operation of the
sewer system and the Johnstown Municipal Authority's sewage disposal
system.
§ 198-26 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-26
192:267
§ 198-27. Property owners to connect with sewers.
All persons owning improved property within the Township of Richland,
which abuts on or adjoins any street or right-of-way in which there is now
or shall hereafter be a public sewer, shall, at their own expense, within
90 days after the effective date of this article or within 90 days after the
construction of a new public sewer, make connection with said sewer in the
manner prescribed by this article or in accordance with the regulations of
the Authority for the purpose of discharging into such sewer such drainage
or waste as is specified in this article, or may from time to time be specified
by the rules and regulations of the Johnstown Municipal Authority or the
Authority.
§ 198-28. Dangerous discharge into sewer prohibited.
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for
any person to discharge or to permit to be discharged into any sewer
any roof or surface water or the flow from any groundwater collection
system, or any matter determined by the regulations of the Authority to be
dangerous or harmful to, or the discharge of which, into a sewer, would
adversely affect, the sewer system or the functioning thereof or the process
of sewage treatment and disposal; or to discharge or permit the discharge
into any sewer any industrial or process wastes which are not preliminarily
SERVICE AGREEMENT — The service agreement, dated as of
September 1, 1961, between the Township of Richland and Highland
Sewer and Water Authority.
SEWAGE — A combination of water-carried wastes from all residences,
public and commercial buildings, apartments, institutions and
industrial establishments.
SEWER — All sanitary sewers, all lateral sewer service connections,
connecting sewers and trunk lines included in the sewer system or
sewage disposal system.
SEWER SERVICE AGREEMENT — The sewer service agreement, dated
December 31, 1960, between the Township of Richland and the
Johnstown Municipal Authority.
SEWER SYSTEM — The existing sanitary sewer facilities within the
service area of the Authority with all renewals, replacements, additions,
extensions and enlargements from time to time made with respect
thereto; but does not include storm sewers.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries stormor
surface water and drainage; but excludes sewage and polluted
industrial wastes.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Richland, of the County of Cambria,
Pennsylvania.
B. The term "shall" is mandatory; and the term "may" is permissive.
§ 198-26 RICHLAND CODE § 198-28
192:268
treated in the manner from time to time prescribed by the regulations of the
Authority, in order to make them reasonably harmless to the sewer system
and to the process of sewage treatment and disposal.
§ 198-29. Prohibited discharges.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to
discharge or to permit the discharge or infiltration into any sewer which is
connected directly or indirectly with the Authority's sewer system of any of
the following substances:
A. Mineral acids; waste acid; pickling or plating liquors from the pickling
of or plating of iron, steel, brass, copper or chromium; or any other
dissolved or solid substances which will endanger health or safety,
interfere with the flow in sewers, attack or corrode sewers or sewage
structures or equipment or otherwise interfere with the operation of the
sewers or other facilities of the Johnstown Municipal Authority and/or
the Authority.
B. Cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic gas
on acidification.
C. Fats, entrails, hair, blood, paunch manure and the like from meat
processing plants, rendering plants and similar industries and
establishments.
D. Gas tar; phenols; residues from petroleum storage, refining or
processing; fuel or lubricating oil; gasoline; naphtha; benzene; or
explosive or inflammable liquids, solids or gases.
E. Ashes, cinders, sand, mud, lime or acetylene sludges, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, wood, plastics, sawdust, paunch
manure, hair, hides, dead animals, spent mash and grain, pulp wood
from food processing, water or wastes containing grease in excess of
100 parts per million or any other solids or viscous substances capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the Johnstown Municipal Authority's or the
Authority's facilities.
F. Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities or from
sewage or industrial waste treatment plants; provided, however, that
until September 1, 1962, but not thereafter, the discharge of such
sludges and other materials may be permitted subject to existing legal
restrictions and subject also to regulations and orders of the Johnstown
Municipal Authority, the Cambria County Health Department and the
Authority.
G. Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded garbage in
a private dwelling, apartment, building, hotel, commercial restaurant
or retail food store, resulting from the proper use of a garbage grinder
or disposer of a type approved by the Johnstown Municipal Authority,
the Cambria County Health Department and the Authority, and
§ 198-28 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-29
192:269
§ 198-30. Abandonment of privy vaults, cesspools and septic tanks.
When connection has been made with the public sanitary sewer, the owner
of such property shall forthwith abandon all privy vaults, cesspools and
septic tanks existing on said premises and shall use them no longer. Any and
all connections between the cesspool or septic tank and the building which
has been served shall be destroyed in such manner that sanitary sewage
would not enter therein; and it shall be unlawful to connect any privy vault,
cesspool, septic tank or any other type of disposal receptacle or structure to
any public sanitary sewer of the Authority.
§ 198-31. Discharge of certain waters and seepage prohibited.
maintained in good operating condition; provided, however, that no
retail food store shall operate more than one grinder or disposer and
said grinder or disposer shall not be greater than three horsepower
in size and, when so required by the Johnstown Municipal Authority,
shall be equipped with an approved water meter and limited in use
to the consumption of an average of not more than 1,500 gallons of
water per day; and provided, further, that the foregoing restrictions
shall not apply to any existing installation in a retail food store of
a garbage grinder or disposer larger than three horsepower in size,
until such time as the equipment now in use can no longer be kept in
good operating condition by ordinary maintenance and repair, at which
time such larger than three horsepower grinder or disposer shall be
abandoned and shall not be renewed or replaced.
H. Water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the Johnstown
Municipal Authority and/or the Authority.
A. Prohibited materials and actions.
(1) The following seepage and water shall be and is hereby prohibited:
(a) Basement seepage and groundwater seepage or any other
uncontaminated seepage of water discharged into the sewer
system.
(b) Downspout, roof drainage, surface or areaway drainage
discharged into the sewer system.
(2) Each property owner whose property is presently connected to the
sewer system shall immediately remove any connection of the
aforesaid type of basement seepage, ground water drainage,
downspout, roof drainage, and drainage from surface or areaway,
and shall adequately and properly plug his house sewer system to
prevent any further entrance of such drainage.
(3) Each user of the sewer system, before connections are made
thereto, shall provide in his house sewer system, outside the
§ 198-29 RICHLAND CODE § 198-31
192:270
§ 198-32. Permits to connect to sewer system.
No person, firm, association or corporation shall make or cause to be made
any connection of his property with any public sanitary sewer until he has
fulfilled all requirements of the Highland Sewer and Water Authority for
securing a permit, and the payment of the necessary tappage or connection
fees prescribed by the rules and regulations of the Highland Sewer and
Water Authority. In all work contemplated, he shall be under the direct
supervision and inspection of the inspector for the Highland Sewer and
Water Authority.
building walls, a trap with a fresh air vent on the house side, in
accordance with the standards approved by Highland Sewer and
Water Authority.
(4) No cross connection shall be made between the sewer system and
the potable water system, whereby vacuums or backsiphonage
could permit sanitary wastes to enter the potable water system. No
cross connection shall be made between the sewer system and
storm drains or storm sewers.
(5) In general, industrial wastes will be considered harmful to the
sewer system which may cause any of the following damaging
effects:
(a) Chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly, with the
materials of construction of the sewer system or Johnstown
Municipal Authority's sewage disposal system in such a
manner as to impair the strength or durability of said sewage
structure.
(b) Mechanical action that will destroy said sewage structures.
(c) Destruction of the hydraulic capacity of said sewage
structures.
(d) Impairment of the normal methods of inspection of said
sewage structures.
(e) Damage to public health and safety.
(f) Obnoxious conditions inimical to the public interest.
B. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
any special agreement or arrangement between the Johnstown
Municipal Authority and/or the Authority and any person, whereby any
industrial wastes or garbage may be admitted to the sewer system
either before or after pretreatment by the producer of such industrial
wastes.
§ 198-31 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-33
192:271
§ 198-33. Failure, neglect or refusal of owner to comply.
If the owner or owners of any building or buildings shall neglect or refuse to
comply with the provisions of this article, the Township of Richland and/or
the Authority shall serve a written notice upon the owner or owners, or upon
the tenants of the property in possession of the premises if said owner or
owners cannot be found on said premises, requiring the owners to comply
with the provisions of this article in every respect within 90 days after the
service of such notice; and if said owner or owners shall neglect or refuse
to comply with said notice, the Township of Richland and/or the Authority
may perform or cause to be performed such work and labor and furnish
or cause to be furnished such materials as may be necessary to comply
with the provisions of this article, at the cost or expense of such owner or
owners, together with 10% additional thereof, and all service and expense
incidental thereto, which sum shall be collected from said owner or owners
for the use of the Township of Richland and/or the Authority, as the case may
be, as debts are, by law, collectible; or, in their discretion, the Township of
Richland and/or the Authority may have its proper officers file a municipal
lien or claim against said premises as provided by the act of the Assembly
in such cases made and provided.
§ 198-34. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No.
272]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith. In the case of firms or associations, the penalties
may be imposed upon the partners or members thereof, and in the case of
corporations, upon the officers thereof.
§ 198-33 RICHLAND CODE § 198-34
192:272
ARTICLE III
Construction, Alteration and Extension
[Adopted 4-25-1968 by Ord. No. 46]
§ 198-35. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to erect,
construct, alter or extend any sewage disposal system of any kind within the
limits of Richland Township unless a permit to do shall first be secured as
provided herein.
§ 198-36. Application for permit.
All applications for permits shall be made to the Township Secretary, who
shall refer such applications to the permit officer or enforcement official
designated by the Board of Supervisors of the Township.
§ 198-37. Compliance with statutory provisions.
The permit officer or enforcement officer shall issue a permit upon
compliance by the applicant with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended,90 and any
regulations adopted thereunder, all of which are hereby incorporated and
made a part of this article; provided, however, that the provisions of said Act
and the regulations adopted thereunder shall apply in every case regardless
of the size of the lot or area to be served by the sewage system and
notwithstanding any limitations to the contrary in said Act and any
regulations adopted thereunder.
§ 198-38. Form of application.
Applications for permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the applicant
and shall be on the standard form adopted by or prescribed by the
Department of Health of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 198-39. Permit fee. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 272]
The fee charged for the application required herein shall be as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors and shall be paid by the
applicant to the Township Secretary at the time of filing of the application.
The fee shall be used to defer in part the cost of processing the application
and conducting the tests required for the granting of the permit, and shall
not be refunded to the applicant in the event that a permit is not granted.
§ 198-40. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No.
272]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
90.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 198-35 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-40
192:273
by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 198-40 RICHLAND CODE § 198-40
192:274
ARTICLE IV
Connection to Windber Area Authority System
[Adopted 10-30-1961 by Ord. No. 61]
§ 198-41. Connection required.
Every owner of property in the Township of Richland whose property abuts
upon any public sanitary sewer presently in existence which ultimately
connects to the Windber Area Joint Sanitary Authority sewage disposal
system or any public sanitary sewer to be constructed in the future by
Windber Area Joint Sanitary Authority (hereinafter called the "Windber Joint
Authority") in conjunction with the initial construction project of its sewage
disposal system shall connect, at its own cost, the house, building or other
structures located on said property with the aforementioned public sanitary
sewers for the purpose of disposing of all acceptable sanitary sewage
emanating from said property.
§ 198-42. Disposal by other means prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupier of any property in
the Township of Richland abutting upon any aforementioned public sanitary
sewer to employ any means, either by septic tank, cesspool, privy vault,
mine hole or otherwise, for the disposal of acceptable sanitary sewage other
than into and through said public sanitary sewers.
§ 198-43. Notice to connect; time limits; extension.
Where any house, building or structure in the Township abutting upon any
aforementioned public sanitary sewer is now or hereafter may be using
any method for the disposal of acceptable sanitary sewage other than
through said public sanitary sewer, it shall be the duty of the Township
Secretary or, upon the written direction of the Township, an authorized
representative of the Highland Sewer and Water Authority (hereinafter
called the "Highland Authority") to notify the owner, lessee or occupier
of such structure, in writing, either by personal service, certified mail or
registered mail, to disconnect the same and make proper connection for
the discharge and disposal of all acceptable sanitary sewage through said
public sanitary sewers, as herein provided, within 60 days after receipt of
such notice. Any owner or lessee or occupier of a structure who cannot
comply with the provisions of this section as to connection within the
sixty-day period stipulated above due to causes beyond his control shall
apply to the Highland Authority within said sixty-day period for a time
extension of up to six months in duration. Said application shall be made
on a form approved or furnished by the Windber Joint Authority and shall
contain a voluntary agreement on the part of the applicant under which the
applicant shall agree to commence paying the regular monthly sewer rates
immediately even though actual connection to the public sanitary sewers
will not be accomplished until some stated later date within said six months'
extension period.
§ 198-41 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-44
192:275
§ 198-44. Connection of certain systems to sanitary sewer
prohibited.
No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or similar receptacle for
human excrement shall at the present time or at any time hereafter be
connected with the aforesaid public sanitary sewers.
§ 198-45. Prohibited discharges.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation connected to any
aforementioned public sanitary sewers to connect any roof drain thereto or
permit any roof drain to remain connected thereto, or to permit, allow or
cause to enter into said public sanitary sewers any stormwater, foundation
drain water, spring water or surface water, or any sewage or industrial
waste from any property other than that for which a permit is or has been
issued.
§ 198-46. Conditions for connection.
Henceforth, no person, firm or corporation shall make or cause to be made
any connection with any of the aforementioned public sanitary sewers until
he has fulfilled all of the following conditions:
A. He shall make application to the Township, or the Highland Authority,
as the Township's designated agent, upon a permit form to be approved
or formulated and supplied by the Windber Joint Authority for
permission to connect to the aforementioned public sanitary sewers.
Among other things, the applicant must state the character and use of
each structure located upon his property.
B. He shall pay the required tap connection permit fee established by the
Windber Joint Authority in addition to any tap connection fee imposed
by the Township or Highland Authority for each connection to the
Township or Highland Authority at the time of making application for
permission to make a connection.
C. No work shall commence before the payment of the aforesaid tap
connection fee or fees and issuance of the aforementioned connection
permit.
D. He shall give the designated inspector of the Township or the Highland
Authority at least 24 hours' notice of the time when such connection
shall be made in order that said inspector can be present to inspect and
approve the work of connection. The inspector shall signify his approval
of the connection by endorsing his name and the date of approval on the
aforementioned connection permit in the possession of the permittees.
E. At the time of inspection of the connection, the owner or owners of
properties shall permit the inspector full and complete access to all
sanitary and drainage arrangements and facilities in each building and
in and about all parts of the property. No building sewer line shall be
§ 198-44 RICHLAND CODE § 198-46
192:276
§ 198-47. Compliance with specifications and procedures.
The construction of all building sewer lines or house service sewers shall
be done in accordance with the specifications, plans and procedures
established by the Highland Authority, which shall be substantially the same
as those adopted by Windber Area Joint Sanitary Authority in its sewage
disposal system rules and regulations, as the same may be from time to time
published and amended, copies of which, upon adoption by the Windber
Joint Authority, shall be maintained on file with the Township Secretary and
the Highland Authority and the Windber Joint Authority.
§ 198-48. Failure of owner to comply; township or other agency to
do work; collection of costs.
If the owner or owners of any occupied houses, buildings or structures in
the Township shall neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this
article or the written notice as prescribed in § 198-43 hereof, the Township
or its designated agent, the Highland Authority, or Windber Area Joint
Sanitary Authority, if it is so designated, in writing, by the Township as
its agent for said purpose, may perform or cause to be performed such
work and labor and furnish or cause to be furnished such material as may
be necessary to comply with the provisions of this article at the cost and
expense of such owner or owners, together with 10% additional thereof and
all charges and expenses incidental thereto, which sum shall be collected
from said owner or owners for the use of the Township or the Highland
Authority, as its agents, or the Windber Joint Authority as debts are by
law collectible, or the Township or the Highland Authority, as its agent,
or the Windber Joint Authority, if so designated as its agent, may, by its
proper officer, file a municipal claim or lien therefor against said premises
as provided by law.
§ 198-49. Unacceptable sanitary sewage defined.
Unacceptable sanitary sewage for purposes of this article shall have the
same definition as that which is set forth in the Windber Area Joint Sanitary
Authority's sewage disposal system rules and regulations, said rules and
regulations to be applicable to all users of the aforementioned public
sanitary sewers.
§ 198-50. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No.
272]
In addition to any penalty hereinabove prescribed, any person, firm or
corporation failing to make a proper connection within the time specified
after receipt of proper notice as provided in § 198-43 hereof shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
covered over or in any manner concealed until after it is inspected and
approved by said inspector.
§ 198-46 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-50
192:277
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 198-50 RICHLAND CODE § 198-50
192:278
ARTICLE V
Connection to Adams Township Authority System
[Adopted 2-17-1975 by Ord. No. 85]
§ 198-51. Connection required.
Every owner of property in the Township of Richland whose property abuts
upon any public sanitary sewer presently in existence which ultimately
connects to the Adams Township Municipal Authority sewage disposal
system or any public sanitary sewer to be constructed in the future by
Adams Township Municipal Authority (hereinafter called the "Adams
Authority") in conjunction with the initial construction project of its sewage
disposal system shall connect, at its own cost, the house, building or other
structures located on said property with the aforementioned public sanitary
sewers for the purpose of disposing of all acceptable sanitary sewage
emanating from said property.
§ 198-52. Disposal by other means prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupier of any property in
the Township of Richland abutting upon any aforementioned public sanitary
sewer to employ any means, either by septic tank, cesspool, privy vault,
mine hole or otherwise, for the disposal of acceptable sanitary sewage other
than into and through said public sanitary sewers.
§ 198-53. Notice to connect; time limits; extension.
Where any house, building or structure in the Township abutting upon any
aforementioned public sanitary sewer is now or hereafter may be using any
method for the disposal of acceptable sanitary sewage other than through
said public sanitary sewer, it shall be the duty of the Township Secretary
or, upon the written direction of the Township, an authorized representative
of the Adams Authority to notify the owner, lessee or occupier of such
structure, in writing, either by personal service, certified mail or registered
mail, to disconnect the same and make proper connection for the discharge
and disposal of all acceptable sanitary sewage through said public sanitary
sewers, as herein provided, within 60 days after receipt of such notice.
Any owner or lessee or occupier of a structure who cannot comply with
the provisions of this section as to connection within the sixty-day period
stipulated above due to causes beyond his control shall apply to the Adams
Authority within said sixty-day period for a time extension of up to six
months in duration. Said application shall be made on a form approved or
furnished by the Adams Authority and shall contain a voluntary agreement
on the part of the applicant under which the applicant shall agree to
commence paying the regular monthly sewer rates immediately even
though actual connection to the public sanitary sewers will not be
accomplished until some stated later date within said six months' extension
period.
§ 198-51 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-54
192:279
§ 198-54. Connection of certain systems to sanitary sewer
prohibited.
No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or similar receptacle for
human excrement shall at the present time or at any time hereafter be
connected with the aforesaid public sanitary sewers.
§ 198-55. Prohibited discharges.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation connected to any
aforementioned public sanitary sewers to connect any roof drain thereto or
permit any roof drain to remain connected thereto, or to permit, allow or
cause to enter into said public sanitary sewers any stormwater, foundation
drain water, spring water or surface water, or any sewage or industrial
waste from any property other than that for which a permit is or has been
issued.
§ 198-56. Conditions for connection.
Henceforth, no person, firm or corporation shall make or cause to be made
any connection with any of the aforementioned public sanitary sewers until
he has fulfilled all of the following conditions:
A. He shall make application to the Township, or the Adams Authority, as
the Township's designated agent, upon a permit form to be approved or
formulated and supplied by the Adams Authority for permission to
connect to the aforementioned public sanitary sewers. Among other
things, the applicant must state the character and use of each structure
located upon his property.
B. He shall pay the required tap connection permit fee established by the
Adams Authority in addition to any tap connection fee imposed by the
Township for each connection to the Township or Adams Authority at
the time of making application for permission to make a connection.
C. No work shall commence before the payment of the aforesaid tap
connection fee or fees and issuance of the aforementioned connection
permit.
D. He shall give the designated inspector of the Township or the Adams
Authority at least 24 hours' notice of the time when such connection
shall be made in order that said inspector can be present to inspect and
approve the work of connection. The inspector shall signify his approval
of the connection by endorsing his name and the date of approval on the
aforementioned connection permit in the possession of the permittees.
E. At the time of inspection of the connection, the owner or owners of
properties shall permit the inspector full and complete access to all
sanitary and drainage arrangements and facilities in each building and
in and about all parts of the property. No building sewer line shall be
covered over or in any manner concealed until after it is inspected and
approved by said inspector.
§ 198-54 RICHLAND CODE § 198-57
192:280
§ 198-57. Compliance with specifications and procedures.
The construction of all building sewer lines or house service sewers shall
be done in accordance with the specifications, plans and procedures
established by the Adams Authority, which shall be substantially the same
as those adopted by Adams Township Municipal Authority in its sewage
disposal system rules and regulations, as the same may be from time to
time published and amended, copies of which, upon adoption by the Adams
Authority, shall be maintained on file with the Township Secretary and the
Adams Township Municipal Authority.
§ 198-58. Failure of owner to comply; township or other agency to
do work; collection of costs.
If the owner or owners of any occupied houses, buildings or structures in
the Township shall neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this
article or the written notice as prescribed in § 198-53 hereof, the Township
or its designated agent, the Adams Authority, may perform or cause to be
performed such work and labor and furnish or cause to be furnished such
material as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this article at
the cost and expense of such owner or owners, together with 10% additional
thereof and all charges and expenses incidental thereto, which sum shall
be collected from said owner or owners for the use of the Township or the
Adams Authority as debts are by law collectible, or the Township or the
Adams Authority, as its agent, may, by its proper officer, file a municipal
claim or lien therefor against said premises as provided by law.
§ 198-59. Unacceptable sanitary sewage defined.
Unacceptable sanitary sewage for purposes of this article shall have the
same definition as that which is set forth in the Adams Township Municipal
Authority's sewage disposal system rules and regulations, said rules and
regulations to be applicable to all users of the aforementioned public
sanitary sewers.
§ 198-60. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No.
272]
In addition to any penalty hereinabove prescribed, any person, firm or
corporation failing to make a proper connection within the time specified
after receipt of proper notice as provided in § 198-53 hereof shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are
§ 198-57 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-60
192:281
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 198-60 RICHLAND CODE § 198-60
192:282
ARTICLE VI
Connection to Forest Hills System
[Adopted 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 258]
§ 198-61. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly declares otherwise, the meaning
of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
ACT 203 — The Act of 1990, P.L. 1227, setting and establishing connection
and tapping fees for municipal sanitary sewer systems.
AUTHORITY — The Forest Hills Municipal Authority (FHMA), or any other
Authority empowered by agreement with the Forest Hills Municipal
Authority or the municipality to operate the sewer system or parts thereof.
BUILDING SEWER — The privately owned extension from the sewage
drainage system of any structure to the lateral of a sewer.
CONNECTION — The complete construction and installation of a building
sewer in compliance with all municipality and Authority requirements.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — The average amount of sewage
flow expected to be generated by a single-family dwelling.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within this municipality upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings (Homo sapiens) or animals and from
which structure sewage and/or industrial waste shall or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any property located in this
municipality used or intended for use, wholly or in part, for the
manufacturing, processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling of any
product, commodity or article, or any other property located in this
municipality from which wastes, in addition to or other than sanitary
sewage, shall be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any and all wastes discharged from an industrial
establishment, other than sanitary sewage.
INFLOW AND INFILTRATION (I & I) — Surface water and/or groundwater
which enters the sewer system by any means. This article expressly
prohibits any person from causing, allowing or permitting any quantity of
inflow and infiltration to enter the sewer system.
LATERAL — Publicly owned portion of the sewer system extending from
a sewer to the property line, to a point designated by the municipality or
Authority, or, if no such lateral shall be provided, the "lateral" shall mean
that portion of or place in a sewer which is provided for connection of any
building sewer.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Richland.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property.
§ 198-61 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-61
192:283
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation or other group or entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from any property.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used
or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, transporting, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes situate in or adjacent to this municipality and owned by
the Authority.
WILDCAT SEWER — A sewer that provides collection but no treatment, not
specifically owned by the Authority.
§ 198-62. Connection required; notice to connect; time limits;
extension.
All persons in the municipality owning improved property which is adjoining
and adjacent to the sewer system are hereby required to connect with
and use said sewer system. Failure to connect within 90 days after written
notice to do so has been provided as defined herein in § 198-63 shall be
a violation of this article. Said connection shall be at the sole cost of the
owner. Any persons who cannot comply with the above requirements due
to causes beyond their control shall apply to the municipality or Authority
within said ninety-day period for a time extension not to exceed six months'
duration. Said application shall be made on a form furnished by the
municipality or the Authority and shall contain an agreement whereby the
applicant voluntarily commences payment of the regular monthly sewer
rates immediately, even though actual connection to the sewer system will
not be accomplished until some later date within said six months' extension
period.
§ 198-63. Failure of owner to comply; township or other agency to
do work; collection of costs.
In addition to any other remedies provided herein, should any adjoining
or adjacent owners or persons whose principal building is within 150 feet
from the sewer system fail to connect with and use the sewer system within
a period of 90 days after written notice to do so has been served by the
Township or the Authority, either by personal service or certified mail, the
Township, the Authority or their designated agent may enter the property
and construct the building sewer. The township or Authority shall send an
itemized bill of the cost of construction to the owner of the property to
which the connection has been made, which bill is payable immediately. If
the owner fails to pay the bill within 30 days, the Township or the Authority
shall, within six months of the date of completion of the connection, file a
municipal lien for the cost of construction, a ten-percent surcharge thereon
and applicable interest penalties.
§ 198-61 RICHLAND CODE § 198-64
192:284
§ 198-64. Disposal by other means prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupier of any property adjoining
or adjacent to the sewer system to employ any means for disposal of
acceptable sanitary sewage (as determined by the Authority's rules and
regulations) other than into and through the sewer system.
§ 198-65. Connection of certain systems to sanitary sewer
prohibited.
No privies, cesspools, sinkholes, septic tanks or other receptacle for human
excrement shall at the present time or any time in the future be connected
with the sewer system.
§ 198-66. Conditions for connection.
No person, firm or corporation shall connect to the sewer system until the
following has been complied with:
A. Application shall be made to the Authority, as the municipality's agent,
upon a form supplied by the Authority for permission to connect to the
sewer system. A separate application form must be completed for each
individual unit intended to be provided sewer service and said
application(s) shall fully describe the character and use of each unit.
B. Payment of the Act 203 fee imposed by the Authority shall be made by
the owner for each equivalent dwelling unit to be connected to the
sewer system at the time of making application therefor. The method of
determining an EDU and calculation of multiple EDU's is covered by the
rules and regulations of the Authority.
C. No work shall be done prior to the payment of said fee(s) and until the
applicant has familiarized himself or herself with the Authority rules
and regulations relating to completion of an acceptable building sewer,
including but not limited to materials, fittings, installation, backfilling,
inspection and testing, particularly as the construction relates to the
elimination of inflow and infiltration.
D. At least 24 hours' notice of the time when a connection is to be made
shall be given to an inspector designated by the municipality or the
Authority so that said inspector can be present to inspect the building
sewer line. Such inspection shall include witnessing the testing as
required by the Authority rules and regulations, as performed by the
applicant, and determining that the building sewer complies with all
requirements as to the proper construction and elimination of all
sources of inflow and infiltration. If the building sewer passes all tests,
the inspector shall signify his approval by endorsing his name and the
date of approval on the application in the possession of the owner or
occupier. Said application shall contain language that the owner
understands the requirement of elimination and exclusion of inflow and
infiltration, and thereafter will not make any modifications to the
§ 198-64 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-66
192:285
§ 198-67. Compliance with specifications and procedures.
The construction of all building sewer lines to the lateral of the sewer
system shall be done at the sole expense of the owner. Said construction
shall be done to eliminate all sources of I & I, in accordance with the
specifications, plans and procedures established by the municipality and the
Authority as set forth in the Authority's sewer system rules and regulations,
as the same may from time to time be published and amended, copies
of which, upon adoption, shall be maintained on file with the Municipal
Secretary and the Authority.
§ 198-68. Prohibited discharges.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation connected to the
sewer system to connect any roof drain thereto or permit any roof drain
to remain connected thereto or to permit, allow or cause to enter into
said sewer system any stormwater, foundation water, spring water, surface
water, any unacceptable sewage or industrial waste (as determined by the
Authority's rules and regulations) or any sewage or industrial waste from
any property, building or unit other than that for which an application has
been made.
§ 198-69. Violations and penalties.
plumbing and drainage without the knowledge, inspection and approval
of the Authority.
E. At the time of inspection, the inspector shall be permitted complete
access to all sanitary and drainage arrangements and facilities in each
building and in and about all parts of the property in order to determine
the nature and extent of the piping network to be connected to the
Authority's sewer system. No preexisting sewer drainage piping may be
connected to the applicant's new building sewer until such preexisting
piping has passed the required tests as specified in Subsection F and
the rules and regulations of the Authority. No building sewer line shall
be backfilled or in any manner concealed until after approval by the
inspector.
F. Testing requirements must meet or exceed those as contained in the
most current edition of the BOCA National Plumbing Code or the CABO
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code.
G. No approved sewer may be extended, altered, repaired, replaced and/
or tampered with in any way without notice to the Authority.
Subsequent to any alteration of any sewer connection, retesting, in
accordance with the Authority's rules and regulations, is required. In
addition, retesting to ensure continued compliance with the rules and
regulations shall be performed at any time necessary based upon
inspections by the Authority or municipality.
§ 198-66 RICHLAND CODE § 198-69
192:286
A. In addition to any penalty hereinabove prescribed, any person or
persons failing to make a proper connection within the time specified
after due notice shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure for the enforcement of
summary offenses. Upon conviction of the same, said person shall pay a
fine not to exceed $1,000 and may be imprisoned in the Cambria County
Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days. Each day or portion thereof for
which said violation is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense
hereunder.
B. Any person or persons violating any other provision of this article (other
than a failure to connect) shall be prosecuted as hereinbefore set forth
and shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township before a District Justice, pay a
fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney's fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this
article. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the
determination of the violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil
Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to
enforce compliance herewith. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 272]
C. For purposes of enforcement of this article, the Authority is hereby
empowered to make the initial determination of article violation and is
similarly empowered to serve the notice of violation.
§ 198-69 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-69
192:287

ARTICLE VIA
Connection to Pegasus System
[Adopted 6-7-2010 by Ord. No. 318]
§ 198-69.1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly declares otherwise, the meaning
of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
ACT 203 — The Act of 1990, P.L. 1227,91 setting and establishing connection
and tapping fees for municipal sanitary sewer systems.
AUTHORITY — The Pegasus Sewer Authority (PSA), or any other authority
empowered by agreement with the Pegasus Sewer Authority or the
municipality to operate the sewer system or parts thereof.
BUILDING SEWER — The privately owned extension from the sewage
drainage system of any structure to the lateral of a sewer.
CONNECTION — The complete construction and installation of a building
sewer in compliance with all municipality and Authority requirements.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — The average amount of sewage
flow expected to be generated by a single-family dwelling.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within this municipality that is
located within the Richland-Township-approved service area for the
Pegasus Sewer Authority and upon which there is erected a structure
intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human
beings or animals (excepting only farm structures without plumbing
facilities which have manure management plans approved by the Cambria
County Conservation District or other local or state agency having
jurisdiction) and from which structure sewage and/or industrial waste shall
or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any property located in this
municipality used or intended for use, wholly or in part, for the
manufacturing, processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling of any
product, commodity or article, or any other property located in this
municipality from which wastes, in addition to or other than sanitary
sewage, shall be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any and all wastes discharged from an industrial
establishment, other than sanitary sewage.
INFLOW AND INFILTRATION (I & I) — Surface water and/or groundwater
which enters the sewer system by any means. This article expressly
prohibits any person from causing, allowing or permitting any quantity of
inflow and infiltration to enter the sewer system.
LATERAL — The publicly owned portion of the sewer system, extending
from a sewer to the property line, to a point designated by the municipality
or Authority, or, if no such lateral shall be provided, the "lateral" shall mean
91.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 198-69.1 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-69.1
192:289
that portion of or place in a sewer which is provided for connection of any
building sewer.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Richland.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation or other group or entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from any property.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used
or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, transporting, treating, and disposing of sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes situate in or adjacent to this municipality and owned by
the Authority.
WILDCAT SEWER — A sewer that provides collection but no treatment; not
specifically owned by the Authority.
§ 198-69.2. Connection required; notice to connect; time limits;
extension.
§ 198-69.3. Failure to comply; costs.
In addition to any other remedies provided herein, should any adjoining
or adjacent owners or persons whose principal building is within 150 feet
from the sewer system fail to connect with and use the sewer system
within a period of 60 days after written notice to do so has been served
by the Township or the Authority, either by personal service or certified
mail, the Township, the Authority, or their designated agent may enter
the property and construct the building sewer. In such case, the Township
A. All persons in the municipality owning improved property which is
adjoining and adjacent to the sewer system are hereby required to
connect with and use said sewer system. Failure to connect within 60
days after written notice to do so has been provided as defined herein in
§ 198-69.3 shall be a violation of this article. Said connection shall be at
the sole cost of the owner.
B. Any person who cannot comply with the above requirements due to
causes beyond his or her control shall apply to the municipality or
Authority within said sixty-day period for a time extension not to exceed
six months' duration. Said application shall be made on a form
furnished by the municipality or the Authority and shall contain an
agreement whereby the applicant voluntarily commences payment of
the regular monthly sewer rates immediately, even though actual
connection to the sewer system will not be accomplished until some
later date within said six-month extension period.
§ 198-69.1 RICHLAND CODE § 198-69.3
192:290
or Authority shall send an itemized bill of the cost of construction to the
owner of the property to which the connection has been made, which bill
is payable immediately. If the owner fails to pay the bill within 30 days, the
Township or the Authority shall, within six months of the date of completion
of the connection, file a municipal lien for the cost of construction, a 10%
surcharge thereon, and applicable interest penalties and costs authorized
by statute.
§ 198-69.4. Disposal by other means prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupier of any property adjoining
or adjacent to the sewer system to employ any means for disposal of
acceptable sanitary sewage (as determined by the Authority's rules and
regulations) other than into and through the sewer system.
§ 198-69.5. Connection of certain receptacles prohibited.
No privies, cesspools, sinkholes, septic tanks or other receptacles for
human excrement shall at the present time or any time in the future be
connected with the sewer system.
§ 198-69.6. Conditions for connection.
No person, firm or corporation shall connect to the sewer system until the
following has been complied with:
A. Application shall be made to the Authority, as the municipality's agent,
upon a form supplied by the Authority for permission to connect to the
sewer system. A separate application form must be completed for each
individual unit intended to be provided sewer service, and said
application(s) shall fully describe the character and use of each unit
B. Payment of the Act 203 fee imposed by the Authority shall be made by
the owner for each equivalent dwelling unit to be connected to the
sewer system at the time of making application therefor. The method of
determining an EDU and the calculation of multiple EDU's is covered by
the rules and regulations of the Authority.
C. No work shall be done prior to the payment of said fee(s) and until the
applicant has familiarized himself/herself with the Authority's rules and
regulations relating to completion of an acceptable building sewer,
including but not limited to materials, fittings, installation, backfilling,
inspection and testing, particularly as the construction relates to the
elimination of inflow and infiltration.
D. At least 24 hours' notice of the time when a connection is to be made
shall be given to an inspector designated by the municipality or the
Authority so that said inspector can be present to inspect the building
sewer line. Such inspection shall include witnessing the testing as
required by the Authority's rules and regulations, as performed by the
applicant, and determining that the building sewer complies with all
§ 198-69.3 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-69.6
192:291
§ 198-69.7. Compliance with rules and regulations.
The construction of all building sewer lines to the lateral of the sewer
system shall be done at the sole expense of the owner. Said construction
shall be done to eliminate all sources of I & I in accordance with the
specifications, plans and procedures established by the municipality and the
Authority as set forth in the Authority's Sewer System rules and regulations,
as the same may from time to time be published and amended, copies
of which, upon adoption, shall be maintained on file with the Municipal
Secretary and the Authority.
§ 198-69.8. Prohibited discharges.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation connected to the
sewer system to connect any roof drain thereto or permit any roof drain
to remain connected thereto or to permit, allow or cause to enter into
said sewer system any stormwater, foundation water, springwater, surface
water, any unacceptable sewage or industrial waste (as determined by the
requirements as to the proper construction and elimination of all
sources of inflow and infiltration. If the building sewer passes all tests,
the inspector shall signify his or her approval by endorsing his or her
name and the date of approval on the application in the possession
of the owner or occupier. Said application shall contain language that
the owner understands the requirement of elimination and exclusion of
inflow and infiltration, and thereafter will not make any modifications
to the plumbing and drainage without the knowledge, inspection and
approval of the Authority.
E. At the time of inspection, the inspector shall be permitted complete
access to all sanitary and drainage arrangements and facilities in each
building and in and about all parts of the property in order to determine
the nature and extent of the piping network to be connected to the
Authority's sewer system. No preexisting sewer drainage piping may be
connected to the applicant's new building sewer until such preexisting
piping has passed the required tests as specified in Subsection F and
the rules and regulations of the Authority. No building sewer line shall
be backfilled, or in any manner concealed, until after approval by the
inspector.
F. Testing requirements must meet or exceed those as contained in the
most current edition of the International Plumbing Code or successor
codes.
G. No approved sewer may be extended, altered, repaired, replaced, and/
or tampered with in any way without notice to the Authority.
Subsequent to any alteration of any sewer connection, retesting, in
accordance with the Authority's rules and regulations, is required, in
addition, retesting to insure continued compliance with the rules and
regulations shall be performed at any time necessary based upon
inspections by the Authority or municipality.
§ 198-69.6 RICHLAND CODE § 198-69.8
192:292
Authority's rules and regulations), or any sewage or industrial waste from
any property, building or unit other than that for which an application has
been made.
§ 198-69.9. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
A. In addition to any penalty hereinabove prescribed, any person or
persons failing to make a proper connection within the time specified
after due notice shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure for the enforcement of
summary offenses. Upon conviction of same, said person shall pay a fine
not to exceed $1,000 and may be imprisoned in the Cambria County Jail
for a period not to exceed 90 days. Each day or portion thereof for
which said violation is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense
hereunder.
B. Any person or persons violating any other provision of this article (other
than a failure to connect) shall be prosecuted as hereinbefore set forth
and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine not to exceed $300 and may be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days in the Cambria County
Jail. Each day or portion thereof for which said violation is found to exist
shall constitute a separate offense hereunder.
C. For purposes of enforcement of this article, the Authority is hereby
empowered to make the initial determination of article violation and is
similarly empowered to serve the notice of violation. The Authority, as
agent for the Township, is empowered to bring an action in equity to
obtain compliance with any portion of this article, which remedy is in
addition to all other remedies set forth herein.
§ 198-69.8 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-69.9
192:293

Part 2
[Adopted 1H0-o2l-d1i9n7g2 T Banyk Osrd. No. 74]
ARTICLE VII
Holding Tank Standards
§ 198-70. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part 2, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this section:
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — Richland Township Board of Supervisors.
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION — The written approval as issued by the
Board of Supervisors and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection authorizing utilization of holding tanks.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
sewage by pumping and hauling it to an approved discharge site. Holding
tanks include but are not limited to the following:
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township of Richland
where there is erected a structure or structures intended for continuous or
periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from
which sewage shall or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person or persons vested with ownership, legal or equitable,
sole or partial, of any property located in Richland Township.
PERSON(S) — Any individual, partnership, company, association,
corporation or any other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals,
and any noxious or deleterious substances harmful or inimical to the public
health, safety or welfare, or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of
any public or private water supplies used for domestic consumption or
recreation.
TOWNSHIP — Richland Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania.
§ 198-71. Rules and regulations.
CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
A.
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by
a water-carrying system.
B.
VAULT PIT PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage where
water under pressure is not available.
C.
§ 198-70 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-71
192:295
§ 198-72. Permits and certification.
The owner of any property proposing to utilize a holding tank or tanks for
on-site disposal of his or her sanitary sewage shall:
A. The Township is hereby authorized and empowered to control within
the Township all methods of holding tank sewage disposal, collection
and transportation thereof.
B. The Township is empowered and shall adopt such rules and regulations
concerning sewage disposal which it may deem necessary from time to
time to effect the purposes herein.
C. All rules and regulations adopted by the Township will be in conformity
with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the Township and all
applicable laws, rules and regulations of administrative agencies of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. The Township shall have the right and power to fix, alter and control
rates, assessments, permit fees and any other charges applicable to
sewage disposal as provided for herein.
E. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing approved holding tank facilities shall be done solely
under the direction and control of the Township and sewage disposal
thereof shall be made only at such site or sites as may be approved by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental
Protection. [Amended 1-21-1974]
A. Apply for a township sewage facilities Act 53792 permit in accordance
with applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.93
B. Attach proof of agreement between the contract hauler and an
approved waste disposal site satisfactory to the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
C. All waste disposal haulers authorized to pump, transport and dispose of
holding tank waste in the Township of Richland shall furnish to the
Township Supervisors a schedule of their pumping quantities to allow
the Township to ensure that tanks of sufficient size and capability are
being utilized.
D. The township and/or its authorized representative shall inspect, prior to
the installation of any holding tanks, their construction, watertightness,
size and location, in conformance with their sewage facilities
application.
E. If, in the opinion of the Township or its authorized representative, any
holding tank facility is broken, leaking or not being satisfactorily
92.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
93.Editor's Note: Former Section 3(b), regarding proof of agreement between the owner and
a sewage hauler, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 1-21-1974.
§ 198-71 RICHLAND CODE § 198-72
192:296
§ 198-73. Violations and penalties.
pumped at regular intervals, the Township shall file violation
proceedings and require immediate correction by the owner or
operator of the property site involved.
F. The person, owner, occupant, tenant or agent of any property that
utilizes a holding tank shall maintain said holding tank in conformance
with this and any other ordinance of this township, the provisions of any
applicable law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the applicable
regulations of this township and any administrative agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this Part 2 shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's
fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this Part 2. No
judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance
herewith. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 272]
B. In addition to any other remedies provided in this Part 2, any violation
of any of the provisions herein shall constitute a public nuisance, and
may be abated by the Township by seeking appropriate equitable or
legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 198-72 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-73
192:297

Part 3
[Adopted As InOdnic-Latoetd S Ienw Aerrsticle Histories]
ARTICLE VIII
Installation, Alteration or Relocation
[Adopted 9-29-1975 by Ord. No. 90]
§ 198-74. Statement of intent.
The intent of this article is to promote the general health, welfare and safety
of the community.
§ 198-75. Applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake or cause to be undertaken the installation, alteration or
relocation of any on-lot sewage disposal system unless an approved sewage
disposal permit has been obtained from the Township Sewage Enforcement
Officer.
§ 198-76. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article supersedes any provisions currently in effect. However, any
underlying ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the intent that
those provisions are more restrictive.
§ 198-77. Municipal liability.
The grant of a sewage disposal permit shall not constitute a representation,
guarantee or warranty of any kind by the municipality, or by any official or
employee thereof, of the ultimate functional characteristics of the proposed
system, and shall create no liability upon the municipality, its officials or
employees.
§ 198-78. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the issuance of
permits for the installation of on-lot sewage disposal systems in accordance
with § 7 of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act94 and the Rules and
Regulations adopted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection pertaining thereto. The general procedure which the Township
shall follow is in accord with "Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement
Officer" by Local Government Research Corp., State College, Pennsylvania,
in cooperation with the Department of Environmental Protection.
94.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.7.
§ 198-74 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-79
192:299
§ 198-79. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
and terms used in this article shall be defined in the above-mentioned Act
and rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 198-80. Procedures.
The Administration of § 7 of the Act shall be as follows:
A. The applicant shall obtain an application for a sewage disposal system,
as printed by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, from the Township Secretary, and shall complete the
appropriate sections of the application in the presence of the Township
Secretary.
B. The applicant shall pay to the Township Secretary a fee as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors which shall cover the
required three trips to the site only. Any additional trips required shall
be at a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, payable to the Township and collected by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer before final approval is given. [Amended
1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 272]
C. The applicant shall contact the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer
to discuss the project and determine the need for a plan revision
module or supplement.
D. The applicant shall secure a backhoe and set up a mutually convenient
time with the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer to undertake the
"deep probe."
E. Upon satisfactory completion of the deep probe, the applicant shall dig
percolation test holes where indicated by the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer, and provide a minimum of 100 gallons of water
adjacent to the test holes. The applicant, further, shall presoak the
holes as directed by the enforcement officer, and advise the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer two days prior to presoaking.
F. The Township Sewage Enforcement Officer shall conduct, or witness
the conducting of, the percolation test and advise the applicant of the
results of said tests within four days of their completion.
G. If the site qualifies for a conventional sewage disposal system, the
Township Sewage Enforcement Officer shall so advise the applicant,
sign the sewage disposal permit and mail or hand deliver said permit to
the applicant.
H. Upon completion of construction of the sewage disposal system
approved under Subsection G above, the applicant shall notify the
Township Sewage Enforcement Officer, and shall not cover said system
until the sewage disposal permit is appropriately signed for 72 hours
§ 198-79 RICHLAND CODE § 198-80
192:300
§ 198-81. Routing procedure.
The routing procedure for the application for sewage disposal system shall
be as follows:
from the time of notification has elapsed, excluding Sundays and
holidays.
I. The Township Sewage Enforcement Officer may, where conditions on
the site are suitable only for "alternate systems," require that the
applicant secure the services of a qualified consultant to prepare design
plans for said alternate system. In the event that site conditions require
the installation of an alternate system, the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer shall so advise the applicant, review consultant
design plans, sign the sewage disposal permit and mail or hand deliver
said permit to the applicant.
J. In the instance of the sale or transfer of an already permitted site, on
which the sewage disposal system has not been constructed, no
application fee shall be paid to the Township Secretary, and the
Township Sewage Enforcement Officer shall issue a new permit and
mail or hand deliver said new permit to the resultant site owner upon
receipt of a check for an amount as set from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors, made payable to the Township. [Amended
1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 272]
K. The review of all Act 537 Official Plan revisions will be conducted by the
Township Sewage Enforcement Officer, which review will be submitted
to the Township Board of Supervisors for adoption upon receipt of a
check for an amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors, which check shall be made payable to the Township.
[Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 272]
L. In the instance of the alteration or repair of an existing on-lot disposal
system, where no soil tests are required, the Township Sewage
Enforcement officer shall issue a sewage disposal permit and mail or
hand deliver said permit to the applicant upon receipt of a check for an
amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, made payable to the Township. [Amended 1-4-2000 by
Ord. No. 272]
A. The four-page application is to be filled out by the applicant and
Township Secretary or the Sewage Enforcement Officer. Instructions
for completing the application are on the back of the white and yellow
copies.
B. When the form is complete and the Sewage Enforcement Officer has
determined that the site and proposed system are satisfactory, he will
check the box "permit issued" on the application.
§ 198-80 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-81
192:301
§ 198-82. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this article, and § 7 of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act,95 shall be as specified in Chapter IX of the Technical Manual for Sewage
Enforcement Officers. Applicants' rights of appeal shall be as provided in
the Act above referred to.
§ 198-83. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No.
272]
Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of this article or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice,
order of direction of the Township Secretary or the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township before a District
C. The "Permit for Installation" (Form ER-BCE-129) is filled out by the
Sewage Enforcement Officer and given to the applicant, as well as the
third copy of Form ER-BCE-128 July 1973 (yellow copy).
D. The fourth copy (pink) is immediately sent by the Sewage Enforcement
Officer, at the end of the working day, to the local Department of
Environmental Protection office for information. The Sanitarian reviews
this copy for technical correctness and evaluation of the local Sewage
Enforcement Officer. If errors are noted on the pink copy of the
application that could interfere with the satisfactory operation of the
proposed system, the Sanitarian shall return the application to the
Sewage Enforcement Officer within 24 hours so that corrections can be
made prior to system installation.
E. Upon completion of the installation and final inspection, the Sewage
Enforcement Officer completes the remaining two copies (white and
green) of ER-BCE-128 July 1973, by checking the final inspection block
and entering the date of action.
F. Approval to cover is given when the Sewage Enforcement Officer signs
the appropriate line on the permit.
G. Central file copy (green) is sent to the local Department of
Environmental Protection office which sends this copy to the Regional
Sewage Facilities Consultant. The Consultant forwards it to the central
office for tabulation.
H. The Enforcement Officer retains the completed ER-BCE-128 July 1973
(white copy) for the municipality files.
I. If the site is found unsatisfactory and a permit is denied, routing of the
forms shall be as indicated in Subsections C, D, G and H above. The
applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the reasons for his permit
denial along with his rights to and methods of appeal.
95.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.7.
§ 198-81 RICHLAND CODE § 198-83
192:302
Justice, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement
of this article. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the
determination of the violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each
day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 198-83 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-83
192:303

ARTICLE IX
Adoption of State Provisions
[Adopted 1-5-1987 by Ord. No. 174]
§ 198-84. Adoption of provisions by reference.
Richland Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, hereby adopts by
reference the applicable sections of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act,
Act of 1965, P.L. 1535, No. 537, as amended,96 and the rules and regulations
issued pursuant thereto by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, which Act and rules and regulations are attached hereto and
made a part hereof as if set out at length.97
§ 198-85. "Municipality" defined.
For the purposes of said Act and rules and regulations, "municipality" shall
mean Richland Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania.
§ 198-86. Adoption of fees.
The Board of Supervisors of Richland Township, Cambria County,
Pennsylvania, is hereby authorized to adopt by resolution, from time to
time, a schedule of fees payable in advance at the time of the filing of the
application for the sewage system for the administrative costs of reviewing
the application and supervising the installation of said sewage system.
96.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
97.Editor's Note: Said provisions are on file in the Township offices.
§ 198-84 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-86
192:305

ARTICLE X
Johnstown-Dornick Corrective Action Plan
[Adopted 6-13-1988 by Ord. No. 184]
§ 198-87. Adoption of plan.
The Richland Township Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to adopt,
by resolution, the Corrective Action Plan submitted by Highland Sewer
and Water Authority to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection as accepted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection by letter dated May 6, 1988. Photocopies of said documents
comprising the Corrective Action Plan are attached hereto. Further, the
Richland Township Board of Supervisors is authorized to adopt, by
resolution, from time to time, any amendments made to and accepted by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to said Corrective
Action Plan.
§ 198-88. Confirmation of action.
The Richland Township Board of Supervisors hereby ratifies and confirms
the action taken by the Board of Supervisors on May 9, 1988, entitled
"Resolution No. 17," a photocopy of which is attached hereto.98
98.Editor's Note: Resolution No. 17 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 198-87 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-88
192:307

ARTICLE XI
Engleside Corrective Action Plan
[Adopted 5-1-1989 by Ord. No. 195]
§ 198-89. Adoption of plan.
The Richland Township Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to adopt,
by resolution, the Corrective Action Plan submitted by Highland Sewer
and Water Authority to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection for elimination of the hydraulic overload conditions within the
Richland Township sanitary sewer system tributary to the Engleside
Sewage Treatment Plant. Photocopies of said documents comprising the
Corrective Action Plan are attached hereto.99 Further, the Richland
Township Board of Supervisors is authorized to adopt, by resolution, from
time to time, any amendments made to and accepted by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection to said Corrective Action Plan.
99.Editor's Note: The Corrective Action Plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 198-89 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-89
192:309

Part 4
[Adopted 9-14-19G9r2eaBsyeO Sredp.a Nraot.i 2on22 F;a Acmilietniedsed In Its Entirety
5-27-2005 By Ord. No. 296100]
ARTICLE XII
Rules and Regulations
§ 198-90. Provisions incorporated by reference.
The "Whereas" clauses set forth above and the rules and regulations of
the local agency now in effect or hereafter adopted governing the use of
the sanitary sewer collection system in Richland Township are incorporated
herein by reference.101
§ 198-91. Enforcement of regulations; use of grease traps.
All rules and regulations of the local agency concerning the prohibition
of illegal discharges into the sanitary sewer system may be fully enforced
by Richland or its duly constituted designees. All establishments, such
as but not limited to restaurants, commercial kitchens, food preparation
or processing establishments, service stations, motor vehicle repair or
maintenance facilities and like or similar facilities or any other
establishment which generates prohibited grease, oil and fat which may
enter into the sanitary sewer system of the local agency, shall be required
to provide a properly designed and sized grease trap and further shall
be required to conduct such periodic inspection and maintenance of such
grease trap as to keep the same properly functioning and preventing the
discharge of grease, oil and fat into the local agency's sanitary sewer
system. Said grease trap shall be so designed, constructed, installed and
routinely maintained so as to keep the grease content of sewage leaving the
premises to less than 100 parts per million by weights.
§ 198-92. Sewer blockage; assessment of costs to repair.
100. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 296 Provides For The Following: 1. The Term “Highland
Sewer And Water Authority” Or “Highland” As Referenced In Ordinance No. 222 Is
Deleted And The Term “Local Agency” Is Substituted In Its Place. “Local Agency” Shall Be
Defined As Any Sewer Authority Or Municipal Bureau Which Provides A Sanitary Sewer
Collection/Conveyance System Or Sewage Treatment Facilities For Any Establishment(s)
Located In Richland Township. The Term "Local Agency" Shall Include: Adams Township
Municipal Authority, City Of Johnstown. Bureau Of Sewage, Forest Hills Municipality
Authority, Highland Sewer And Water Authority, Pegasus Sewer Authority, Windber Area
Authority And Any Other Local Agency Formed In The Future To Provide A Sanitary Sewer
Collection/Conveyance System Or Sewage Treatment Facilities Servicing Any
Establishment/Sewage Customer Anywhere In Richland Township. 2. All Other Terms And
Conditions Of Ordinance No. 222. As Codified In The Code Of The Township Of Richland,
Chapter 198, Article XII, Sections 198-90 Through 198-94 Are Ratified And Confirmed. 3.
It Is The Specific Intent Of The Board Of Supervisors To Adopt By Reference For
Enforcement Purposes All Rules And Regulations Of Any Local Agency Providing A
Sanitary Collection/Conveyance System Or Sewage Treatment Facilities To Any
Establishment(s) Located In Richland Township.
101. Editor's Note: The "Whereas" clauses and rules and regulations are on file in the Township
offices.
§ 198-90 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-92
192:311
§ 198-93. Appeal for relief from charges.
Any establishment asserting that it has not in fact contributed to such a
sanitary sewer blockage as set forth above may apply for relief from said
charges by providing written documentation of the installation of a properly
designed and sized grease trap, as well as written records of continual
and regular inspection and maintenance of said grease trap. Said record of
installation and maintenance is subject to review by Richland Township or
the local agency or their designee, as is the actual grease trap installation
itself. Final determination as to the relief from charges shall be within the
sole discretion of Richland upon advice received from the local agency.
§ 198-94. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. In the event of a blockage in the sanitary sewer system of the local
agency caused by the failure of an establishment to provide or maintain
a grease trap, the cost of correcting, repairing and eliminating such
sanitary sewer system blockage shall be the responsibility of the
establishment causing the backup or blockage. At the sole option of the
local agency, failure to pay said costs shall result in the termination of
sanitary sewer service and water service to the establishment in
accordance with other existing rules of the local agency.
B. In the case of a sanitary sewer blockage caused by more than one
establishment which has failed to provide or maintain a grease trap as
required by this Part 4, then the total cost incurred in correcting,
repairing or eliminating said sanitary sewer blockage will be divided
equally between the number of establishments determined to have
contributed to said blockage.
A. If any person violates any of the provisions of this Part 4 or the rules and
regulations of the local agency as incorporated herein by reference,102
the Township or its designated representative may commence an action
for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Court of Common
Pleas of Cambria County, Pennsylvania.
B. The township or its designated representative shall have the authority
to seek civil and criminal penalties and injunctive relief for
noncompliance with the provisions of this Part 4. Any person found to
be in noncompliance with any provision of this Part 4 shall be fined not
more than $1,000 a day for each offense. Each day on which a violation
shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Township or its
designated representative may recover reasonable attorneys' fees,
court costs, court reporters' fees and such other expenses of litigation
by appropriate suit of law against the person found to have violated this
Part 4.
102. Editor's Note: Said rules and regulations are on file in the Township offices.
§ 198-92 RICHLAND CODE § 198-94
192:312
Part 5
Ci[tAy dOofp Jtoehdn 5s-t1o0w-n1 9W9a3s Bteyw Oartder. NCoo.l l2e3ct2i]on
ARTICLE XIII
General Provisions
§ 198-95. Purpose and policy.
This Part 5 sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection system of Richland Township
and the treatment system for the City of Johnstown and its suburbs and
enables the owner of the treatment system to comply with all applicable
state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the
General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403).
§ 198-96. Definitions and word usage.
A. The objectives of this Part 5 are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipality
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or
otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system; and
(4) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal
wastewater system.
B. This Part 5 provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance
of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of
general requirements for the other users; authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities; requires user reporting; assumes that existing
customers' capacity will not be preempted; and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.
C. This Part 5 shall apply to the City of Johnstown and to persons outside
the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the
city publicly owned treatment works (POTW). Except as otherwise
provided herein, the Director of the City Bureau of Sewage shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Part 5.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
and phrases, as used in this Part 5, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
§ 198-95 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-96
192:313
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Director in an NPDES state with an
approved state pretreatment program and the Administrator of the
EPA in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state
pretreatment program.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — An
authorized representative of an industrial user may be:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure, five days at 20º centigrade expressed in terms of
weight and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the POTW.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or pretreatment standard.
CITY — The City of Johnstown or the operator of the sewage treatment
plant, as the case may appear from context.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The term "control authority" shall refer to
the "approval authority," defined hereinabove; or the Director if the city
has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR
403.11.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Pennsylvania.
DIRECTOR OF BUREAU OF SEWAGE (DIRECTOR) — The person
designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned
treatments works and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president,
if the industrial user is a corporation;
(1)
A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively; and
(2)
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated
above, if such representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge
originates.
(3)
§ 198-96 RICHLAND CODE § 198-96
192:314
term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other
duly authorized official of said Agency.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section
304(b) or (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) into the POTW (including
holding tank waste discharged into the system).
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant
to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any
requirement of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention
of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with
Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria, guidelines
or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or more
stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to
the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) and 40 CFR Subchapter N,
Parts 401-471, which applies to a specific category of industrial user.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the
authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR Section 403.5.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
(1)
§ 198-96 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-96
192:315
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
concentration with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where indicated
by the context.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of solution.
POLLUTION — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
PRETREATMENT and TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature
of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior
to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants
into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means,
except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national
pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which in
this instance is the facility currently operated by the City of Johnstown,
Bureau of Sewage at Dornick Point. This definition includes any sewers
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant
and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same
general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
(3)
§ 198-96 RICHLAND CODE § 198-96
192:316
that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not
include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility
providing treatment. For the purposes of this Part 5, "POTW" shall also
include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons
outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, or
ruling of the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission, users of the
city's POTW.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any industrial user of the city's
wastewater disposal system who:
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, office of Management and Budget,
1972.
STATE — State of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or
other Acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water or
stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT — As set forth in § 198-107
of this Part 5.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
(1) Is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards;
Is a noncategorical industrial user that has a discharge flow of
25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater;
(2)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the city POTW; or
(3)
Is found by the city to have a reasonable potential to adversely
affect the operation of the POTW or to violate any pretreatment
standard of the city or the EPA.
(4)
§ 198-96 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-96
192:317
§ 198-97. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
l Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
SIC Standard industrial classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
U.S.C. United States Code
TSS Total suspended solids
PUC Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
§ 198-98. General discharge prohibitions.
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
A. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the
operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions
apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements. A user
may not contribute the following substances to any POTW:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction
with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. The
discharge of waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than
140º F. is prohibited. At no time shall two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system (or
at any point in the system) be more than 5% nor any single reading
be over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
Prohibited materials include but are not limited to gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols,
§ 198-96 RICHLAND CODE § 198-98
192:318
ketones, aldephydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, biomates,
carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
(a) If an agent of the POTW or the City of Johnstown makes an
inspection and reading with an explosion hazard meter, the
results thereof shall be recorded in writing and forwarded to
the contributing municipality; and
(b) If any such reading is over 10% of the lower explosion limit set
on the meter, the person conducting the test shall immediately
notify both police and fire officials of the contributing
municipality who shall take such precautions as are deemed
necessary.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause an obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities, such as but not limited to grease,
garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch to dry dimension,
animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood,
plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or
polishing wastes, or the discharge of petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in an
amount in excess of 100 milligrams per liter.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or higher than 9.0.
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving
waters of the POTW or to exceed the limitation set forth in a
categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include
but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section
307(a) of the Act.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(6) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation process. In no case shall a substance
discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance
with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations
developed under Section 405 of the Act, any criteria, guidelines or
regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to
the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
§ 198-98 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-98
192:319
Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used.
(7) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality
standards.
(8) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(9) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but
in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into
the POTW which exceeds 40º C. (104º F.) unless the POTW
treatment plant is designed to accommodate such temperature.
(10) Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user
knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW.
In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain
concentration or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time
period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal
operation.
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by
the Superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
(12) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
(13) The results of all inspections, whether a violation is found or not,
shall be submitted in writing to the contributing municipality
within one week of the inspection.
(14) Any discharge causing interference at the POTW.
(15) All wastewater entering the sanitary sewer system shall be
pretreated to typical domestic levels unless otherwise stated in
writing by the POTW by way of a wastewater discharge permit.
Typical domestic levels and specific pollutant limitations may
become necessary periodically due to changing NPDES
requirements, required reevaluations of the local limits analysis or
other reasons. At such times that it becomes necessary, modified
local limits will be established and formally adopted by the POTW
after the modifications have been approved by the Approval
Authority (USEPA). After formal adoption by the POTW, the new
modifications become automatic in this Pretreatment Ordinance. A
revised Appendix A103 will be issued by the POTW for inclusion in
§ 198-98 RICHLAND CODE § 198-98
192:320
§ 198-99. Promulgation of federal pretreatment standards.
Upon the promulgation of federal categorical pretreatment standards for
a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent
than limitations imposed under this Part 5 for sources in that subcategory,
shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this Part 5. The
Director of the Bureau of Sewage shall notify all affected users of the
applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR Section 403.12 and of any
new or revised categorical standards as promulgated by the EPA.
§ 198-100. Modification of federal pretreatment standards.
Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal
of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply
to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal
pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the
amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the
wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent
which is achieved by the system in 95% of the samples taken when
measured according to the procedures set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of
Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403, General Pretreatment
Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution, promulgated
pursuant to the Act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in
the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR
Part 403, Section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval
authority is obtained.
this Pretreatment Ordinance as a replacement. No formal adoption
process by this governmental body is necessary for the new specific
pollutant limitations to become effective and part of this
Pretreatment Ordinance. [Amended 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 274]
(16) Pollutants which result in the presence of the toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(17) Any trucked or hauled wastes without prior approval of the POTW,
and at the discharge point designed by the POTW.
B. When the Director determines that a user(s) is contributing to the
POTW any of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts as to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, the superintendent shall
advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution on the POTW, and
develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference
with the POTW. The contributing municipality shall be advised of any
such actions taken or contemplated.
103. Editor's Note: Appendix A, Local Discharge Limitations, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 198-98 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-101
192:321
§ 198-101. Application of state requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this Part 5.
§ 198-102. City's right of revision.
The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal
system if deemed necessary to comply with the objective presented in
§ 198-95 of this Part 5.
§ 198-103. Excessive discharge.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutantspecific
limitation developed by the city or state. (Comment: Dilution may
be an acceptable means of complying with some of the prohibitions set forth
in § 198-98, e.g., the pH prohibition; use of dilution must be approved in
advance by the Director of the POTW.)
§ 198-104. Accidental discharges.
A. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this Part 5.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall
be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and
expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide this protection shall be submitted to the POTW operator for
review, and shall be approved by the POTW operator before
construction of the facility. All existing users shall complete such a plan
by January 1, 1987. No user who commences contribution to the POTW
after the effective date of this Part 5 shall be permitted to introduce
pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have
been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and
operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the
responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this Part 5. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is
the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the
POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective
actions.
B. Written notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the
user shall submit to the contributing municipality and the Director of
the POTW a detailed written report describing the cause of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
§ 198-101 RICHLAND CODE § 198-104
192:322
§ 198-105. Fees.
§ 198-106. Compliance with discharge requirements.
It shall be unlawful to discharge without a city permit to any natural
outlet within the City of Johnstown, or in any area under the jurisdiction
of said, and/or to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the
Director of the Bureau of Sewage in accordance with the provisions of this
Part 5. It shall be unlawful for an existing user of the POTW to change
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a
result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person
or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil
penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other
applicable law.
C. Notice to employees: A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to
call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that
all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to
occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the wastewater disposal system for the
implementation of the program established herein. The applicable
charges or fees shall be set forth in the Schedule of Charges and
Fees.104
B. The city may adopt charges and fees which may include:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
POTW's pretreatment program;
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
(3) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
(4) Fees for permit applications;
(5) Fees for filing appeals;
(6) Fees for consistent removal (by the POTW) of pollutants otherwise
subject to federal pretreatment standards; and
(7) Other fees as the POTW may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
C. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Part 5 and are
separate from all other fees chargeable by the POTW or contributing
municipality for treatment, collection and/or supervision.
104. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Charges and Fees is on file in the Township offices.
§ 198-104 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-106
192:323
the character or volume of its discharge where such contributions do not
meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such
contributions would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit.
§ 198-107. Wastewater contribution permits.
A. General permits. All significant users proposing to connect to or to
contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit
before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing
significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain
a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the effective
date of this Part 5.
B. Permit application.
(1) Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall
complete and file with the city, and the contributing municipality,
an application in the form prescribed by the city. Existing users
shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 90 days
after the effective date of this Part 5, and proposed new users shall
apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the
POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units
and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(a) Name, address and location (if different from the address).
(b) Standard industrial classification number according to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the
Budget, 1972, as amended.
(c) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in §§ 198-98 through 198-104 of
this Part 5, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory;
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g)
of the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended.
(d) Time and duration of contribution.
(e) Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
(f) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections and
appurtenances by the size, location and elevation.
(g) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be
discharged.
(h) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or
§ 198-106 RICHLAND CODE § 198-107
192:324
not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards.
(i) If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to
meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
[1] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final
plans, executing contract for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).
[2] No increment referred to in Subsection B(9)(a) shall
exceed nine months.
[3] Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the Superintendent including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment
of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on
which it expects to comply with this increment of progress,
the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the user
to return the construction to the schedule established. In
no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Superintendent.
(j) Each product produced, by type, amount, process or processes
and rate of production.
(k) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(l) Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment
system.
(m) Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW
operator to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
(2) Within 30 days following the filing of the permit application, the
contributing municipality may review all materials, data and facts
submitted for consideration in the application. The contributing
§ 198-107 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-107
192:325
municipality may make recommendations in detail wherein public
necessity, convenience and general welfare do or do not justify the
grant of the permit. If the contributing municipality fails to file
such recommendations, it shall be presumed that the contributing
municipality has no objections to the grant of the permit. In any
event, the recommendations of the contributing municipality shall
be regarded as advisory in nature and shall not be binding on the
POTW.
(3) The POTW operator will evaluate the data furnished by the user
and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater
contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided
herein.
C. Permit modifications. Within three months of the promulgation of a
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater
contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised
to require compliance with such standard within the time frame
prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an
application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by
Subsection B, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit
within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user with an
existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the Director of
the Bureau of Sewage and the contributing municipality within 90 days
after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical
pretreatment standard the information required by Subsection B(1)(h)
and (i).
D. Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this Part 5 and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the POTW operator.
Permits may contain the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer.
(2) Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(3) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
§ 198-107 RICHLAND CODE § 198-107
192:326
§ 198-108. Reporting requirements for permittee.
(6) Compliance schedules.
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports (see § 198-108).
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city
access thereto.
(9) Requirements for notification and approval of the city of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change
in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being
introduced into the wastewater treatment system.
(10) Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per § 198-114.
(11) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure
compliance with this Part 5.
E. Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period not
to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a
year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply
for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of
the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may
be subject to modification by the POTW operator during the term of the
permit as limitations or requirements as identified in §§ 198-98 through
198-104 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be
informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to
the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the
permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
F. Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of the
POTW operator. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with
the terms and conditions of the existing permit. The contributing
municipality shall be notified of such transfer by the user.
A. Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a
new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards
and requirements shall submit to the Director a report indicating the
nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the
regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and
requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these
process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment
standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a
§ 198-107 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-108
192:327
consistent basis and, if not, what additional O & M and/or pretreatment
is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be
signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and
certified to by a qualified professional.
B. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance
date of such pretreatment standards, or, in the case of a new
source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall
submit biannual reports to the Director, unless required more
frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the Director of the
Bureau of Sewage, indicating the nature, concentration and flow of
the pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
pretreatment standards. All significant noncategorical industrial
users are also required to submit such biannual reports detailing
the nature, concentration and flow of pollutants that are outlined in
their wastewater discharge permits and the City of Johnstown local
discharge limits, Section 1042.16(e)(14), Ordinance No. 4537. All
baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports or
biannual status reports on continued compliance must be signed by
a duly authorized representative of the industrial user and must
include the certification statement set forth in CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii).
(2) The Director may impose mass limitations on users which are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass
limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by
Subsection B(1) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants
regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user.
These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of
the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration,
or production and mass, where requested by the Director, of
pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be
prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis
shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by
the Administrator pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and
contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any
other test procedures approved by the Administrator. Sampling
shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by
the Administrator. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include a
sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the EPA publication Sampling and Analysis
Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority
Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other
sampling and analytical procedures approved by the Administrator.
§ 198-108 RICHLAND CODE § 198-108
192:328
§ 198-109. Monitoring facilities.
(3) All analyses of sewage effluent performed by or on behalf of any
industrial user of the system must be reported in writing to the
Director of the Bureau of Sewage.
(4) Notification.
(a) All industrial users shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional
Waste Management Division Director, and Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) Hazardous
Waste Authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW
of a substance which would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR Part 261, and detail the name, hazardous waste number
and type of discharge. If the discharge is greater than 100 kg
per calendar month, the industrial user shall also make known
the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, and
estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents
in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month
and during the following 12 months.
(b) All notifications must take place within 180 days of
promulgation of 40 CFR 403.12, or, in the case of new
discharges, within 180 days after the discharge of the listed or
characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. Any
changed discharges must be promptly brought to the attention
of the POTW. Discharges of less than 15 kg of hazardous
wastes per calendar month are exempt from reporting
requirements, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharges of
more than 15 kg of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar
month or of any quantity of acute hazardous waste requires a
one-time notification. Any industrial user that requires
notification under this section shall certify that it has a
program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of
hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to
be economically practical.
A. The POTW operator may require to be provided and operated, at the
user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling
and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage
systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the
user's premises, but the operator may, when such a location would be
impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, with the concurrence
by resolution of the geographic municipality, allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it
will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
B. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
§ 198-108 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-109
192:329
§ 198-110. Inspection and sampling.
The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the
purposes of this Part 5 are being met and all requirements are being
complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is
created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any
of their duties. The city, approval authority and, where the state is the
approval authority, the EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's
property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspections,
compliance monitoring and/or metering operations, and shall have the right
to copy records and reports of the industrial users. Where a user has
security measures in force which would require proper identification and
clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary
arrangements with their security guards so that, upon presentation of
suitable identification, personnel from the city, contributing municipality,
approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for
the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. The contributing
municipality shall designate an employee or officer to be notified in the
event of inspections within the contributing municipality.
§ 198-111. Compliance with pretreatment standards.
facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the
user.
C. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the POTW
operator's requirements and all applicable local construction standards
and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days
following written notification by the POTW operator.
A. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this Part 5 and shall achieve compliance with all federal
categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations
specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities
required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be
provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed
plans showing pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall
be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city
before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and
operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to the city under this Part 5. Any subsequent
changes in the pretreatment facilities or methods of operation shall be
reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of
the changes.
§ 198-109 RICHLAND CODE § 198-111
192:330
B. The city shall annually publish in the Johnstown Tribune-Democrat
newspaper a list of industrial users which, at any time during the
previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with
pretreatment requirements. An industrial user is in significant
noncompliance if its violations meet one or more of the following
criteria:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, in which 66% or
more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period
exceed the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same
pollutant parameter.
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, in which 33% or more of
all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during
a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable
TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOC, TSS, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH).
(3) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit that the city
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering
the health of the City of Johnstown's wastewater treatment plant's
personnel or the general public).
(4) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or
has resulted in the City of Johnstown's exercise of its emergency
authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
(5) Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction or attaining final compliance.
(6) Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, ninety-day self-monitoring reports and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules.
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(8) Any other violation which the city determines will adversely affect
the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program.
C. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the EPA or the approval authority upon
request.
§ 198-111 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-112
192:331
§ 198-112. Confidential information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections
shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without
restriction. If the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the city that the release of certain portions of a report might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes, those sections shall not be made
available for inspection by the public. However, all information and data
provided by industrial users shall be made available to the EPA as provided
by Section 308 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1317.
§ 198-113. Suspension of service or permit due to harmful
contributions.
§ 198-114. Revocation of permit.
Any user who violates the following conditions of this Part 5, or applicable
state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in
accordance with the procedures of §§ 198-113 through 198-117 of this Part
5:
A. The POTW operator may suspend the wastewater treatment service
and/or a wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of the POTW operator, in order to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or
causes the POTW operator to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
Upon such action, the POTW operator shall immediately notify the
contributing municipality.
B. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person
to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW operator
shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to
the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The POTW
operator shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the
wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the
user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to
the POTW operator and the contributing municipality within 15 days of
the date of occurrence.
A. Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge;
§ 198-112 RICHLAND CODE § 198-114
192:332
§ 198-115. Notification of violation.
Whenever the POTW operator finds that any user has violated or is violating
this Part 5, wastewater contribution permit or any prohibition or limitation
of requirements contained herein, the POTW operator must serve upon
such person, and the contributing municipality, a written notice stating the
nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for
the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the POTW operator
by the user.
§ 198-116. Show cause hearing.
B. Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
C. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring; or
D. Violation of any condition of the permit.
A. Show cause and appeal. The POTW operator may order any user who
causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show
cause before the Wastewater Appeal Board why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the
user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the
Wastewater Appeal Board regarding the violation, the reasons why the
action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action and directing the
user to show cause before the Wastewater Appeal Board why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) on the user and the contributing
municipality at least 10 days before the hearing. Within five days of the
hearing, the user must submit a bond as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors to defray the expenses of the
hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of the
corporation. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 272]
B. Wastewater Appeal Board. The Wastewater Appeal Board must itself
conduct the hearing and do the following:
(1) Issue in the name of the Wastewater Appeal Board notices of
hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and
the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings.
(2) Take the evidence.
(3) Provide a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts
and other evidence, together with recommendations to the City of
Johnstown and contributing municipalities for action thereon.
§ 198-114 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-116
192:333
§ 198-117. Legal action upon noncompliance.
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the
city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this Part 5,
federal or state pretreatment requirements or any wastewater contributor
permits issued by the city, or if any person fails to submit required
monitoring or compliance reports or refuses to allow any authorized
representative of the POTW to enter and inspect the premises of the
industrial user, the POTW operator may commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the County Court of Common
Pleas or through an appropriate order of the Public Utilities Commission.
C. Transcript. At any hearing held pursuant to this Part 5, testimony taken
must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so
recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any
party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
D. Order. After the Wastewater Appeal Board has reviewed the evidence, it
may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing
that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly
operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and
appropriate may be issued.
E. Makeup of Wastewater Appeal Board. The Wastewater Appeal Board
shall be made up of seven members, three of whom shall be appointed
by the Mayor of the City of Johnstown and four shall be appointed by
the contributing municipalities. Four members shall constitute a
quorum. The contributing municipalities of each district, as designated
below, shall jointly agree to the member for said district, who shall be
appointed for a term of one year. Members appointed from the
contributing municipalities shall be geographically representative of all
contributing municipalities so that one member is appointed from each
of the four designated districts.
District 1 City of Johnstown (3 members)
District 2 Richland Township, Stonycreek Township, Geistown
Borough (1 member)
District 3 Upper Yoder Township, Ferndale Borough, Dale Borough,
Loraine Borough (1 member)
District 4 Westmont Borough, Southmont Borough, Lower Yoder
Township (1 member)
District 5 Conemaugh Township, East Taylor Township, Franklin
Borough, East Conemaugh Borough, Daisytown Borough,
West Taylor Township, Brownstown Borough (1 member)
§ 198-116 RICHLAND CODE § 198-118
192:334
§ 198-118. Civil penalties.
The City of Johnstown shall have the authority to seek civil and criminal
penalties and injunctive relief for noncompliance by any user. Any industrial
user found to be in noncompliance with any provision of this Part 5 and
the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder shall be fined
not less than $1,000 a day for each offense. Each day on which a violation
shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In
addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable
attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of
litigation by appropriate suit of law against the person found to have
violated this Part 5 or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder.
§ 198-119. Falsifying information. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No.
272]
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Part 5, or wastewater
contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Part 5,
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $600, plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Township
in the enforcement of this Part 5. No judgment shall be imposed until the
date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure.
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 198-120. Enforcement response plan.
An enforcement response plan, as approved by the EPA, shall be
implemented by the city's Bureau of Sewage to formalize the enforcement
procedures to be followed for all persons and users of the city's wastewater
disposal system that fail to maintain compliance with the provisions of
this Part 5, federal, state or local pretreatment regulations, wastewater
discharge permits or the guidelines of the Industrial Pretreatment Program.
The Bureau of Sewage shall be empowered to utilize all provisions of
enforcement, as mandated by the EPA, in its administration of the Industrial
Pretreatment Program, that are notices of violation, administrative orders,
compliance schedules, administrative fines, show cause hearings, injunctive
relief and service termination.
§ 198-121. Application for waste hauler license; terms; revocation.
A. All persons desiring to transport and discharge holding tank waste,
septage or trucked industrial waste shall apply for a waste hauler
§ 198-118 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-121
192:335
§ 198-122. Applicability to city and noncity users.
This Part 5 shall be effective upon city industrial users on the same date and
to the same extent as it is effective against noncity industrial users.
§ 198-123. Withdrawal of contributing municipality.
Any contributing municipality may, upon one year's written notice to the
Authority of Johnstown, withdraw from this agreement and establish its own
inspection procedures pursuant to the provisions of the Clean Water Act of
1977.
license with the City Bureau of Sewage. Such application shall consist
of:
(1) Name, address, location and phone number.
(2) Vehicle information, including make, year, model, license number
and waste volume capacity of each vehicle which will be utilized,
and total number of vehicles owned.
(3) A description and analysis of wastes to be discharged at the
treatment plant.
(4) A list of permits held by the applicant for the generation,
transportation or disposal of wastes.
(5) An estimate of the total maximum volume of waste to be discharged
daily at the treatment plant.
B. Waste hauler licenses shall contain the following terms and conditions:
(1) Maximum discharge rate.
(2) Term of license.
(3) Specific limitation and requirements of wastewater and septages.
C. Waste hauler licenses shall be issued for a time period not to exceed one
year.
D. The acceptance of trucked wastes is based solely on the ability of the
wastewater treatment facility to assimilate those wastes without
potential of interference or pass-through. All trucked wastes must be
within the acceptable ranges of local limitations and treatment plant
acceptability. The Bureau of Sewage may, immediately and without
notice, revoke any waste hauler license if it is determined that the
acceptance of the waste is detrimental to the overall operations of the
treatment facility, whether caused by constituents of the waste or
circumstances wholly within the plant. Any waste hauler who violates
any provision of this Part 5 or waste hauler license may be subject to
immediate license revocation.
§ 198-121 RICHLAND CODE § 198-123
192:336
Part 6
Use Of City Of Johnstown Regional Sewage Collection Or Treatment
[Adopted 6-22-S2y0s0t9emBsy Ord. No. 313]
ARTICLE XIV
Rates, Rules and Regulations
§ 198-124. Definitions.
The terms, as used hereinafter, shall have the following definitions:
APPLICABLE RULES — The most current version of Rates, Rules and
Regulations for Johnstown Regional Sewage Regarding the Use of the
Sewage Collection for Treatment Systems, which have been formally
adopted by the Board of the Redevelopment Authority of the City of
Johnstown, and notice of which adoption has been provided to each
municipality. The applicable rules shall include all exhibits to the rules.
APPROVED PRETREATMENT PROGRAM — A program for pretreatment of
industrial waste approved by the Environmental Protection Agency or the
Department of Environmental Resources in accordance with the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, 62 Stat. 1155, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The United States Environmental Protection
Agency (USEPA) or other governmental agency authorized to review and
approve the JRS's industrial pretreatment or other source control program.
ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PROGRAM — The Enforcement Response
Program as approved by the USEPA and provided to the Township of
Richland by the JRS.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of Richland Township,
Cambria County.
JRS — Johnstown Regional Sewage, an enterprise operation of the
Redevelopment Authority of the City of Johnstown, and operating as and
fulfilling the functions of the PWTA, public wastewater treatment authority,
and POTW, publicly owned treatment works, as referred to in applicable
statutes and federal laws and regulations.
LOCAL LIMITS — Limitation on concentrations and absolute volumes of
contaminants introduced into the sewage collection system.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Richland, Cambria County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 198-125. Adoption of generally applicable sewer rules by
reference.
A. The Board of Supervisors of Richland Township hereby adopts by
reference, the Rates, Rules and Regulations for Johnstown Regional
Sewage Regarding the Use of the Sewage Collection or Treatment
Systems, as currently adopted by the JRS.
§ 198-124 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-125
192:337
§ 198-126. Specific pollutant limitations.
All wastewater entering the sanitary sewage system shall be pretreated
to typical domestic levels unless otherwise stated, in writing, by the JRS
by way of a significant industrial user permit or other permit. Typical
domestic levels shall be documented in a set of local limits for pollutants,
capable of effecting efficient operation of the sewage treatment plant, in the
Rates, Rules and regulations, Appendix B,105 in a format as attached hereto.
Typical domestic levels and specific pollutant limitations may be changed
periodically due to changing NPDES requirements, changes in the overall
characteristics of waste throughout the system, required reevaluations of
the local limits analysis or other reasons. At such times that it becomes
necessary, modified local limits will be established and formally adopted by
the JRS. Such revision shall only be implemented after the modifications
have been reviewed and determined to be acceptable by the approval
authority (USEPA). Revised pretreatment program local discharge limits
will be issued as Appendix B to the applicable rules and issued to all
municipalities.
§ 198-127. Authorization to adopt rules and issue permits.
Consistent with the rules adopted by the authority and due process rights
to administrative hearings and adjudication before the governing body of
the JRS, or its duly designated hearing officer, pursuant to provisions of
the Pennsylvania Local Government Public Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et
seq., the Township of Richland specifically authorizes the JRS to establish
general and individual controls on users of the system as required by
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1977,106 as amended, and the
implementing regulations adopted by the approval authority found at 40
CFR Part 403, and specifically authorizes the JRS to:
B. At such times that it becomes necessary, revised rules will be formally
adopted by the JRS, a copy of which shall be submitted to the
municipality.
C. Every person, business or organization located within the geographic
boundaries of the municipality, and connected to the JRS collection and
treatment system, shall in all instances use the sewage collection and
treatment system in a manner which is in complete compliance with the
Rates, Rules and Regulations for Johnstown Regional Sewage
Regarding the Use of the Sewage Collection or Treatment Systems.
Violation of any of the rules or requirements set forth therein, either as
currently applicable or as may be adopted in the future, shall be
deemed to be a violation of this Part 6.
A. Deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or
changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users
105. Editor's Note: Appendix B, Johnstown Regional Sewage Pretreatment Program Local
Discharge Limitations, is included at the end of this chapter.
106. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251.
§ 198-125 RICHLAND CODE § 198-127
192:338
§ 198-128. Inspections.
The JRS is hereby authorized to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to determine, independent of information
supplied by industrial users, compliance or noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements by industrial users.
Representatives of the JRS shall be authorized to enter any premises of any
industrial user in which a discharge source or treatment system is located
or in which records are required to be kept under 40 CFR § 40.12(o) to
assure compliance with pretreatment standards.
§ 198-129. Enforcement authority.
where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause
the POTW to violate its NPDES permit.
B. Require compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements by industrial users.
C. Where necessary for the efficient operation of the system or as required
by the approved pretreatment program, to control through permit,
order, conditions or similar means the contribution to the JRS by each
user to ensure the efficient operation of the sewage collection and
treatment system and compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. In the case of industrial users identified as
"significant" under 40 CFR § 403.3(v), this control shall be achieved
through individual permits or equivalent individual control mechanisms
issued to each such user except as exempted by current federal
regulations.
D. Assess and collect fees for permits and permit-related activities. The
authorization to establish rules and issue and enforce permits shall
include, but not be limited to, the adoption of general and individual
control mechanisms, as those are defined in 40 CFR § 403.8(f). Rules
shall at all times contain the minimum necessary standards set forth in
40 CFR Part 403. Any violation of an order, rule or permit condition
issued hereunder, general or individual, shall be deemed to be a
violation of this Part 6.
A. Delegation. The JRS is hereby designated as the responsible party and
agent of the Township of Richland for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this Part 6. The JRS is hereby authorized to initiate
actions, in its own name or acting in the name of the Township of
Richland for violation of this Part 6, or to bring civil actions in equity or
law to ensure compliance or prevent violation of the applicable rules.
The JRS is designated as the responsible party for carrying out any
hearings which may be required under the Pennsylvania Local
Government Public Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
§ 198-127 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-129
192:339
§ 198-130. Violations and penalties.
§ 198-131. Conflict with other ordinances.
In the event that any of the provisions of this Part 6 should be found to
conflict with any of the provisions of previous sewer ordinances relating
to the Johnstown Regional Sewer System, including but not limited to
Ordinance 14, adopted June 28, 1961 (Richland Code § 198-26), it is the
B. Enforcement response plan. The JRS is hereby authorized to impose
civil penalties for violations of its rules as set forth in the enforcement
response plan. At such times that it becomes necessary, modifications to
the enforcement response plan will be established and formally adopted
by the JRS after the modifications have been approved by the approval
authority (USEPA). After formal adoption by the JRS, the new
modifications become automatic in this municipality. A revised
enforcement response plan will be issued by the JRS to all
municipalities for inclusion in their ordinances as a replacement. No
formal adoption process by this governmental body is necessary for the
revisions to the enforcement response plan to become effective and
part of this Part 6.
C. Injunctions and termination of service. The JRS is also specifically
authorized to obtain remedies for noncompliance by any industrial user
with any pretreatment standard and requirement. The JRS is also
authorized to terminate service to violators or seek injunctive relief for
noncompliance by industrial users with pretreatment standards and
requirements.
A. Penalties under municipal authorization.
(1) The JRS shall also have authority to seek or assess civil penalties
for violation of this ordinance, in the amount of $1,000 a day, as
permitted by 53 P.S. § 66601 of the Second Class Township Code.
(2) Enforcement shall be as provided for in the organic law of the
municipality with the JRS bringing the action in the name of the
municipality. Each violation for each separate day shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. This authorization to assess penalties
is in addition to authority already granted to the JRS under
provisions of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law, 35
P.S. § 752.1 et seq.
B. Penalties under Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law. For
penalties assessed under authority of the Publicly Owned Treatment
Works Penalty Law, 35 P.S. § 752.1 et seq., notice of assessment of civil
penalties shall include as part of the notice of an assessment of civil
penalties a description of the applicable appeals process under the
Pennsylvania Local Government Public Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 55 et
seq., to be followed, including the name, address and telephone number
of the person responsible for accepting such appeal.
§ 198-129 RICHLAND CODE § 198-131
192:340
express intent of the Richland Township Board of Supervisors that the
language of this Part 6 shall control.
§ 198-131 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 198-131
192:341
Chapter 204
SOIL EROSION AND GRADING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 138.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 204-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Soil Erosion,
Sedimentation and Grading Control Ordinance," implementing Title 25,
Rules and Regulations, Pt. I, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department
of Environmental Protection, Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources,
Article II, Water Resources, Chapter 102, Erosion Control.
§ 204-2. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to regulate the modification of the natural
terrain, the alteration of drainage and to provide for certain erosion and
sediment control measures within the Township of Richland to assure and
safeguard health, safety, ecology and the general welfare in Richland
Township.
§ 204-3. Scope.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, any subdivision approved
under Chapter 215, Subdivision and Land Development, any new
construction or installation of a new structure under Chapter 240, Zoning,
or any change in use or activity qualified under §§ 204-6 and 204-7 herein
shall be in conformity with this chapter, subject to compliance with and in
conjunction with the Cambria County Soil and Erosion Control Regulations.
In the event of a conflict between this chapter and floodplain regulations,
floodplain regulations shall take precedence.
§ 204-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ALLUVIAL SOILS — An azonal great group of soils, developed from
transported and relatively recently deposited material (alluvium),
characterized by a weak modification (or none) of the original material by
soil-forming processes.
CUT AND/OR FILL — Process of earthmoving by excavating part of an area
and/or using excavated material from embankment or fill areas.
§ 198-131 RICHLAND CODE § 204-4
204:342
EROSION —
GRADE — The slope of a road, channels or natural ground.
RUNOFF (HYDRAULICS) — That portion of the precipitation and a drainage
area or watershed that is discharged from the area in stream channels;
types include surface runoff, groundwater runoff or seepage.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by
air, water, gravity or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface either
above or below sea level.
SLOPE — Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually
expressed in percent or degrees (horizontal: vertical).
SOIL DRAINAGE — A condition of the soil, referring to the frequency and
duration of periods when the soil is free of saturation.
SUBSOIL — Material immediately underlying topsoil, consisting of but not
limited to, either singly or in combination, clay, sand, gravel or crushed
rock, but not including bedrock or other impervious surface, as more fully
defined and set forth in the most recently adopted and approved Cambria
County Soil Survey exclusive of the A Horizon.
TOPSOIL — The topmost layer of ground cover containing humus in some
concentration, capable of supporting plant growth, as more fully defined
and set forth in the most recently adopted and approved Cambria County
Soil Survey under the designation of the A Horizon, but not including
subsoil as heretofore defined.
WATERCOURSE — A natural drainage route or channel for the flow of
water.
§ 204-5. Filing of permits and approvals; right of inspection.
Whenever any subdivision is proposed, any new construction or installation
of a new structure under Chapter 240, Zoning, or other activity which
results in application to the Cambria County Soil Conservation District and
submission of a soil and erosion control plan, a copy of said plan and
final approval and/or permits as may be granted shall be submitted to the
township prior to any activity, construction, grading or relandscaping of the
affected tract being undertaken. The township shall also be provided with
a copy of said application, final approval and/or permit such as will allow
full and complete review of the proposal as completed. The township shall
have full and complete authority to inspect the activities undertaken at said
site, including the full right of ingress and egress to the property, and shall
have the authority to terminate, stop or suspend activities or conduct not in
compliance with such approvals and/or permits as may be issued.
The wearing away of land surface by running water, wind, ice, chemical
or other geological agents.
A.
Detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice
or gravity.
B.
§ 204-4 SOIL EROSION AND GRADING § 204-6
204:343
§ 204-6. Plan submission.
Whenever any subdivision approved under Chapter 215, Subdivision and
Land Development, any new construction or installation of a new structure
under Chapter 240, Zoning, or any change in use which causes the
landscape to be permanently disturbed as to either contours, soil or slope
characteristics, vegetation or any ground cover is to be permanently
removed, except as hereinafter excluded under §§ 204-7 and 204-8, and
except as otherwise subject to review and approval by the Cambria County
Soil Conservation District as provided under § 204-5, a plan is required
showing how resulting erosion and sediment shall be controlled. This plan
shall include the following:
§ 204-7. Activities requiring grading permit.
Except for those situations which have been approved by issuance of a
permit by the Cambria County Soil Conservation District as set forth in
§ 204-5 and those activities exempted by § 204-8, the following activities
require a grading permit:
§ 204-8. Activities not requiring grading permit.
The following activities do not require a grading permit:
A. The amount of site alteration proposed.
B. Development schedule.
C. Erosion and sediment control practices (both temporary and
permanent) and the operation and maintenance arrangements.
A. Modifying, disturbing, blocking, diverting or otherwise adversely
affecting the natural overland or subsurface flow of stormwater.
B. Construction, erection or installation of any drainage dam, ditch,
culvert, drain pipe, bridge or any other structure or obstruction
affecting the drainage of any premises.
C. Disturbing the landscape, vegetation or any ground cover by any
proposal involving an area in excess of 20,000 square feet unless
covered by Subsection A or B above.
A. Improvements, such as erection of retaining walls, driveway paving or
sidewalks.
B. Farming, gardening, lawn installation or lawn restoration, but not
including sod farming.
C. Work within the right-of-way of a public street or alleyway to be offered
for dedication or previously ordained by the township, county or
commonwealth, or any park, playground, recreation area or open space
dedicated to and accepted by the township, county or commonwealth.
§ 204-6 RICHLAND CODE § 204-9
204:344
§ 204-9. Application for permit.
§ 204-10. Data required on plan.
A. Any person, firm or corporation proposing to engage in an activity
requiring a grading permit hereunder shall apply by the submission of a
plan.
B. The applicant should, before submitting the plan for review, consult
Chapter 240, Zoning, Chapter 138, Floodplain Management, and
Chapter 215, Subdivision and Land Development, which regulate the
development of the land in Richland Township.
C. A separate plan shall be required for each grading permit.
D. Three copies of the proposed plan, including specifications and
development schedules, shall be submitted to the Township Zoning
Officer for a grading permit. The Township Zoning Officer shall forward
the plan to the Planning Commission.
A. The plan for a grading permit shall include:
(1) A map or maps showing the predevelopment topography of the
area, the proposed alteration to the topography and the erosion
and sedimentation control measures and facilities.
(2) A narrative report describing the project and giving the purpose
and the engineering assumptions and calculations for control
measures and facilities.
B. The maps and narrative shall include but are not limited to a general
description of the project, noting stormwater handling, accelerated
erosion control, sedimentation control and anticipated beginning and
ending dates for the project. The map should describe and locate
topographic features including:
(1) Boundary lines of the project area.
(2) Acreage.
(3) Contours at appropriate intervals to adequately describe the
topography.
(4) Location of the project relative to highways or other identifiable
landmarks.
(5) Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within or in the
vicinity of the project.
(6) Any other physical features including scale and North arrow.
(7) The map shall also specify soil types as would be noted in a soil
survey by name, depth, textural or areal extent along with
proposed changes to land surface.
§ 204-9 SOIL EROSION AND GRADING § 204-10
204:345
§ 204-11. Special requirements.
In addition to the requirements of § 204-10, and where deemed necessary
by the Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors, the applicant
shall submit with the plan a detailed drainage study prepared by a
registered professional engineer or surveyor licensed in the commonwealth.
This study shall include:
(8) Vegetative cover which will note contours of finished areas.
(9) Types of temporary and permanent control measures and facilities.
(10) Their location and dimensions.
C. The narrative shall include the description of the maintenance program
for the control facilities, including stormwater runoff, and appropriate
design considerations and calculations for both temporary and
permanent control measures and facilities. Said map(s) shall be
prepared by a registered architect, professional engineer or registered
surveyor.
A. A plan of the property showing the location of all present and proposed
ditches, streams, pipes and other drainage structures and proposed
cuts and/or fills. In addition to showing present elevations and
dimensions and location and extent of all proposed grading and/or
drainage, the plan shall clearly indicate all woodlands, buildings,
parking areas and driveways. Further, the plan shall indicate the
present and proposed sources, storage and disposition of water being
channeled through or across the premises, together with elevations,
gradients and maximum flow rates. The plan shall describe the work to
be performed and disposition of cut and/or fill, the materials to be used
and the manner or method of performance, including provisions for
protecting and maintaining existing drainage facilities whether on
public or private property. The applicant shall also supply the
supporting data for the plan as developed by the engineer or surveyor.
B. A soils investigation report, when requested, when load-bearing fill is
proposed. This report shall consist of test borings, laboratory testing
and engineering analysis to correlate surface and subsurface conditions
with the proposed grading plan. The results of the investigation shall be
presented in a report by a registered professional engineer and shall
include data regarding the nature, distribution and supporting ability of
existing soils and rocks on the site, conclusions and recommendations
to ensure stable soil conditions and groundwater control, as applicable.
The Township of Richland may require such supplemental reports and
data as is deemed necessary. Recommendations included in such
reports and approved by the township shall be incorporated in the plan
or specifications. In addition:
(1) Fills toeing out on natural slopes steeper than two horizontal to one
vertical shall not be made unless a report is received which is
§ 204-10 RICHLAND CODE § 204-11
204:346
§ 204-12. Plan approval.
Upon the approval of the plan by the Planning Commission, the township
shall issue the necessary grading plan approval.
§ 204-13. Standards for grading activities.
Except for those activities exempted by § 204-8, the following standards
shall apply to all activities permitted or allowed under §§ 204-5 and 204-7 of
this chapter:
deemed acceptable by the township and approved by the Board of
Supervisors. The report shall be made by a registered professional
engineer certifying that he has investigated the property, made
soils tests and that, in his opinion, such steeper slopes will safely
support the proposed fill.
A. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter or any condition of the
grading permit, the permittee is responsible for the prevention of
damage to other property or personal injury, which may be affected by
the activity requiring a grading permit.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall modify, fill, excavate, pave, grade
or regrade land in any manner so close to a property line that would
endanger or damage any adjoining street, alley or any other public or
private property without supporting and protecting such property from
settling, cracking, erosion, sediment, flooding or any other physical
damage or personal injury which might result.
C. Notwithstanding any other term or provision of this chapter, no person,
firm or corporation shall cause or allow to be removed greater than
50% of the existing topsoil from any site, and in no event shall the
topsoil existing on any site be reduced to less than a depth of six inches
as measured from the underlying subsoil except what may be modified
by the township by issuance of a conditional permit, which permit shall
be issued to modify the terms of this chapter only based upon sound
engineering practices and subject to appeal by any party in interest,
including the applicant, the township by and through the Planning
Commission or any other interested or affected party filing an appeal to
be heard by the Township Zoning Hearing Board. Further, it is the
intention of this chapter to achieve conservation of both topsoil and
subsoil in such a manner that disturbance of the subsoil will achieve a
balance on each and every disturbed site.
D. No person, firm or corporation shall deposit or place any debris or any
other material whatsoever or cause such to be thrown or placed in any
drainage ditch or drainage structure in such a manner as to obstruct
free flow.
E. No person, firm or corporation shall fail to adequately maintain, in good
operating order, any drainage facility on his premises. All drainage
§ 204-11 SOIL EROSION AND GRADING § 204-13
204:347
ditches, culverts, drain pipes and drainage structures shall be kept
open and free flowing at all times.
F. The owner of any property on which any work has been done pursuant
to a grading permit granted under this chapter shall continuously
maintain and repair all graded surfaces and anti-erosion devices,
retaining walls, drainage structures or means and other protective
devices, plantings and ground cover, installed or completed. The
Township of Richland is responsible for maintenance and repair within
the right-of-way of municipal roads; however, the property owner shall
be responsible for new installation or replacement of driveway piping.
G. All graded surfaces shall be permanently seeded, sodded and/or
planted or otherwise protected from erosion within 30 days, weather
permitting, and shall be tended and/or maintained until growth is well
established. The disturbed area and duration of exposure shall be kept
to a minimum using temporary erosion and sediment control measures
immediately.
H. When required, adequate provisions shall be made for dust control
measures as are deemed acceptable by the Township Zoning Officer.
I. All plans and specifications submitted for a grading permit shall include
provisions for both interim (temporary) and ultimate (permanent)
erosion and sediment control.
J. The design, installation and maintenance of erosion and sediment
control measures shall be accomplished in accordance with standards
and specifications established by the County Soil Conservation District
as adopted from standards and specifications of the United States Soil
Conservation Service, and is outlined in the then-applicable and current
handbook of administrative regulations or guidelines as may be
adopted and enacted by the County Soil Conservation District.
(1) Technical standards for the design and installation of erosion and
sediment control measures are on file with the Township of
Richland, the office of the County Conservation District and other
governmental agency offices.
(2) Standards and specifications adopted for the purpose of this
chapter and by the County Conservation District include but are
not limited to the following basic conservation measures:
(a) Temporary cover on critical areas;
(b) Permanent grass and legume cover for critical areas on
prepared seedbed;
(c) Permanent grass and legume cover for critical areas on
unprepared seedbed;
(d) Sodding;
§ 204-13 RICHLAND CODE § 204-13
204:348
§ 204-14. Inspection procedures.
Except for those situations requiring approval by the Cambria County Soil
Conservation District as set forth in § 204-5 and those activities exempted
by § 204-8, the following standards shall apply:
(e) Mulching;
(f) Temporary diversion;
(g) Permanent diversion;
(h) Grassed waterway or outlet;
(i) Grade stabilization structure;
(j) Debris basin;
(k) Drain; and
(l) Drainage: mains or laterals.
K. A quality control program is critical for fills; therefore, wherever fill
material is to be used, the person, firm or corporation shall be
responsible for testing to determine its dry density as per ASTM D1556.
It is recommended that the density of any load-bearing layer supporting
or to be incorporated in a road surface, detention basin or erosion
swales shall be not less than 90% of maximum density.
(1) Inspection procedure shall follow the general procedure as stated
in § 204-14.
(2) Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be
subject to review at all times.
(3) Degree of compaction required shall be determined by the
township following the guidelines in this section.
A. All inspections shall be the responsibility of the township or a qualified
person acceptable to the township.
B. Inspections will be carried out on a random basis, except as stated
below. However, a set of "as-built" plans shall be on file at the site and
authenticated by a registered professional engineer. When it is deemed
acceptable to the township, a designated qualified person may
authenticate the as-built plans and will assume full responsibility for
the quality of work.
C. Any and all as-built plans shall be available on the site at all times and
be subject to inspection and inquiry.
D. Engineering check notes shall accompany all as-built plans which
involve structural or mechanical measures and shall serve as
§ 204-13 SOIL EROSION AND GRADING § 204-14
204:349
§ 204-15. Violations and penalties.107
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 204-16. Additional remedies.
In addition to other remedies provided by law, Richland Township may
institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent any violation of
this chapter or to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the
use of any land which is being occupied in violation of this chapter.
§ 204-17. Correction of violation.
In addition to the penalties as set forth in § 204-15, any movement of the
landscape, vegetation or any ground cover performed in violation of this
chapter shall be restored to its previous condition, including replacement
of excavated earth, removal of illegally placed fill and restoration of grades
and planting.
§ 204-18. Appeals.
supporting evidence that structures meet design standards and
specifications specified herein.
E. A final inspection shall be conducted by the township to certify
compliance with this chapter. Satisfactory compliance with this chapter
shall be necessary before issuance of an occupancy or use permit.
A. Right of appeal. The owner or developer of land, officer or agency of the
township or any other person aggrieved may appeal to the Richland
Township Zoning Hearing Board, pursuant to Chapter 240, Zoning, as
amended, any order, requirement, decision or determination or
interpretation of the Zoning Officer, Planning Commission or Township
Supervisors relative to the provisions of this chapter or that the
provisions of this chapter do not fully apply.
B. Exercise of power. In exercising the above powers, the Board may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 204-14 RICHLAND CODE § 204-18
204:350
Chapter 207
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 93.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 146.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 148.
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and such order,
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and, to
that end, shall have all the powers of the officer or agency from whom
the appeal was taken. Every change granted or denied by the Board
shall be accompanied by written findings of fact based on sworn
testimony and evidence, specifying the reason for granting or denying
the variation. The decision of the Board shall be made a part of any plan
approval.
C. Procedure. In conducting hearings pursuant to this chapter, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall follow the procedure as set forth in Chapter 240,
Zoning, as amended.
D. Criteria for granting variations. In determining whether to vary the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, the Board
shall consider whether an equally good or better form of soil erosion
and sedimentation control is available; however, financial disadvantage
of the property owner or developer is not in and of itself sufficient
evidence of a need to permit any variation.
§ 204-18 SOLID WASTE § 204-18
207:351

ARTICLE I
Licensing of Haulers
[Adopted 2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 191]
§ 207-1. Intent and purpose.
All municipal waste accumulated or stored upon any property within the
Township of Richland shall be collected and removed by a responsible
person or collector who shall be licensed by the Township of Richland and
shall be disposed in an area authorized by and approved by the Board of
Supervisors in accordance with all state regulations.
§ 207-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning appears clearly from the context:
ASHES — Residue from the burning of coal, coke or other combustible
material.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a
manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters
the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 108
DWELLING — Place of residence within the Township of Richland of
one or more persons where refuse is generated through normal living
habits.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities and any sludge not meeting the definition of
residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act109 from
a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term
does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
OCCUPANT — Person generally in possession and control of any
dwelling.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal
government or agency, state institution and agency, or any other legal
entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
109. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 207-1 SOLID WASTE § 207-2
207:353
§ 207-3. Licensing of collectors.
§ 207-4. Prohibited activities.
In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall
include the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal
entity having officers and directors. Family members or two or more
unrelated persons living in a residential family unit shall collectively be
defined as a person. 110
REFUSE — All solid waste, except human body wastes, including
garbage, ashes and rubbish.
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and
other decomposable matter. This category includes but is not limited to
ashes, bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and yard
cleanings. 111
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
neuter.
A. No person shall collect, remove, haul or convey any municipal waste
obtained from within the geographic limits of Richland Township
through or upon any of the streets or alleys of the Township of Richland
or dispose of the same in any manner or place without obtaining a
license from Richland Township.
B. The fee for such license shall be as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors, and all licenses shall be issued for the
calendar year, or such portion thereof as shall remain after the issuance
thereof. There shall be no reduction in the fee for a license issued after
the beginning of any calendar year. Said fee may be changed by the
Board of Supervisors by resolution.112
C. Every person who shall apply for a license under this section shall state
the type or types of municipal waste to be collected, the manner of
collection and the place and method of disposal.
D. No license shall be granted if the place and method of disposal shall not
conform to the requirements of this article.
E. No licensed collector shall make any change in the arrangements for
disposal of municipal waste collected by him without first receiving the
approval of the Board of Supervisors.
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-2 RICHLAND CODE § 207-4
207:354
§ 207-5. Equipment of collector; decal fees.113
The collector shall be required to collect and remove municipal waste
in motor-driven vehicles having enclosed steel bodies with steel covers
and watertight and nonleakable automatic packer-type bodies, and to so
conduct the collection, removal and transportation of the municipal waste
so as to assure general cleanliness and sanitation throughout the entire
process and operation thereof. All vehicles shall prominently display a
contractor's decal. Contractor's decals in excess of one shall cost the
collector an amount as set from time to time be resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 207-6. Disposal site.
Unless otherwise permitted by the Board of Supervisors, all municipal
waste collected in Richland Township shall be disposed of at an approved
municipal waste landfill located within the geographic boundaries of
Richland Township.
§ 207-7. Evidence of disposal sites.
Each collector applying for a license shall provide either evidence of
ownership of an approved municipal waste landfill or evidence of a valid
agreement covering the use of an approved municipal waste landfill as
permitted in § 207-6 above. Such evidence shall accompany the application
for the license.
§ 207-8. Insurance coverage.
The collector shall carry an insurance policy providing complete third-party
comprehensive liability and property damage insurance, the limits of which
shall be not less than $300,000 to $500,000 personal liability and $100,000
property damage, and shall furnish the proper certificates of insurance
coverage to the Township of Richland.
§ 207-9. Cancellation of license.
Any violation of these specifications shall be sufficient cause for the
immediate cancellation of the license.
A. It shall be unlawful to permit an unlicensed collector to collect or
remove municipal waste from any household or commercial or
industrial generator of municipal waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to allow any municipal waste obtained within the
geographic boundaries of Richland Township to accumulate on the
ground or be deposited on highways, vacant lots or other property, or
be thrown into any stream or other body of water.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-4 SOLID WASTE § 207-10
207:355
§ 207-10. Notification to customers.
All contracts between collectors and customers shall contain a statement
informing customers that the performance of their disposal contract is
conditioned upon obtaining and maintaining a license to operate in Richland
Township.
§ 207-11. Indemnification of township.
By applying for and obtaining a license in Richland Township, the collector
agrees to hold Richland Township harmless and indemnify Richland
Township against any and all lawsuits, suits, actions, payments, costs,
charges, demands, judgments or claims or demands of any character, name
or description brought on account of any injuries or damages received or
sustained by any person, persons or property by reason of any act, omission,
negligence or misconduct of said collector, his agents or employees in the
execution of the license conditions or for the failure by Richland Township
to issue or reissue or to terminate said license.
§ 207-12. Certified list of customers.
The collector shall deliver to the Township Manager at the time of the
application for a license, and at least 15 days prior to the expiration date of
the license, a certified list of customers. This list shall become and remain
at all times the property of Richland Township.
§ 207-13. Violations and penalties.114
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-10 RICHLAND CODE § 207-13
207:356
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 6-11-1990 by Ord. No. 208]
§ 207-14. Title.
The short title of this article shall be the "Township of Richland Recycling
Ordinance."
§ 207-15. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article or in regulations
hereafter promulgated hereunder, shall have the meanings given to them in
this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
BIMETALLIC CANS — Empty food and beverage containers consisting of a
steel (ferrous) cylinder and bottom and an aluminum top.
COLLECTOR — The sole proprietorship, partnership or corporation with
which Richland Township contracts to undertake curbside recycling
collection.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters. 115
COMMONWEALTH AGENCY — The commonwealth and its departments,
boards, commissions and agencies, commonwealth-owned universities, and
the State Public School Building Authority, the State Highway and Bridge
Authority and any other authority now in existence or hereafter created or
organized by the commonwealth.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Paper or pasteboard contracted into parallel
grooves and ridges, commonly referred to as "cardboard," which is used for
wrapping, packing, shipping and/or storage.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner
that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the
environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 116
GLASS CONTAINERS — All empty bottles and jars made of clear, green
or brown glass, and shall not include noncontainer glass, plate glass, blue
glass and porcelain and ceramic products, light bulbs and fluorescent tubes.
GOVERNMENTAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities used or occupied by
commonwealth or local public agencies.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-14 SOLID WASTE § 207-15
207:357
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Printed or unprinted sheets, shavings and
cuttings of sulphite or sulphate ledger, bond, writing and other pages which
have similar fiber and filler content. This grade must be free of treated,
coated, padded or heavily printed stock. This includes lightweight office
papers, i.e., bond, Xerox paper and onionskin, as well as computer paper.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages,
schools and universities. 117
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
LOCAL PUBLIC AGENCY —
MULTISTORY MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS — A multiple-family
dwelling of more than three stories. A multiple-family dwelling is a group
of dwellings on one plot or lot containing separate living units or dwelling
units for three or more families, but which may have joint services or
facilities, or both.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Richland, Cambria County,
Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities,
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
in the Solid Waste Management Act118 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or
air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and other
matters of public interest, but not including glossy advertising inserts
typically included with newspapers, nor does "newspaper" include
magazines or periodicals.
Counties, cities, boroughs, towns, townships and school districts now in
existence or hereafter created or organized by the commonwealth.
A.
All municipal or school or other authorities now in existence or
hereafter created or organized by any county, city, borough, township
or school district or any combination thereof.
B.
Any and all other public bodies, authorities, councils of government,
officers, agencies or instrumentalities of the foregoing, whether
exercising a governmental or proprietary function.
C.
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
118. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 207-15 RICHLAND CODE § 207-15
207:358
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government
or agency, state institution and agency, or any other legal entity which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of
this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or any combination
of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors
of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors. Family
members or two or more unrelated persons living in a residential family unit
shall collectively be defined as a person. 119
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, bimetal
and tin cans, plastic, high-grade office paper and corrugated paper,
newspaper, plastic and such other materials, if any, as specified from time
to time by the Board of Supervisors to be recycled. These materials are
specified in the recycling regulations and may be revised from time to time
as deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through
combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other than a
fuel for the operation of energy.
RECYCLING REGULATIONS — Rules and regulations promulgated by the
Board of Supervisors pursuant to this article.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal, residual
or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
material. 120
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that are
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
STEEL CANS — Empty all-steel beverage and food containers.
§ 207-16. Establishment of program.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory source-separation
and collection of certain recyclable materials by all persons within the
Township of Richland.
§ 207-17. Separation and storage of recyclables.
A. All persons shall separate from other municipal waste generated at
their homes, apartments and other residential establishments, except
as provided for in Subsection C, and store until collection, the
recyclable materials and such other materials, if any, as specified from
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-15 SOLID WASTE § 207-17
207:359
§ 207-18. Placement for collection.
All recyclable materials shall be placed at the curbside or a similar location,
separated from solid waste, for collection at such times and dates as shall
be specified from time to time by the Board of Supervisors in the township
recycling regulations.
§ 207-19. Ownership of recyclables and collection by unauthorized
persons.
Upon the placement of recyclable materials for collection at the curbside
or a similar location, pursuant to this article, such materials shall become
the property of Richland Township. It shall be a violation of this article for
any person or persons, unauthorized by Richland Township, to collect or
pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such recyclable materials.
Each and every such collection or pickup from one or more locations
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
time to time by the Board of Supervisors in the township recycling
regulations.
B. All persons shall separate leaf waste from other municipal waste
generated at their homes, apartments and other residential
establishments, and store until collection, unless those persons have
otherwise provided for the composting of leaf waste. An owner, landlord
or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily rental housing
properties with four or more units may comply with its responsibilities
under this section by establishing a collection system for recyclable
materials at each property, which collection system must include
suitable containers for collecting and sorting materials, easily
accessible locations for the containers and written instructions to the
occupants concerning the use and availability of the collection system.
Only those owners, landlords and agents of owners or landlords who
establish such a collection system shall not be liable for the
noncompliance of occupants of their buildings.
C. All persons shall separate from other municipal waste the recyclable
materials and such other materials, if any, as specified from time to time
by the Board of Supervisors in the township recycling regulations and
generated at commercial, governmental or institutional establishments
and from community activities, and store such materials until
collection. Persons occupying commercial, governmental and
institutional establishments within the Township of Richland shall be
exempt from the requirements of this article or regulations only if those
persons shall have otherwise provided for the recycling of such
materials and shall, by December 31 of each calendar year, provide
written documentation to the Board of Supervisors for the total number
of tons recycled.
§ 207-17 RICHLAND CODE § 207-20
207:360
§ 207-20. Collection of solid waste contaminated by recyclables.
The municipality or any other person collecting solid waste generated
within the municipality may refuse to collect solid waste from any person
who has clearly failed to source-separate recyclables designated under an
applicable section of this article.
§ 207-21. Enforcement and administration.
§ 207-22. Violations and penalties.121
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 207-23. Township authorized to enter into collection agreements.
Richland Township may enter into an agreement or agreements with public
or private agencies or persons to authorize them to collect municipal waste
and all or part of the recyclable materials from curbside or similar locations.
§ 207-24. Alternative collection of recyclable material.
Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials only to persons or
organizations, if any, designated by the Board of Supervisors in the
A. The officials of Richland Township are authorized and directed to
enforce this article and to establish and promulgate reasonable rules
and regulations as to the manner, days and times for the collection of
recyclable materials in accordance with the terms hereof and as to any
other matters required or deemed appropriate to implement this
article. Richland Township may change, modify, repeal, amend or
supplement any portion of said rules and regulations at any time or
from time to time by resolution.
B. In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, when unlawful
conduct as defined in this article exists, the municipality may institute a
suit in equity for an injunction to restrain such violation of this article
and such remedy shall be in addition to the penalties provided for
below.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-20 SOLID WASTE § 207-24
207:361
township recycling regulations. Such materials must either be delivered to
the person's or organization's site, or they may be placed at the curbside
or similar location for collection by such persons or organizations on days
not designated as recyclable material collection days by the municipality.
Such persons or organizations shall not collect recyclable materials on or
immediately preceding (within 24 hours) a regularly scheduled curbside
collection day.
§ 207-25. Disposal of leaf waste.
It is prohibited, and will be deemed a violation hereof, for any owner,
lessee or occupant of any residential, commercial or institutional property
in Richland Township to put into or cause to be put into the solid waste
collection system of Richland Township any leaf waste.
§ 207-26. Joint municipal cooperation.
Richland Township is hereby authorized to join with other municipalities in
a cooperative effort to carry out the intent of the Municipal Waste Planning,
Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, Act of July 28, 1988, (P.L. 556. No. 101),
53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 207-24 RICHLAND CODE § 207-26
207:362
ARTICLE III
Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 218]
§ 207-27. Title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Solid Waste Ordinance of
Richland Township."
§ 207-28. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the
meaning ascribed herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980 (P.L.
380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).
ACT 101 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and
Waste Reduction Act of 1988 (Act No. 101, July 28, 1988).
AGRICULTURAL WASTE — Poultry and livestock manure, or residual
materials in liquid or solid form, generated in the production and
marketing of poultry, livestock, fur-bearing animals and their products,
provided that such waste is not a hazardous waste. The term includes
the residual materials generated in producing, harvesting and
marketing of all agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and agricultural
crops or commodities grown on what are usually recognized and
accepted as farms, forests or other agricultural lands.
BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste, including but not limited
to appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches or stumps
which may require special handling due to their size, shape or weight.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — All municipal and
residual waste building materials, grubbing waste and rubble resulting
from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on
houses, commercial buildings and other structures and pavements.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a
manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters
the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 207-27 SOLID WASTE § 207-28
207:363
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Solid waste, comprised
of garbage and rubbish, which normally originates in the residential
private household or apartment house.
GARBAGE — Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit or
vegetable matter that is capable of being decomposed by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisances as
odors, gases or vectors.
HAULER or PRIVATE COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation who has been licensed by Cambria County
and Richland Township or its/their designated representatives to
collect, transport and dispose of refuse for a fee.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes,
as defined in Act 97 or Act 101,122 which, because of its quantity,
concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may:
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishments engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and
slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment engaged
in service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
LICENSE, COUNTY — A legally constituted requirement (PA Act 101
of 1988) imposed by the County Commissioners of Cambria County
for the purpose of collecting and hauling municipal waste from any
municipality within Cambria County. This license shall also designate
the required disposal site or sites as included in the county's Municipal
Waste Management Plan.
LICENSE, RICHLAND — A legally constituted requirement (Article I,
Licensing of Haulers) imposed by Richland Township for the purpose of
regulating refuse collectors operating within Richland Township.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Richland, Cambria County,
Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population;
or
(1)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed.
(2)
122. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 207-28 RICHLAND CODE § 207-28
207:364
activities; and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or
hazardous waste under Acts 97 and 101 from a municipal, commercial
or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment
plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include sourceseparated
recyclable materials as defined in Article II, Recycling.
ORDINANCE NO. 191 — The Richland Township Licensing of Collectors
Ordinance123 of February 27, 1989. 124
ORDINANCE NO. 208 — The Richland Township Recycling Ordinance
of June 11, 1990, and the regulations issued pursuant thereto. 125
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal
government or agency, state institution and agency or any other legal
entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall
include the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal
entity having officers and directors. Family members or two or more
unrelated persons living in a residential family unit shall collectively be
defined as a person.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to
convert part or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing
facilities include but are not limited to transfer facilities, composting
facilities and resource recovery facilities.
REFUSE — All solid waste materials which are discarded as useless.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material
or other waste including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations
and any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term "residual waste"
shall not include coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal
Control Act.126 Residual waste shall not include treatment sludges from
coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried
on pursuant to and in compliance with a valid permit issued pursuant
to the Clean Streams Law. 127
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and
other decomposable matter. This category includes but is not limited to
ashes, bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and yard
cleanings.
123. Editor's Note: See Art. I, Licensing of Haulers, of this chapter.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
125. Editor's Note: See Art. II, Recycling, of this chapter.
126. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
127. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 207-28 SOLID WASTE § 207-28
207:365
§ 207-29. Prohibited activities.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of
material placed for collection or from a solid waste processing or
disposal facility.
SEWAGE TREATMENT RESIDUES — Any coarse screenings, grit and
dewatered or air-dried sludges from sewage treatment plants and
pumpings from septic tanks or septage which are a municipal solid
waste and require proper disposal under Acts 97 and 101. 128
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall
be presumed that the containment of any waste in excess of one year
constitutes disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSFER STATION — Any supplemental transportation facility used
as an adjunct to solid waste route collection vehicles.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any solid waste at any
time after generation.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to
accumulate upon any public or private property within the municipality
any garbage, rubbish, bulky waste or any other municipal or residual
solid waste except in accordance with the provision of this article and
any Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and
Act 101.129
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste within the
municipality except in accordance with the provisions of this article and
any Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and
Act 101.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any solid waste in the
municipality except in accordance with the provisions of this article and
any Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and
Act 101.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, transport, collect or remove
any solid waste from public or private property within the municipality
without first securing a license to do so in accordance with the
provisions of this article and Article I, Licensing of Haulers.
128. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
129. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 207-28 RICHLAND CODE § 207-29
207:366
§ 207-30. Standards for storage of solid waste.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from any
solid waste that is stored or deposited for collection within the
municipality without prior approval by the municipality.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid
wastes within the municipality except at an approved and permitted
resource recovery facility under Act 97 and Act 101,130 and any
Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to these acts.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit or cause or
permit to be thrown, placed or deposited any solid waste in or upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, body of water or public or private property
within the municipality except as provided in this article.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person to place a used lead acid battery in
mixed municipal solid waste, discard or otherwise dispose of a lead acid
battery except by delivery to an automotive battery retailer or
wholesaler, to a secondary lead smelter permitted by the Environmental
Protection Agency or to a collection or recycling facility authorized
under the laws of this commonwealth.
I. It shall be unlawful for any municipal waste landfill to accept for
disposal, and no resource recovery facility may accept for processing,
other than composting, truckloads composed primarily of leaf waste.
A. The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents, and to eliminate
conditions harmful to public health or which create safety hazards,
odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
B. Any person producing municipal waste shall provide a sufficient
number of approved containers to store all waste materials generated
during periods between regularly scheduled collections, and shall place
and store all waste materials therein.
C. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following preparation standards:
(1) All municipal waste shall be drained of free liquids before being
placed in storage containers.
(2) All garbage or other putrescible waste shall be securely wrapped in
paper, plastic or similar material or placed in properly tied plastic
bags.
(3) All cans, bottles or other food containers should be rinsed free of
food particles and drained before being placed in storage
containers.
130. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 207-29 SOLID WASTE § 207-30
207:367
(4) Garden clippings and tree trimmings shall be placed in approved
containers or shall be cut and tied securely into bundles. Bundles
shall be not more than four feet in length, not more than two feet in
diameter and not more than 40 pounds in weight. Such materials
may also be composted by the municipality and/or by the property
owner.
(5) Newspapers and magazines shall be placed in approved containers
or shall be tied securely into bundles of not more than 40 pounds in
weight.
(6) When specified by the municipality or its designated
representative, special preparation and storage procedures may be
required to facilitate the collection and resource recovery
(recycling) of certain waste materials (Article II, Recycling).
D. All municipal waste shall be stored in containers approved by the
municipality or its designated representative. Individual containers and
bulk containers utilized for storage of municipal waste shall comply
with the following standards:
(1) Reusable containers shall be constructed of durable, watertight,
rust- and corrosion-resistant material such as plastic, metal or
fiberglass, in such a manner as to be leakproof, weatherproof,
insectproof and rodentproof.
(2) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a tightfitting
cover and suitable lifting handles to facilitate collection.
(3) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a capacity
of not less than 10 gallons nor more than 40 gallons, and a loaded
weight of not more than 40 pounds.
(4) Disposable plastic bags or sacks are acceptable containers,
provided that the bags are designated for waste disposal. Plastic
bags shall have sufficient wall strength to maintain physical
integrity when lifted by the top, shall be securely tied at the top for
collection and shall have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons and
a loaded weight of not more than 35 pounds.
(5) All containers, either reusable or disposable, shall also comply with
the minimum standards established by the National Sanitation
Foundation.
E. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following storage standards:
(1) Containers shall be kept tightly sealed or covered at all times. Solid
waste shall not protrude or extend above the top of the container.
(2) Reusable containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times. The interior of the containers shall be thoroughly cleaned,
rinsed, drained and disinfected, as often as necessary, to prevent
§ 207-30 RICHLAND CODE § 207-30
207:368
§ 207-31. Standards and regulations for collection and
transportation.
the accumulation of liquid residues or solids on the bottom or sides
of the containers.
(3) Containers shall be used and maintained so as to prevent public
nuisances.
(4) Containers that do not conform to the standards of this article or
which have sharp edges, ragged edges or any other defect that may
hamper or injure collection personnel shall be promptly replaced
by the owner upon notice from the municipality or its designated
representative.
(5) Containers shall be placed by the owner or customer at a collection
point specified by the municipality or its designated representative.
(6) With the exception of pickup days when the containers are placed
out for collection, the containers shall be properly stored on the
owner or customer premises at all times.
(7) Bulk waste items such as furniture, automobile parts, machinery,
appliances and tires shall be stored in a manner that will prevent
the accumulation or collection of water, the harborage of rodents,
safety hazards and fire hazards and shall be in compliance with the
BOCA regulations of the municipality.
F. The storage of all municipal waste from multifamily residential units,
commercial establishments, institutions and industrial lunchroom or
office waste sources is subject to the regulations and standards set
forth in this article. The type, size and placement requirements for bulk
containers shall be determined by the waste generator and the waste
hauler, and are subject to approval by the municipality.
A. Every person generating any type of waste, as defined herein, shall
contract with a county/municipal licensed hauler or private collector of
his/her/its choice to provide essential collection service.
B. At the request of the municipality, a person shall provide evidence of a
contract with a collection service which was, is or is to be provided.
Evidence may include a written contract with paid receipt from or
canceled check to a properly licensed hauler or private contractor or
other indicia which in the sole discretion of the municipality is
satisfactory to prove that there is/was compliance with the
requirements of this article.
C. All residential garbage and rubbish shall be collected at least once a
week.
D. All commercial, institutional, public and industrial lunchroom and office
waste containing garbage shall be collected at least once a week.
§ 207-30 SOLID WASTE § 207-31
207:369
§ 207-32. Administrative appeals.
Rubbish collection from these sources shall be made as often as
necessary to control health hazards, odors, flies and unsightly
conditions. The municipality reserves the right to require more
frequent collection when deemed necessary.
E. The municipality reserves the right to set, by resolution, the days and
hours of solid waste collection activity.
F. All licensed haulers shall comply with the following standards and
regulations:
(1) All municipal waste collected within the municipality shall be
conveyed by the hauler to a transfer station, processing facility or
disposal site designated in the approved Cambria County Municipal
Waste Management Plan and Article I, Licensing of Haulers.
(2) Any trucks or other vehicles used for the collection and
transportation of municipal waste must comply with the
requirements of Acts 97 and 101131 and any Department
regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101, and must be
licensed by the Cambria County Commissioners or their designated
agent and Richland Township as per Article I, Licensing of Haulers.
(3) All collection vehicles conveying domestic waste and garbage shall
be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside
littering, attraction of vectors, the creation of odors and other
nuisances.
(4) Collection vehicles for rubbish and other nonputrescible solid
waste shall be capable of being enclosed or covered to prevent
roadside litter and other nuisances.
(5) All solid waste shall be collected and transported so as to prevent
public health hazards, safety hazards and nuisances.
(6) All solid waste collection vehicles shall be operated and maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
A. All appeals shall be made in writing to the Board of Supervisors.
B. Pending a reversal or modification, all decisions of the municipality
shall remain effective and enforceable.
C. Appeals may be made by the following persons:
(1) Any person who is aggrieved by a new standard or regulation
issued by the municipality may appeal within 10 days after the
municipality gives notice of its intention to issue the new standard
or regulation.
131. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 207-31 RICHLAND CODE § 207-32
207:370
§ 207-33. Injunction powers.
The municipality may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Cambria
County for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, to enforce any of
the provisions of this article.
§ 207-34. Violations and penalties.133
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 207-35. Conflict with other provisions.
It is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that Article I, Licensing of
Haulers, and Article II, Recycling, as they may be subsequently amended,
are to be read and construed in pari materia with this article.
D. The notice of appeal shall be served in writing and sent by certified mail
with return receipt requested. Within 20 days after receipt of the notice
of appeal, the Board of Supervisors shall hold a public hearing pursuant
to the Local Agency Law.132 Notice of the hearing shall be sent to both
parties in time to adequately prepare for the hearing. Notice shall be
sent to the parties by certified mail with return receipt requested at the
last known address in addition to publication in the local newspaper.
132. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105.
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-32 SOLID WASTE § 207-35
207:371
Chapter 210
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 42.
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 112.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 138.
Sewers — See Ch. 198.
Soil erosion and grading — See Ch. 204.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 207-35 RICHLAND CODE § 207-35
207:372
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 210-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Richland Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 210-2. Statement of findings.
The Board of Supervisors of Richland Township finds that:
§ 210-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 210-2 of this chapter, through provisions
designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood-control efforts in downstream
communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health
and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety and
welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
Commonwealth.
B. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.
§ 210-1 SOLID WASTE § 210-3
207:373
§ 210-4. Statutory authority.
§ 210-5. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this chapter. This chapter shall apply to all areas of Richland
Township. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and
shall be regulated by this chapter:
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management (SWM) best management practices (BMPs)
that are implemented within the municipality.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
A. Primary authority. The municipality is empowered to regulate these
activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Stormwater Management
Act, and the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. §§ 66501 et seq. and
66601 et seq., as amended.
B. Secondary authority. The municipality also is empowered to regulate
land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July
31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.134
A. Land development.
B. Subdivisions.
C. Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime.
D. Construction or reconstruction of or additional impervious or
semipervious surfaces (driveways, parking lots, roads, etc.).
E. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
F. Redevelopment of a site which will increase runoff must still comply
with § 210-10, Volume controls and § 210-11, Rate controls.
G. Diversion piping or encroachments in any natural or man-made
channel.
134. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-3 RICHLAND CODE § 210-5
207:374
§ 210-6. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance. Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of Richland Township's
requirements regarding stormwater matters which do not conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater management design
criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and details,
outlet structure design, etc.).
H. Nonstructural and structural stormwater management BMPs or
appurtenances thereto.
I. Any of the above regulated activities which were approved more than
five years prior to the effective date of this chapter and resubmitted for
municipal approval.
§ 210-5 SOLID WASTE § 210-6
207:375

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 210-7. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender, and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops, including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops, or the pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious
area is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural."
In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
§ 210-7 SOLID WASTE § 210-7
207:377
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CAPTURE — Collecting runoff to be stored for reuse or allowed to
slowly infiltrate into the ground.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Cambria County Conservation
District, as defined in Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3
P.S. § 851(c)], as amended, that has the authority under a delegation
agreement executed with the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection to administer and enforce all or a portion of
the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year-storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return
period."
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of this commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) — An impervious or
impermeable surface which is disconnected from any stormwater
drainage or conveyance system and is redirected or directed to a
pervious area which allows for infiltration, filtration, and increased time
of concentration as specified in Appendix B, disconnected impervious
area.135
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is
worn away by water, wind or chemical action.
EXISTING CONDITION — The condition of a project site prior to the
proposed construction.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and
studies as being a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that
comprise Group 13 soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania
135. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-7 RICHLAND CODE § 210-7
207:378
DEP Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended
or replaced from time to time by PADEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is
assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends
from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management
plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
GEOTEXTILE — A fabric manufactured from synthetic fiber that is used
to achieve specific objectives, including infiltration, separation between
different types of media (i.e., between soil and stone), or filtration.
HOTSPOT — Areas where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants that are higher
than those that are typically found in stormwater (e.g., vehicle salvage
yards and recycling facilities, vehicle fueling stations, fleet storage
areas, vehicle equipment and cleaning facilities, and vehicle service
and maintenance facilities).
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D)
according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare
soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and
provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group
classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local
NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious
as the HSG varies from A to D (NOTE: NRCS; see § 210-47C and D).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces
(or areas) shall include, but not be limited to, roofs, additional indoor
living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and
any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas
are not counted as impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of
the following meanings:
§ 210-7 SOLID WASTE § 210-7
207:379
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT — A land development and construction
approach that uses various land planning, design practices, and
technologies to simultaneously conserve and protect natural resource
systems and reduce infrastructure costs.
MUNICIPALITY — Richland Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously
SCS).
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERVIOUS SURFACE (PERVIOUS AREA) — Any area not defined as
impervious.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to
perform the work required by the chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions that have an
impact on stormwater runoff and that are specified in § 210-5 of this
chapter.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92
or Chapter 102 or the Clean Streams Law.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time.
For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be
expected to occur on average once every 25 years, or stated in another
way, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one
year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent chance).
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts,
or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group of two or more
buildings or the division or allocation of land or space between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means
of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features;
(1)
(2) Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.136
(3)
136. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 210-7 RICHLAND CODE § 210-7
207:380
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
SMALL PROJECT — A small project is defined as a regulated activity
that creates disconnected impervious areas equal to or greater than
500 square feet and less than 5,000 square feet.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Pennsylvania Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES —
Is abbreviated as BMPs or SWM BMPs throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and
retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plans for managing
stormwater runoff in the Little Conemaugh River and Stonycreek River
watersheds adopted by the County of Cambria as required by the Act
of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), as amended, and known as the
"Storm Water Management Act."137
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff
will be managed at the development site in accordance with this
chapter. Stormwater management site plan will be designated as SWM
site plan throughout this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.138
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
VOID RATIO — The ratio of the volume of void space to the volume of
solid substance in any material.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
137. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
138. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-7 SOLID WASTE § 210-7
207:381
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
surface water of the commonwealth.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
§ 210-7 RICHLAND CODE § 210-7
207:382
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 210-8. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 210-9:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by Richland Township, in accordance with
§ 210-17, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
C. The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of,
and do not conflict with, state law, including but not limited to the Clean
Streams Law.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under the Pennsylvania Code Title
25 and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual), Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Department of Environmental Protection, No. 363- 2134-008 (2000), as
amended and updated.
E. For all regulated activities, implementation of the volume controls in
§ 210-10 is required with the exception of regulated activities that meet
the exemption criteria found in § 210-9A of this chapter.
F. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 210-8 SOLID WASTE § 210-8
207:383
G. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
permission of the adjacent property owner(s). Such stormwater flows
shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
H. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property;
(2) Meet state water quality requirements as defined in Article II;
(3) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes
over 8%, and existing native vegetation.
(b) Preserve and maintain trees and woodlands. Maintain or
extend riparian buffers and protect existing forested buffer.
Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible.
(c) Establish and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural
flow pathways.
(d) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction. Over disturbed
areas, replace topsoil to a minimum depth equal to the original
depth or four inches, whichever is greater. Use tracked
equipment for grading when feasible.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
(4) To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for
low-impact development practices described in "The Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual" (SWM Manual)
(NOTE: See § 210-47A.).
I. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
J. Storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and
rate control capacities over a period of time not less than 24 and not
more than 72 hours from the end of the design storm.
K. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Pennsylvania Code Title 25, the Clean Streams Law, and the
Stormwater Management Act.
L. The design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of
discharge should be obtained from the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of
§ 210-8 RICHLAND CODE § 210-8
207:384
the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, U.S. Department of Commerce,
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National
Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver
Spring, Maryland 20910. NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at Internet
address http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
M. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the SWM Manual.
(NOTE: See § 210-47A.)
N. The applicant may meet the rate controls criteria in § 210-11 through
off-site stormwater management measures as long as the proposed
measures are in the same subwatershed. Off-site stormwater control
measures may only be sought if it is shown that on-site stormwater
control measures cannot be physically accomplished. This does not
relieve the applicant from meeting the volume controls criteria in
§ 210-10 on site.
O. Where a development is traversed by watercourses, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall conform to the stream
buffer requirements. If a perennial or intermittent stream passes
through the site, the applicant shall create a stream buffer extending a
minimum of 50 feet to either side of the top-of-bank of the channel. The
buffer area shall be maintained with and encouraged to use appropriate
native vegetation (reference to Appendix H of Pennsylvania Handbook
of Best Management Practices for Developing Area for plant lists). If
the applicable rear or side yard setback is less than 50 feet, the buffer
width may be reduced to 25% of the setback to a minimum of 10 feet. If
an existing buffer is legally prescribed (i.e., deed, covenant, easement,
etc.) and it exceeds the requirements of this chapter, the existing buffer
shall be maintained. This does not include lakes or wetlands.
P. Roof drains should not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm
sewers or roadside ditches to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where it is advantageous to do so. When it is
more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then
it shall be permitted on a case-by-case basis by Richland Township.
Q. No regulated earth disturbance activities within Richland Township
shall commence until the requirements of the chapter are met.
R. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated activities or
regulated earth disturbance from DEP, Cambria County Conservation
District and PA DOT must be provided.
S. Water shall not be stored on a roof. Water stored on parking areas and
drive areas shall not exceed five inches in depth as measured from the
basin bottom to the emergency spillway crest.
T. Storage must be open and accessible for visual inspection. Where
underground detention is provided manhole/inlet access must be
provided to allow visual inspection.
§ 210-8 SOLID WASTE § 210-8
207:385
§ 210-9. Exemptions.
U. Provide a four-foot-height fence around surface detention basins where
two feet or more of water depth is stored measured from the pond
bottom to the crest of the emergency spillway.
V. Where a detention basin is to be turned over to Richland Township, the
following apply:
(1) Property shall be granted to Richland Township in fee simple;
(2) Access shall be granted to Richland Township in fee simple;
(3) Access shall be a twelve-foot-wide gravel all-weather roadway that
is seeded with lawn vegetation on a twenty-foot-wide access area;
(4) Provide a six-foot-height vinyl-clad chain-link fence with twelvefoot-
wide access gate aligned with gravel access roadway;
(5) Basin slopes shall have gradual slopes that are machine mowable;
(6) Basin shall have access ramp for mobile equipment that aligns with
twelve-foot-wide access gate;
(7) Developer shall provide a maintenance fee as established by
Richland Township by resolution to assist with future maintenance
costs.
A. Exemptions:
(1) Regulated activities that create disconnected impervious areas
smaller than 500 square feet are exempt from all requirements in
this chapter.
(2) Regulated activities that create disconnected impervious areas
equal to or greater than 500 square feet and less than 5,000 square
feet are exempt from the peak rate control and the SWM site plan
preparation requirement of this chapter but should comply with the
small project requirements found in Appendix F of the chapter.139
(3) Regulated activities that create disconnected impervious areas
equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet and less than 10,000
square feet are exempt only from the peak rate control requirement
of this chapter.
(4) Agricultural activity is exempt from the rate control and SWM site
plan preparation requirements of this chapter, provided that the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102.
(5) Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the
rate control and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this
139. Editor's Note: Appendix F is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-8 RICHLAND CODE § 210-9
207:386
§ 210-10. Volume controls.
chapter, provided that the activities are performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Additional exemption criteria.
(1) Exemption responsibilities. An exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to
protect public health, safety, and property.
(2) HQ and EV streams. An exemption shall not relieve the applicant
from meeting the special requirements for watersheds draining to
identified high quality (HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters and
source water protection areas (SWPA) and requirements for
nonstructural project design sequencing.
(3) Drainage problems. If a drainage problem is documented or known
to exist downstream of or is expected from the proposed activity,
then the municipality may require the applicant to comply with the
chapter.
(4) Even though the developer is exempt, he is not relieved from
complying with other regulations.
C. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 210-8D through K.
A. The low-impact development practices provided in the SWM Manual
(NOTE: See § 210-47A.) shall be utilized for all regulated activities to
the maximum extent practicable.
B. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm
Method in Subsection B(1) or the Simplified Method in Subsection B(2)
below. For regulated activities that create 10,000 square feet or less of
impervious cover that do not require hydrologic routing to design the
stormwater facilities, this chapter establishes no preference for either
methodology; therefore, the applicant may select either methodology
on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic limitations on
applicability of the analytical procedures associated with each
methodology, and other factors.
(1) The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the SWM Manual [NOTE: See
§ 210-47A.]) is applicable to any size of regulated activity. This
method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions.
(a) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for
all storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour
duration precipitation.
(b) For modeling purposes:
§ 210-9 SOLID WASTE § 210-10
207:387
§ 210-11. Rate controls.
The post-development peak discharge rates will follow the applicable
approved management district or release rate map for the two-, five-, ten-,
twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year storms. The approved stormwater
management release district maps for the Little Connemaugh River and the
Stonycreek River watersheds are found in Appendix D.140 The stormwater
management subarea for the Little Conemaugh River watershed is found
in Table 1. The stormwater management district criteria for the Stonycreek
River watershed is found in Table 2. For any areas not shown on the release
rate maps or management district maps, the post-development discharge
rates shall not exceed the pre-development discharge rates.
[1] Existing (pre-development) nonforested pervious areas
must be considered meadow or its equivalent.
[2] Five percent of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow in the model for existing
conditions.
(2) The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the SWM Manual [NOTE: See
§ 210-47A.]) provided below is independent of site conditions and
should be used if the Design Storm Method is not followed. This
method is not applicable to regulated activities greater than 10,000
square feet or for projects that require design of stormwater
storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(a) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches
of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(b) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow
(i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this
commonwealth). Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
(c) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(d) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 210-11, Rate
controls.
140. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-10 RICHLAND CODE § 210-11
207:388
Table 1
Stormwater Management Districts in the Little Conemaugh River
Watershed
Subarea Subarea Release Rate Factor
B-32 1
B-33 0.7
B-34 0.7
C-6 1
C-9 1
C-10 1
Table 2
Stormwater Management Districts in the Stonycreek River
Watershed
District
Proposed Condition
Design Storm (reduce to)
Existing Condition
Design Storm
A 2-year 1-year
5-year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
B-1 5-year 2-year
10-year 5-year
25-year 10-year
50-year 25-year
100-year 100-year
B-2 2-year 2-year
25-year 10-year
50-year 25-year
100-year 100-year
A. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development site are not
subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable peak runoff
rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely
convey off-site flows through the development site.
B. Any stormwater management facility designed to store runoff and
requiring a berm or earthen embankment shall be designed to provide a
concrete lined emergency spillway to safely pass the one-hundred-year
§ 210-11 SOLID WASTE § 210-11
207:389
post-development flow plus be provided with one foot of freeboard.
Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, design shall comply with the Chapter
105 requirements.
C. Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges,
stream enclosures, outfalls) and any work involving wetlands shall
conform to PADEP Chapter 105. Design shall provide one foot freeboard
measured below the lowest point along the top of the roadway.
D. Drainage conveyance facilities (storm sewers and channels) not falling
under PADEP Chapter 105 must be able to convey post-development
runoff from a twenty-five-year design storm without surcharging the
facilities.
E. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels
and at all points of discharge.
F. Calculation methodology. Stormwater runoff from all development sites
shall be calculated using either the Rational Method or a soil cover
complex methodology.
(1) Any stormwater runoff calculations shall use generally accepted
calculation technique that is based on the NRCS soil cover complex
method. Table 3 summarizes acceptable computation methods. It is
assumed that all methods will be selected by the design
professional based on the individual limitations and suitability of
each method for a particular site. Richland Township may allow the
use of the Rational Method to estimate peak discharges from
drainage areas that contain less than five acres. The Soil Complex
Method is required for drainage areas greater than five acres.
Table 3
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method
Developed By Applicability
TR-20 (or
commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Where use of full
hydrology computer
model is desirable or
necessary
TR-55 (or
commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS For land development
plans within limitations
described in TR-55
HEC-1/HEC-HMS U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers
Where use of full
hydrologic computer
model is desirable or
necessary
§ 210-11 RICHLAND CODE § 210-11
207:390
Table 3
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method
Developed By Applicability
PSRM Penn State
University
Where use of a
hydrologic computer
model is desirable or
necessary
Rational Method (or
commercial
computer package
based on Rational
Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites less than 200
acres or as approved by
the municipality
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved
by the municipality
(2) All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths
for the various return period storms according to the region for
which they are located as presented in Table C-1 in Appendix C of
this chapter.141 If a hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or
HEC-1 is used for stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration
of rainfall shall be 24 hours. The Alternating Block Method, shown
in Figure C-1, Appendix C, of this chapter shall be used for the
rainfall distribution.
(3) For the purposes of existing conditions flow rate determination,
undeveloped land shall be considered as "meadow" in good
condition, unless the natural ground cover generates a lower curve
number or Rational "C" value (i.e., forest), as listed in Table C-2 or
C-3 in Appendix C of this document.
(4) All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration for
overland flow and return periods from the design storm curves
from Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Rainfall
Curves (1986) (Figures C-2 to C-4).142 Times of concentration for
overland flow shall be calculated using the methodology presented
in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, NRCS,
TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to time by NRCS). Times
of concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using
Manning's equation.
141. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
142. Editor's Note: Said figures are included in Appendix C at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-11 SOLID WASTE § 210-11
207:391
(5) Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed
conditions to be used in the soil cover complex method shall be
obtained from Table C-2 in Appendix C of this chapter.
(6) Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for
use in the Rational method shall be obtained from Table C-3 in
Appendix C of this chapter.
(7) Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be
used for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of
open channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's
roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table C-4 in
Appendix C of the chapter.
(8) Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using
any generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
(9) The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet
the performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by
routing the design storm hydrograph through these facilities using
the Storage-Indication Method. For drainage areas greater than
200 acres in size, the design storm hydrograph shall be computed
using a calculation method that produces a full hydrograph.
Richland Township may approve the use of any generally accepted
full hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total
runoff volume that is consistent with the volume from a method
that produces a full hydrograph.
§ 210-11 RICHLAND CODE § 210-11
207:392
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 210-12. Plan requirements.
The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
A. Appropriate sections from the Municipal Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,143 and other applicable local ordinances, shall
be followed in preparing the SWM site plans.
B. The municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient
in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan is found to be
deficient, the municipality may either disapprove the submission and
require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the
municipality may accept submission of modifications.
C. Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the operation and maintenance plan discussed
in Subsection E(8) below.
D. The following signature block for the municipality:
"(Municipal Official or designee), on this date (date of signature),
has reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM site plan meets all
design standards and criteria of the Municipal Ordinance No. (number
assigned to the Ordinance)."
E. The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
(1) The SWM Plan shall consist of all applicable calculations, maps and
plans. A note on the cover sheet and SWM site plan shall refer to
the associated computations and erosion and sedimentation plan
by title and date. All SWM site plan materials shall be submitted to
Richland Township in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat,
and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall be
disapproved and returned to the applicant.
(2) Project description and the overall stormwater management
concept for the project, including specifications of the materials to
be used.
(3) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the SWM
Manual (NOTE: See § 210-47A.). A detailed site evaluation shall be
completed for projects proposed in areas of carbonate geology and
other environmentally sensitive areas such as brownfields.
(4) Complete stormwater runoff design computations, and
documentation as specified in this chapter, or as otherwise
143. Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-12 SOLID WASTE § 210-12
207:393
necessary to demonstrate that the maximum practicable measures
have been taken to meet the requirements of this chapter, including
the recommendations and general requirements in § 210-8.
(5) Expected project time schedule.
(6) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
(7) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality,
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features
and on any existing stormwater conveyance system that may be
affected by the project.
(8) The SWM plan shall include an operation and maintenance (O&M)
plan for all existing and proposed physical stormwater
management facilities. This plan shall address long-term ownership
and responsibilities for operation and maintenance as well as
schedules and costs for O&M activities.
(9) The SWM site plan shall include the following information:
(a) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities
or other identifiable landmarks.
(b) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas with steep
slopes greater than 15%, five-foot contour intervals may be
used.
(c) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project area.
(d) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundries,
sinkholes, existing drainagecourses, areas of natural
vegetation to be preserved, and the total extent of the
upstream area draining through the site.
(e) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of the property lines.
(f) Cambria County Soil Survey soil types and boundaries.
(g) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area.
(h) Proposed structures, roads' paved areas, and buildings.
(i) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slope
greater than 15%, five-foot contours may be used.
(j) The name of the development, the name and address of the
owner of the property, and the name of the individual or firm
preparing the plan.
§ 210-12 RICHLAND CODE § 210-12
207:394
§ 210-13. Plan submission.
For all activities regulated by this chapter that require any other permits
under applicable state or federal regulations, must provide proof of
(k) The date of submission.
(l) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(m) A North arrow.
(n) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearing to the nearest degree.
(o) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(p) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(q) Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage
structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.
(r) The locations of existing and proposed on-lot wastewater
facilities and water supply wells.
(s) Overland drainage paths.
(t) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
management facilities that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(u) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would
be located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the
performance standards and design criteria specified in this
chapter.
(v) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater management system to be a permanent fixture that
can be altered or removed only after approval of a revised plan
by Richland Township.
(w) The following signature block for the design engineer:
[1] "(Design Engineer), on this date (date of signature),
hereby certify that the Drainage Plan meets all design
standards and criteria of the Richland Township, Act 167
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
[2] The seal, signature and date of the design engineer.
(x) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
§ 210-12 SOLID WASTE § 210-13
207:395
application for said permit(s) as part of the plan. The plan shall be
coordinated with the state and federal permit process.
§ 210-14. Plan review.
§ 210-15. Modification of plans.
A. Four copies of the SWM plan shall be submitted to the Township for
their distribution as follows:
(1) Two copies to the municipality.
(2) One copy to the Municipal Engineer (when applicable).
(3) One copy to the Township Planning Commission/Office.
B. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the municipality or
DEP.
A. The SWM site plan shall be reviewed by a qualified professional for the
municipality for consistency with the provisions of this chapter. After
review, the qualified professional shall provide a written
recommendation for the municipality to approve or disapprove the
SWM site plan. If it is recommended to disapprove the SWM site plan,
the qualified professional shall state the reasons for the disapproval in
writing. The qualified professional also may recommend approval of the
SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the acceptable
conditions for approval in writing. The SWM site plan review and
recommendations shall be completed within the time allowed by the
Municipalities Planning Code144 for reviewing subdivision plans.
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 calendar
days whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If the
SWM site plan involves a subdivision and land development plan, the
notification period is 90 days. If a longer notification period is provided
by other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so
notified by Richland Township. If Richland Township disapproves the
SWM site plan, the municipality shall cite the reasons for disapproval in
writing.
A. A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in
SWM BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of
SWM BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are
not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by Richland Township
shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM Site plan in
accordance with this article.
B. A modification to an already approved or disapproved SWM site plan
shall be submitted to Richland Township, accompanied by the
applicable review fee. A modification to a SWM site plan for which a
144. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-13 RICHLAND CODE § 210-15
207:396
§ 210-16. Resubmission of disapproved stormwater management
site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing Richland Township's concerns, to the Township in accordance
with § 210-13 of this chapter and distributed accordingly and be subject to
review as specified in § 210-14. The applicable review fee must accompany
a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 210-17. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
Richland Township's approval of a SWM site plan shall be valid for a period
not to exceed six months for the purposes of obtaining a building or grading
permit for the project. The six-month time period shall commence on the
date that the Richland Township Planning Commission approves the SWM
site plan and site plan. A permit must then be secured in accordance with
all zoning/building permit or grading permit regulations. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not
been constructed, or if constructed and record drawings of these facilities
have not been approved within the time period of an approved permit, then
Richland Township may consider the SWM site plans disapproved and may
revoke any and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved
by Richland Township shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 210-16 of
this chapter.
§ 210-18. As-built plans; completion certificate; final inspection.
formal action has not been taken by Richland Township shall be
submitted to Richland Township accompanied by the applicable review
fee.
A. The Developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans
shall be submitted to the municipality.
B. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent SWM
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications. If any licensed qualified professionals contributed to the
construction plans, then a licensed qualified professional must sign the
completion certificate.
C. After receipt of the completion certification by the municipality, the
municipality may conduct a final inspection.
§ 210-15 SOLID WASTE § 210-18
207:397

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 210-19. Schedule.
A. Richland Township or its municipal assignee shall inspect all phases of
the installation of the permanent stormwater management facilities as
deemed appropriate by the Township.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Township determines that the
permanent stormwater management facilities are not being installed in
accordance with the approved stormwater management plan, Richland
Township may revoke any existing building permits and issue a cease
and desist stop-work order until a revised SWM plan is submitted and
approved, as specified in the chapter.
§ 210-19 SOLID WASTE § 210-19
207:399

ARTICLE VI
Operation and Maintenance
§ 210-20. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 210-21. Operation and maintenance agreements.
The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the SWM BMPs.
If the owner fails to adhere to the operation and maintenance agreement,
the municipality may perform the services required and charge the owner
appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
§ 210-22. Stormwater management easements.
A. Richland Township shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as part
of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the municipality will accept the
facilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater management BMPs
shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and
recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with
the land.
C. The operation and maintenance plan shall be recorded as a restrictive
deed covenant that runs with the land.
D. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by Richland
Township.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the applicant
or property owner if necessary for access for inspections and
maintenance or the preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance,
infiltration, and detention areas and other stormwater controls and
BMPs by persons other than the property owner. The purpose of the
easement shall be specified in any agreement under § 210-21.
C. When the stormwater management basin is to be taken over by
Richland Township, the property it is situated on and a twenty-foot-wide
access is to be provided fee simple to Richland Township.
§ 210-20 SOLID WASTE § 210-22
207:401

ARTICLE VII
Fees and Expenses
§ 210-23. Review fee.
The fee required by this chapter is the municipal review fee. The municipal
review fee shall be established by the municipality to defray review costs
incurred by the municipality and the Municipal Engineer. All fees shall be
paid by the applicant.
§ 210-24. Review fee schedule.
Richland Township shall establish a review fee schedule by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors. The resolution may be as set forth in the site plan
review fees resolution. Richland Township Supervisors shall periodically
update the review fee schedule to ensure that review costs are adequately
reimbursed.
§ 210-25. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the drainage plan by Richland Township and any
independent review engineer.
C. The site inspections.
D. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and drainage improvements presented in the drainage plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 210-23 SOLID WASTE § 210-25
207:403

ARTICLE VIII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 210-26. Performance guarantee.
The applicant should provide a financial guarantee to Richland Township
for the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater
management controls as required by the approved stormwater plan, this
chapter, or the subdivision and land development ordinance.
§ 210-27. Responsibilities for operation and maintenance of
stormwater controls and BMPs.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within Richland Township
shall commence until approval by Richland Township of a stormwater
control and BMP operations and maintenance plan which describes
how the permanent (e.g., post-construction) stormwater controls and
BMPs will be properly operated and maintained.
B. The following items shall be included in the stormwater control and
BMP operations and maintenance plan:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Cambria
County, and shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch by thirty-sixinch
or thirty-inch by forty-two-inch sheets. The contents of the
maps(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater controls and BMPs;
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks;
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
appropriate;
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project site area;
(e) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainagecourses, and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved;
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site;
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added;
§ 210-26 SOLID WASTE § 210-27
207:405
§ 210-28. Municipality review of stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings;
and
(i) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
controls and BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(2) A description of how each permanent stormwater control and BMP
will be operated and maintained, and the identity of the person(s)
responsible for operations and maintenance;
(3) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan; and
(4) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater controls and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or
removed only after approval by the municipality.
C. The stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan for
the project site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater controls and
BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to Richland Township, stormwater controls and
BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by Richland
Township. The acceptance and maintenance of such stormwater
controls shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors. An
owners' association or similar entity may be necessary for the
ownership and/or maintenance of the stormwater controls and
BMPs.
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership, or if sewers and other public improvements are to be
privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs shall be the
responsibility of the owner or private management entity.
D. Richland Township shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. Richland Township
reserves the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater controls and BMPs.
A. Richland Township shall review the stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan for consistency with the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and any permits issued by DEP.
§ 210-27 RICHLAND CODE § 210-28
207:406
§ 210-29. Adherence to approved plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater control
and BMP required by an approved stormwater control and BMP operations
and maintenance plan, or to allow the property to remain in a condition
which does not conform to an approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan, unless an exception is granted in writing
by Richland Township.
§ 210-30. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater controls and BMPs.
§ 210-31. Stormwater management easements.
§ 210-32. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
B. Richland Township shall notify the applicant in writing whether the
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan is
approved.
C. Richland Township may require a record drawing of all stormwater
controls and BMPs and an explanation of any discrepancies with the
operations and maintenance plan.
A. The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance
agreement with Richland Township covering all stormwater controls
and BMPs that are to be privately owned. The agreement shall be
substantially the same as the agreement in Appendix A of this
chapter.145
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of
all permanent stormwater controls and BMPs. The agreement shall be
subject to the review and approval of the solicitor of Richland Township.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by Richland
Township.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for 1) access for inspections and maintenance or 2)
preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and other stormwater controls and BMPs, by persons
other than the property owner. The purpose of the easement shall be
specified in any agreement under § 210-30.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record the maintenance agreement contained in Appendix
145. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-28 SOLID WASTE § 210-32
207:407
§ 210-33. Recording of approved plan and related agreements.
§ 210-34. Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund.
A,146 which is attached and made part hereof, covering all stormwater
control facilities that are to be privately owned.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities.
The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Municipal Solicitor and governing body.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater controls and
BMPs will be placed, constructed or implemented, as described in the
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan, shall
record the following documents in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds
for Cambria County within 15 days of approval of the Stormwater
Control and BMP Operations Plan by Richland Township:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof;
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 210-30; and
(3) Easements under § 210-31.
B. Richland Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for
the project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply
with this section.
A. Persons installing stormwater storage facilities shall be required to pay
a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund to
help defray costs of periodic inspections and maintenance expenses.
The amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows:
(1) If the storage facility is to be privately owned and maintained, the
deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections performed by
the municipality for a period of 10 years, as estimated by the
Municipal Engineer. After that period of time, inspections will be
performed at the expense of the municipality.
(2) If the storage facility is to be owned and maintained by the
municipality, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years. Richland Township will
establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by the
applicant.
(3) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values. Richland Township shall
determine the present worth equivalents, which shall be subject to
the approval of the governing body.
146. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-32 RICHLAND CODE § 210-34
207:408
B. If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreation facility (e.g., ballfield, lake), Richland Township may reduce
or waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the
value of the land for public recreation purpose.
C. If at some future time a storage facility (whether publicly or privately
owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or other
storage facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund deposit will
be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to the
storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount of the deposit
remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid will be returned to
the depositor.
D. Long-term maintenance. Richland Township may require applicants to
pay a fee to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund to cover longterm
maintenance of stormwater control and best management
practices.
E. Stormwater-related problems. Richland Township may require
applicants to pay a fee to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund
to cover stormwater-related problems which may arise from the land
development and earth disturbance.
§ 210-34 SOLID WASTE § 210-34
207:409

ARTICLE IX
Prohibitions
§ 210-35. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter the waters of this commonwealth
is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface waters
of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except as provided in Subsection C below and discharges allowed under
a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(13)Water from individual residential car washing.
(14) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
D. In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contributes to
pollution of the waters of this commonwealth, the municipality or DEP
will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
§ 210-35 SOLID WASTE § 210-36
207:411
§ 210-36. Roof drains.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs and to the maximum extent practicable satisfy the criteria for
disconnected impervious areas.
§ 210-37. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures without the written approval of the
municipality.
§ 210-36 RICHLAND CODE § 210-37
207:412
ARTICLE X
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 210-38. Right of entry.
§ 210-39. Public nuisance.
§ 210-40. Inspection.
SWM BMPs should be inspected by the landowner, or the owner's designee
(including the municipality for dedicated and owned facilities), according to
the following list of minimum frequencies:
§ 210-41. Notice of violation.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, Richland Township may enter
at reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to
inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in
regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
B. Stormwater control and BMP owners and operators shall allow persons
working on behalf of Richland Township ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of Richland Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater control or BMP in Richland
Township such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the discharges from such stormwater control or BMP.
D. Unreasonable delay in allowing Richland Township access to a
stormwater control or BMP is a violation of this article.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Annually for the first five years.
B. Once every three years thereafter.
C. During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
A. Whenever Richland Township finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, Richland
Township may order compliance by written notice to the responsible
person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
§ 210-38 SOLID WASTE § 210-41
207:413
§ 210-42. Suspension and revocation.
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) The implementation of stormwater controls and BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by Richland Township or designee, and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent Richland Township from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any approval or permit issued by Richland Township may be suspended
or revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or operations and maintenance
agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by Richland Township when:
(1) Richland Township has inspected and approved the corrections to
the violations that caused the suspension.
(2) Richland Township is satisfied that the violation has been
corrected.
C. A permit or approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 210-41 RICHLAND CODE § 210-42
207:414
§ 210-43. Violations and penalties.
§ 210-44. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, Richland Township shall provide written notification of the
violation. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply
within the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions
of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and resort
by the municipality from pursuing any and all remedies. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated
activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred to comply with
the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 210-45. Enforcement.
The Richland Township Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections
regarding compliance with the drainage plan shall be the responsibility of
Richland Township or other qualified persons designated by the Township.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion Richland Township may provide a limited
time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases,
Richland Township will provide the owner, or the owner's designee,
with a written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the
owner to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the
violation within the allowed time period, Richland Township may revoke
or suspend any or all applicable approvals and permits pertaining to
any provision of this chapter.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense, and penalties
shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. A set of design plans approved by Richland Township shall be on file at
the site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the municipality or designee during
construction.
§ 210-42 SOLID WASTE § 210-45
207:415
§ 210-46. Appeals.
B. Adherence to approved plan. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to undertake any regulated activity under § 210-5 on any
property except as provided for in the approved drainage plan and
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to
alter or remove any control structure required by the drainage plan
pursuant to this chapter or to allow the property to remain in a
condition which does not conform to the approved drainage plan.
C. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide as-built (record) drawings: one paper print and one
electronic copy.
D. After receipt of the certification by Richland Township, a final
inspection shall be conducted by the Township or designated
representative to certify compliance with this chapter.
E. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit, the governing body will
schedule a hearing to discuss the noncompliance if there is no
immediate danger to life, public health or property. The expense of a
hearing shall be the owner's responsibility.
F. Occupancy permit. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the
certification of completion pursuant to Subsection C has been secured.
The occupancy permit shall be required for each lot owner and/or
developer for all subdivisions and land development in Richland
Township.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of Richland Township, or its
designee, relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to
Richland Township within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Richland Township
relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the County
Court of Common Pleas in Cambria County where the activity has taken
place within 30 days of Richland Township's decision.
§ 210-45 RICHLAND CODE § 210-46
207:416
ARTICLE XI
References
§ 210-47. Sources for stormwater management planning.
A. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). No.
363-0300-002 (2006), as amended and updated. Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, Harrisburg, PA.
B. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
363-2134-008 (2000), as amended and updated. Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
C. United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), National Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part
630: Hydrology, 1969-2001. Originally published as the National
Engineering Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available online at
http://www.wcc.nrcs.usda.gov/hydro/hydro-techref-neh-630.html.147
D. United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS). 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
E. United States Department of Commerce (USDC), National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service (NWS),
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, 2004-2006. Precipitation-
Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Silver Spring,
Maryland 20910. Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/.
147. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 210-47 SOLID WASTE § 210-47
207:417
Chapter 212
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Board of Appeals — See Ch. 6.
§ 210-47 RICHLAND CODE § 210-47
207:418
Part 1
[Adopted 1G1e-n2e5r-a1l9 P9r6oBviysiOonrds. No. 252]
ARTICLE I
Rights-of-Way
§ 212-1. Purpose.
§ 212-2. Definitions.
The following words shall have the meaning as set forth below in the
interpretation of this Part 1:
APPROVE or APPROVAL — Written authorization by the Public Works
Director or his designee.
PERMIT — An official document or certificate issued by the Codes
Enforcement Officer or agency appointed by the township authorizing the
construction of the specific structure or performance of the specific activity.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company,
firm, trust, corporation or other entity recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties, including any governmental agency.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land dedicated and publicly owned for use as a street,
alley, crosswalk or utility installation.
A. It is the purpose of this Part 1 to:
(1) Assure that there are no impediments to the effective and efficient
removal of snow from the public right-of-way by the Township
Public Works Department during inclement weather;
(2) Control the free flow of surface water away from road surfaces;
(3) Control or prohibit structures or uses on the township right-of-way
which create hazards to pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic and/or
endanger township employees or equipment while performing their
duties; and
(4) Ensure the unobstructed and speedy access to public utilities
located within the township right-of-way for repair or relocation.
B. To that end, it is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that any
interpretation of this Part 1 be so construed to carry out the abovestated
purposes. Further, the provisions of this Part 1 are not intended
to interfere with, abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or
ordinances, provided that where this Part 1 imposes a greater
restriction than that imposed by such other rules, easements,
covenants, restrictions, regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this
Part 1 shall control.
§ 212-1 SOLID WASTE § 212-2
207:419
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected that requires location in
or on the ground or attachment to something having location in or on the
ground.
§ 212-3. Permits required.
§ 212-4. Unlawful activities.
After the effective date of this Part 1, it shall be unlawful to do the following
activities in Richland Township:
A. Except as excluded by the express terms of this Part 1, no driveway may
be constructed, no structure may be placed or no use may be made near
or adjacent to the township right-of-way without a permit issued by the
Codes Office.
B. Any fee for issuance of the permit shall be established by the Board of
Supervisors, by resolution.
C. Any permit issued pursuant to this Part 1 shall require the written
approval of the Public Works Director to determine if the purposes of
this Part 1 are fulfilled.
D. The application to be submitted and the permit form to be issued shall
be drafted by the Codes Officer in cooperation with the Public Works
Director and be approved by the Board of Supervisors, by resolution.
A. Construct a driveway without a duly issued permit.
B. Use the public right-of-way for servicing vehicles, displays or
conducting a private business.
C. Fail to keep the area between the edge of the pavement and the public
right-of-way line clear of all fences, pillars, walls, chains, pipes, bumps,
bars, sales exhibits, business signs, lawn decorations, service
equipment, gates, railroad ties, stairs, private sidewalks, walkways or
other similar items or structures not approved, excluding, however,
traffic signs, driveway reflectors not to exceed two in number or any
structures not subject to local regulation by any state or federal law or
regulation.
D. Deposit, push or excavate dirt, debris, mud or any combination thereof
onto the public right-of-way.
E. Damage, deface and/or remove traffic signs, curbing, culverts, piping,
roadway surface or other township property.
F. Damage, construct, reconstruct or divert any drain or ditch without the
approval of the Public Works Director.
G. Stop or obstruct any public road in the township in violation of the
provisions of Work Zone Traffic Control Publication Number 203 issued
§ 212-2 RICHLAND CODE § 212-4
207:420
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, as amended, which
is incorporated herein by reference.
H. Permit stormwater or groundwater from foundations, roofs or surface
drainage systems, or any other similar items, or natural springs or
waterways emanating from the property, to flow or discharge onto the
public right-of-way at a detrimental rate or cause soil erosion, a hazard
or a public nuisance.
I. Deposit or place any debris or other material whatsoever, or cause such
to be thrown or placed, in any drainage ditch or drainage structure in
such a manner as to obstruct the free flow of water.
J. Construct mailbox supports of concrete, brick or stone.
K. Construct a driveway of paver brick, concrete or other decorative stone
that is within five feet of the paved cartway. It shall be required that the
five-foot area within which no paver brick, concrete or other decorative
stone be installed be paved with macadam.
L. Permit a fence or structure to be constructed or maintained or any
shrubbery vegetation, plant or other similar obstruction, or any part
thereof, to be planted or maintained within the township in any manner
or at a location which creates a traffic hazard by impairing visibility
from or of a public highway.
M. Maintain a hazardous condition in a driveway, curb cut or similar area.
N. Install drainage or driveway pipes of less than 12 inches in diameter or
of such a size and type as directed and approved by the Public Works
Director.
O. Fail to maintain a driveway pipe in a proper state of repair, free of
obstruction.
P. Permit shrubbery, vegetation, trees, branches, plants or other similar
obstruction, or parts thereof, to obstruct fire hydrants, stop signs,
street signs, traffic signs or other similar items.
Q. Permit shrubbery, vegetation, tree branches, plants or other similar
obstructions to interfere with public travel.
R. Fail to maintain free of hazardous conditions and to keep in a proper
state of repair all driveways, parking spaces and similar areas.
S. Install stormwater drainage pipes between the edge of the pavement
and the public right-of-way without the approval of the Public Works
Director.
T. Connect to a stormwater system without the approval of or in a manner
not approved by the Public Works Director.
§ 212-4 SOLID WASTE § 212-5
207:421
§ 212-5. Snow removal from private property.
After the effective date of this Part 1, it shall be unlawful to do the following
activities in Richland Township with regard to snow removal:
§ 212-6. Imposition of costs to remove structures, obstructions or
uses.
Notwithstanding any prior approval of the township for the location of
any structure on the township right-of-way, any damages incurred to the
structure or costs incurred to remove said structure, including those
existing prior to the effective date of this Part 1, caused or necessitated by
snow removal, or the need to access public utilities located within the rightof-
way of the township, shall be at the sole cost and expense of the property
owner. When time permits, the property owner shall be given a reasonable
period of time to remove the structure, obstruction or use. In emergency
situations, when insufficient time exists to permit the removal or relocation
of the structure, obstruction or use by the property owner, the township,
municipal authority or appropriate public utility may remove the structure,
obstruction or use and impose the costs on the property owner and collect
said costs as permitted by law.
§ 212-7. Notice of violation.
Except for § 212-5, which shall be governed by § 212-11B, any person who
violates any of the provisions of this Part 1, or any permit or approval given
hereunder, shall be given written notice by the township by personal service
or certified mail sent to the address of the property owner listed on the tax
assessment records of Cambria County, Pennsylvania. Such notice shall set
forth the violation with specificity and the time during which the violation
A. No snow, ice, slush or a combination thereof shall be pushed or
deposited across and/or onto any public highway.
B. No snow, ice, slush or a combination thereof shall be pushed or
deposited into any drainage area, stream, river, culvert or catch basin.
C. No snow, ice, slush or a combination thereof shall be deposited, pushed
or maintained within a commercial, manufacturing, light industrial or
multiple-family zoning district parking facility or at or near an
intersection in any zoning district, in a manner or at a location which
creates a traffic hazard by impairing visibility from or of a public
highway.
D. No person shall damage any township property, including but not
limited to traffic signs, culverts, etc., while removing snow, ice, slush or
a combination thereof. Any damage to township property shall be
repaired or replaced in accordance with the requirements of the
township at the expense of the property owner and/or snow removal
agency.
§ 212-5 RICHLAND CODE § 212-7
207:422
is to be abated. Said notice shall also advise the property owner of appeal
rights pursuant to Chapter 6, Administrative Board of Appeals, as amended.
§ 212-8. Appeal procedure.
Except for any violation of § 212-5, which shall be governed by § 212-11B,
any person aggrieved by any decision or interpretation rendered pursuant
to this Part 1 may, within 30 days of receipt of such notice or interpretation,
appeal to the Richland Township Administrative Board of Appeals pursuant
to the provisions of Chapter 6, Administrative Board of Appeals, as
amended.
§ 212-9. Rules and regulations.
Upon the recommendations of the Public Works Director and the Codes
Enforcement Officers, the Board of Supervisors may adopt, by resolution,
rules and regulations to carry out the intent of this Part 1.
§ 212-10. Remedies.
In case any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired or maintained or any structure, or land as used, or any hedge, tree,
shrub or other growth is maintained in violation of this Part 1, or any rules
or regulations made pursuant thereto, the proper township authorities, in
addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute any appropriate
action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct
or abate such violation, to prevent the use of said structure or land or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
§ 212-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No.
272]
A. For any and every violation of the provisions of § 212-4 of this Part 1, or
the terms of any permit issued or regulations or rules promulgated
pursuant thereto, the owner, general agent or contractor of a structure
or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and
the owner, general agent, contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of a
building or structure in which such violation has been committed or
shall exist, or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any
other person who knowingly commits, takes part or assists in such
violation, or who maintains any structure or premises in which such
violation shall exist, shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced in the name of Richland
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $600 plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by Richland Township as
a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by a District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
Richland Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
§ 212-7 SOLID WASTE § 212-11
207:423
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice
determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person violating this Part 1 to
have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorney's fees collected for the violation of this Part 1 shall be paid
over to Richland Township.
B. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this Part 1 shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each
section of this Part 1 that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
§ 212-11 RICHLAND CODE § 212-11
207:424
Part 2
[Adopted 1S2tr-1ee8t- 2E0x0c0a vBayt iOonrds. No. 275]
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 212-12. Words defined.
The following words shall have the meaning in this Part 2 as set forth below:
ACCESS DRIVEWAY — Any means for passage of vehicles between property
abutting on a township highway and the highway, including that part of the
driveway that lies within the established right-of-way limits of the township
highway. It also includes such drainage structures as may be necessary for
the proper construction and maintenance thereof.
APPROVAL — Written permission given by the township.
EMERGENCY — An event requiring a road cut during a period time that the
township office is not open for business.
FEES — Amount established by the Board of Supervisors, from time to time,
by resolution.
PADOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR — The person duly appointed by the Township
Board of Supervisors to the position of Public Works Director, or his
designee.
SHOULDER — The area three feet beyond the edge of pavement or concrete
curbing.
STREET — Includes a public street, public easement, public right-of-way,
public highway, public alley, public way or public road accepted or
maintained by the township.
TOWNSHIPS — Richland Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania.
§ 212-12 SOLID WASTE § 212-12
207:425

ARTICLE III
General Provisions and Specifications
§ 212-13. General permit provisions.
Except as modified by the express language appearing elsewhere in this
Part 2, the following provisions and specifications shall apply to the
occupancy of township right-of-way:
A. The work authorized by this permit shall be done at such time and in
such a manner as shall be consistent with the safety of the public and
shall conform to all requirements and standards of the township or
current Pennsylvania Department of Transportation specifications,
where applicable. If at any time it shall be found by the township that
the work is not being done or has not been properly performed, the
permittee and/or its contractor, upon being notified in writing by the
township, shall immediately take the necessary steps, at its own
expense, toward placing the work in condition to conform to said
requirements or standards.
B. In the event of willful failure or neglect by said permittee and/or its
contractor or their employees to perform and comply with the
conditions, restrictions and provisions of this permit, the township may
revoke and annul this permit and order and direct said permittee and/or
its contractor to remove any or all structures or property belonging to
said permittee and/or its contractor from the legal limits of the highway
right-of-way and to restore the highway right-of-way to its former
condition.
C. If work is stopped on a project for any reason, and any ditch or trench,
in the opinion of the township, remains open for an unreasonable
period, the permittee and/or its contractor, if so directed, shall refill the
ditch or trench, and work shall not be resumed thereon until the
permittee and/or its contractor is prepared to proceed with the work
until completion. In the event that the permittee and/or its contractor
fails to refill the ditch or trench or proceed until completion of the work
upon notice from the township to do so, the township may perform the
necessary and required work subject to reimbursement by the
permittee and/or its contractor.
D. The permittee shall pay all costs and expenses incident to or growing
out of the project, including the prescribed fees for the same, the cost of
making and maintaining the temporary restoration of the disturbed
areas and making permanent restoration and, further, shall reimburse
the township for any inspection costs which the township may deem it
necessary to incur, and the permittee shall reimburse the township for
said costs within 30 days after receipt of the statement setting forth
sums expended therefor by the township.
E. If the permittee and/or its contractor, after making an opening in the
highway to place or repair pipe or for any other purpose, fails to restore
§ 212-13 SOLID WASTE § 212-13
207:427
any portion of highway right-of-way to conform with specifications of
the township, the township reserves the right to do the work and bill
the permittee for the cost of the restoration.
F. The permittee will submit to the township a certificate or certificates of
insurance for public liability and property damage, in sufficient
amounts to cover any loss, that may be incurred for or on account of any
matter, cause or thing arising out of the construction, reconstruction,
repair, relocation or installation of the permitted facilities, except in
those instances where the township by prior arrangement has
authorized the permittee to provide other means of protecting the
township and its employees.
G. The permission herein granted does not relieve the permittee and/or its
contractor from obtaining any consent otherwise required from the
owner or owners of the abutting property and does not confer upon the
permittee and/or its contractor the right to cut, remove or destroy trees
or shrubbery within the legal limits of the highway except under such
conditions, restrictions and regulations as the township may prescribe.
H. If at any time the structure or facility shall become a hazard from any
cause whatsoever, the permittee and/or its contractor shall have the
same removed or repaired within 48 hours after receipt of written
notification, except at times of extraordinary happenings when
extension of such time limit may be given by the township.
I. After each and every excavation made by the permittee and/or its
contractor in any road or highway right-of-way covered by this permit
incident to the erection, repair, resetting or removal of any poles,
manholes, conduits, water, steam, oil, gas pipes, sewers or any other
obstructions or construction, said permittee and/or its contractor shall,
under the supervision and direction of the township, restore the road to
a condition conforming to requirements and/or specification of the
township. So long as said permittee and/or its contractor operates and
leaves in place such structures and appliances in, upon or along said
highway right-of-way, the permittee and/or its contractor shall maintain
and keep in good order and repair said structures and appliances. The
permittee covenants and agrees to fully indemnify and save harmless
the township of and from all liability for damages or injury occurring to
any person or persons or property at or on said roads through or in
consequence of any act or omission of any contractor, agent, servant,
employee or person engaged or employed in, about or upon said work,
by, at the instance or with the approval or consent of the permittee, or
from the failure of the permittee and/or its contractor to comply with
the provisions set forth herein.
J. If at any time in the future the highway is widened or the alignment or
grades are changed, the permittee further agrees to change or relocate
any part of the structures covered by this permit which interferes with
the improvement of the highway, at its own expense, to the extent now
or hereafter required by law.
§ 212-13 RICHLAND CODE § 212-13
207:428
K. During the time when the highway right-of-way covered by this permit
is under process of construction and/or until said road or highway is
accepted by the township, no permittee and/or its contractor will be
authorized to enter upon said highway right-of-way for the purpose of
erecting poles, laying conduits, water, steam, oil or gas pipes or sewers
or doing any other work whatsoever which might interfere with the
construction of the road or highway, unless said permittee and/or its
contractor shall first file with the township a duly attested certificate,
signed by the contractor or other authority constructing said road or
highway, containing the full consent to such proposed work of said
permittee and/or its contractor within the lines of said highway right-ofway,
together with a satisfactory waiver, release and quit-claim to the
township, of all damages and all defenses whatsoever for delays by
reason of such work and occupation of said roadway by said permittee
and/or its contractor, or from any cause whatsoever resulting by reason
of such work and occupation, provided that the provisions of this
subsection shall not apply in case of emergency; in such case, the
permittee and/or its contractor shall procure the written consent of the
township to do such work as may be deemed necessary to correct the
existing emergency conditions.
L. Any work done under this permit shall be subject to the conditions,
restrictions and provisions of this permit, which shall govern all
excavations, openings and trenches for the purpose of making repairs
to any poles, conduits, water, steam, oil, gas pipes or sewers, or other
structures, or property and appurtenances thereto belonging, erected
on or in the highway right-of-way.
M. This permit is issued subject to any additional rights which the
township in which the work is to be done may have in such matters.
N. After a permit is granted by the township, it shall not be assigned nor
transferred without prior written approval from the township.
O. To protect the highway surface or pavement on said projects, all
equipment used by the permittee and/or its contractor shall be
approved by the township. Such equipment shall have rubber runners
or wheels. In the event that other than rubber-equipped machinery is
used, the pavement shall be protected by the use of heavy rubber or
similar matting which shall be a minimum of four inches wider on each
side than the tracks or wheels of the equipment used.
P. Information as to the date and character of construction or
reconstruction of the township road or street may be obtained by
contacting the township.
Q. If, in the construction work, the permittee will be required to use
certain blasting operations in the excavation, the permittee agrees to
make, execute and deliver to the township a bond in the sum stipulated
by the township with surety in the form of a surety company, duly
registered and authorized to do business in Pennsylvania, conditioned
§ 212-13 SOLID WASTE § 212-13
207:429
§ 212-14. Subsurface operations.
that the permittee will save harmless the township from any damages
whatsoever to its subgrade, subbase, modified subbase, drainage
facilities, road metal and any other installations or matters in, under or
upon the highway right-of-way for a period of five years from the date
of the completion of the last work covered by this permit.
R. Maintenance and protection of traffic for work authorized by this
occupancy permit must be carried out in accordance with the PADOT
Publication 203, as amended, and/or the requirements of the township.
In this connection, the permittee shall provide and maintain all
necessary precautions to prevent injury or damage to persons and
property from operations covered by this permit. A traffic control plan
may be required as directed by the township.
(1) Warning signs shall be placed beyond each end of the actual
operation in such a manner as to be visible to the traveling public
and meet the requirements of the township. These signs shall
display the name of the permittee and/or its contractor on the back
of the sign. Special employees shall be assigned by the permittee
and/or its contractor to direct traffic when it becomes necessary to
limit it to one way. Advance permission must be obtained from
township, or its authorized representative, before directing traffic
through one lane. Substantial barricades with adequate
illumination shall be provided and maintained for any open trench
or hole in the highway right-of-way in a manner approved by the
township.
(2) Flagmen shall be provided by permittee as specified and in
accordance with the requirements of PADOT Publication 203, as
amended.
A. Any opening or impairment of any nature whatsoever of any improved
surface within the township right-of-way as authorized by township
permit of any kind shall be made in accordance with the following
specified provisions:
(1) Plates or bridging will be required on all openings made within the
improved surface which have a shortest dimension in length or
width of six feet or less whenever work cannot be completed prior
to peak traffic hours within the same day, or in the manner
specified on the permit. The plate or bridging is to be extended a
minimum of 18 inches on either side of the opening and tied into
the existing cartway.
(2) A painted marker for identification showing the name of the
permittee or a symbol assigned to the permittee shall be placed at
each opening or impairment made for service installations or
repairs within the improved surface of township highways. It shall
§ 212-13 RICHLAND CODE § 212-14
207:430
be placed at the nearest edge of the cut closest to the edge of the
improved surface and shown on plans attached to the application.
(3) The permittee is responsible for all costs and expenses of making
and maintaining temporary or permanent restorations of disturbed
areas. When permanent restoration is made, the permittee shall be
responsible for such areas for any subsequent failure of the
highway surface during a period of two years following completion
of the permanent restoration work.
B. No openings for the purpose of placing pipe lines or other structures
under the improved surface of the road or highway by drilling, boring,
driving or tunneling shall be made closer than three feet to the edge of
the road pavement, and trenches for conduits, water, steam, oil, gas
pipes, sewers and other obstructions placed parallel with the road or
highway shall be dug so that the near edge of the trench is at least three
feet outside of the edge of the road pavement with a minimum depth of
three feet below the surface of the road or highway, unless the township
shall authorize in writing a lesser clearance. A greater distance shall be
used wherever practicable.
C. In case the road or highway is not paved, the trench shall be placed so
that its near edge is at least 15 feet from the general center lines of the
traveled road or highway unless authorized as provided in Subsection
B. The center line shall be determined by the township.
D. The trench for such construction shall not be opened for a distance of
more than 50 feet at any one time, unless especially authorized by
township. At no time will the permittee be permitted to leave more than
50 feet of trench open at the end of a working day whenever utilizing
the shoulder of a township highway for the utility.
E. In case it is necessary to cross under any improved road or highway, the
opening for a pipe line shall be drilled, bored or driven on a horizontal
plane at a minimum depth of three feet below the surface of the road or
highway. Trenching will be authorized by the township, in writing,
where drilling, boring or driving the proposed structure beneath the
township road is determined not to be feasible. Where necessary to
cross the improved road or highway by trenching, the crossing shall be
made under 1/2 of the improved road width and the pipe or structure
placed and the hole carefully backfilled in accordance with the
applicable restoration detail.148 The second half of the trenching is to be
completed in the same manner, so at least one-way traffic will be
maintained over 1/2 the improved road or highway while the second
half is being trenched.
F. Where a tile drain or other structure or facility is encountered, it shall
be replaced or restored by the permittee and/or its contractor in
accordance with township specifications.
148. Editor's Note: The restoration details are on file in the township offices.
§ 212-14 SOLID WASTE § 212-14
207:431
§ 212-15. Surface or overhead operations.
G. The permittee and/or its contractor shall place the top of manholes so
that it shall be even with the elevation of the highway and slope of its
shoulder, unless a lower elevation shall be approved.
H. All excess excavated material shall be removed and disposed of outside
the legal limits of the highways as the work progresses, unless the
approval of the township is obtained for disposal of the material within
the legal limits of the highway. All parts of the highway and various
structures disturbed shall be restored to a condition equal to that which
existed before starting the work. Guard rails shall be replaced to the
present alignment, and any guard posts discolored through the work of
the permittee and/or its contractor shall be refinished by washing or
repainting.
I. All openings required to be made in the cartway or street for the
installation, renewal or repair of a utility shall be made pursuant to
permit, or written authorization, issued by the township in accordance
with the following requirements on backfilling and pavement
replacement as specified by township ordinance or current
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation specifications, where
applicable.
A. On highways other than limited access highways, utility poles, guys and
other ground-mounted utility appurtenances shall be placed at least 30
feet from the edge of the traveled roadway where sufficient right-of-way
is available. When sufficient right-of-way is not available, the poles shall
be placed as near to the right-of-way line as possible. No poles or other
overhead structures shall be placed where they will obstruct the view of
traffic on the highway, nor within five feet of any warning or direction
sign, unless specifically permitted in writing.
B. All wires except power transmission and supply lines, appurtenances or
supports attached to poles which cross the highway shall be placed or
erected so as to provide a minimum vertical clearance of 18 feet within
right-of-way limits of highway. Where power transmission and supply
lines cross over a highway in urban and rural areas, vertical clearance
and other requirements of the National Electrical Safety Code must be
complied with. All guys shall be placed so as to avoid interference with
traffic of all kinds on the highway and must present a neat appearance
when installed; if for electric light or power lines, they must be
adequately insulated at a point not less than 10 feet vertical above the
ground; if for telephone lines when in proximity to electric light or
power lines, they must be adequately insulated at a point not less than
eight feet vertical above the ground.
§ 212-14 RICHLAND CODE § 212-15
207:432
ARTICLE IV
Permit
§ 212-16. Permit required; emergency exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or authority to tunnel
under or to make any excavation, dig, tear up or disturb in or upon any
street, alley or public highway or in or upon the right-of-way thereof in the
Township of Richland without having obtained a permit as herein required.
In the event of an emergency requiring the immediate excavation or digging
up of water, sewer, gas, electric or telephone lines or other transmission
lines by a public utility, municipal authority or company or association
providing water service, it shall not be necessary to obtain a permit before
commencing said emergency, excavation or digging up. However, said
permit must be obtained upon the opening of the township office (8:00 a.m.
prevailing time) of the next business day of the township.
§ 212-17. Street openings limited.
No person to whom a permit has been granted shall perform any of the
work authorized by such permit in any amount greater than that specified
in the permit, except that upon approval by the Pubic Works Director,
additional work may be done under the provisions of the permit in such an
amount as the Public Works Director shall deem appropriate and necessary
to complete the work. Any deposit and bond posted in connection with
the permit shall be deemed to cover any such additional work as may be
approved pursuant to this section within the limit mentioned herein.
§ 212-18. Commencement of work.
Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within 10 days
after the issuance of the permit therefor. If not so commenced, the permit
shall be automatically terminated unless the permittee applies to the Public
Works Director for an extension of time within which to commence work.
If such an extension is granted, the original permit shall remain in force
for the period of time specified in the extension. Permits which terminate
within 10 days after issuance or within any extension of time granted by
the Public Works Director may be renewed only upon the payment of an
additional permit fee as originally required.
§ 212-19. Expiration of permits.
Every permit shall expire at the time stated in the permit. If the permittee
should not complete the work within the specified time, he shall, prior to
expiration of the permit, present in writing to the Public Works Director a
request for an extension of time, setting forth therein the reasons for the
requested extension. If, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, such an
extension is necessary and not contrary to the public interest, the permittee
may be granted additional time for the completion of the work.
§ 212-16 SOLID WASTE § 212-20
207:433
§ 212-20. State highways.
The provisions of this Part 2 shall not be applicable in those instances
where the highway is maintained by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Department of Transportation (PADOT).
§ 212-21. Rights of township.
Every permit shall be granted subject to the right of the township or of any
other person to lawfully use the street for any purpose, not inconsistent with
the permit.
§ 212-22. Revocation of permits.
A. In addition to the reasons set forth in Article III, § 212-13B, any permit
may be revoked by the Public Works Director, after notice to the
permittee, for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provisions of this
Part 2.
(2) Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or law
relating to the work.
(3) Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering life or property.
B. A permittee shall be granted a period of three days from the date of the
notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the diligent
prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before said permit is
revoked.
C. Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon
the permittee or his agent engaged in the work. The notice shall contain
a brief statement of the reasons for revoking the permit. Notice may be
given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or
by certified or registered United States mail addressed to the person to
be notified.
D. When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the
permit has not been completed, the Public Works Director shall do such
work as may be necessary to restore the street or part thereof to as
good a condition as before the opening was made. All expenses thereby
incurred by the township shall be recovered from the deposit or bond
the permittee has made or filed with the township.
§ 212-20 RICHLAND CODE § 212-22
207:434
ARTICLE V
Applications
§ 212-23. Duties and responsibilities of applicants.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any applicant to:
§ 212-24. Duties of permittees.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person receiving a permit to:
A. Make written application for such permit with the township on such
form as it shall prescribe. No work shall commence until the township
has approved the application and plan and issued a permit and until the
permittee has paid and provided all fees, deposits, certificates and
bonds required by this Part 2.
B. Furnish in triplicate a plan showing the work to be performed under
said permit. Two copies of such plan shall be returned to the applicant
at the time the permit is granted.
C. Agree to save the township, its officers, employees and agents harmless
from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be
claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under said permit.
The acceptance of any permit under this Part 2 shall constitute such an
agreement by the applicant whether the same is expressed or not.
A. Pay a permit issuance fee and permit inspection fee in accordance with
the schedule of fees determined by the Board of Supervisors, by
resolution.149
B. Make a deposit to cover the cost of inspecting the work authorized by
the permit and the cost of restoring the street damaged by such work,
all in accordance with the provisions of this Part 2.
C. Furnish a bond as required by this Part 2.
149. Editor's Note: The schedule of fees is on file in the township offices.
§ 212-23 SOLID WASTE § 212-24
207:435

ARTICLE VI
Manner of Excavating
§ 212-25. Opening and excavation restrictions.
In addition to the general provisions in Article III, the following restrictions
apply:
A. Pipe drains, pipe culverts or other facilities encountered shall be
protected by the permittee.
B. Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the
purpose of location or preserving the lines of any street or property
subdivision, or a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey
bench mark within the township shall not be removed or disturbed or
caused to be removed or disturbed unless permission to do so is first
obtained in writing from the township. Permission shall be granted only
upon condition that the permittee shall pay all expenses incident to the
property replacement of the monument.
C. When work performed by the permittee interferes with the established
drainage system of any street, provisions shall be made by the
permittee to provide proper drainage to the satisfaction of the
township.
D. When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is caused to roll,
flow or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause the same to be
removed from the street within 24 hours after deposit. In the event that
the earth, gravel or other excavated material so deposited is not
removed, the township shall cause such removal and the cost incurred
shall be paid by the permittee or deducted from his deposit.
E. Access to private driveways shall be provided except during working
hours when construction operations prohibit provision of such access.
Free access to fire hydrants must be provided at all time.
F. Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench
and kept trimmed up so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible
to public travel. In order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate a dirt
or dust nuisance, the township may require the permittee to provide toe
boards or bins; and if the excavated area is muddy and causes
inconvenience to pedestrians, temporary wooden plank walks shall be
installed by the permittee as directed by the township. If the street is
not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of
the adjacent sidewalk, the permittee shall keep a passageway of at least
1/2 the sidewalk width open along such sidewalk line.
G. Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours of
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless the permittee
obtains written consent from the Public Works Director to do the work
at an earlier or later hour. Such permission shall be granted only in case
of an emergency or in the event that the work authorized by the permit
§ 212-25 SOLID WASTE § 212-25
207:437
§ 212-26. Backfilling and restoring opening.
is to be performed in traffic-congested areas. If the work is done on a
Saturday, the township shall be given 48 hours' notice to permit it to
have an inspector present, if it deems it necessary.
H. In granting any permit, the township may attach such other conditions
thereto as may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage to public or
private property or to prevent the operation from being conducted in
manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely to create a
nuisance. Such conditions may include but shall not be limited to:
(1) Limitations on the period the year in which the work may be
performed.
(2) Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment.
(3) Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported.
(4) The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials.
(5) Requirements as to the laying of dust, the cleaning of streets, the
prevention of noise and other results offensive or injurious to the
neighborhood, the general public, or any portion thereof.
(6) Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
I. All signage, including, but not limited to, street signs, traffic control
signs, warning signs, etc., shall be promptly replaced upon completion
of the work according to township regulations.
A. All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be properly made,
backfilled and relaid by the permittee in accordance with the
township's specifications which are adopted by resolution.
B. The township must be notified by the permittee during the forty-eighthour
period preceding beginning of backfilling of the date and
approximate time at which backfilling will be done.
C. After excavation is commenced, the work of making and backfilling the
same shall be prosecuted with due diligence.
D. The township shall make such inspection as it may deem necessary of
all work authorized by a permit. The township is empowered to provide
a full-time inspector if necessary to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this Part 2.
E. All inspection costs, including but not limited to salary, overhead and
expenses of each inspector, shall be borne by the permittee.
F. The permittee shall notify the township in writing upon completion of
all work accomplished under the provisions of the permit. A certificate
of final inspection shall be issued by the township to each permittee not
sooner than two years after the permanent restoration of the excavation
§ 212-25 RICHLAND CODE § 212-26
207:438
§ 212-27. Pavement milling and overlay requirements.
has been made, provided that the work authorized by the permit has
been performed according to township specifications.
G. If any settlement in a restored area or other defect occurs within a
period of two years from the date of completion of the permit
restoration, any expense incurred by the township in correcting such
settlement shall be paid by the permittee.
H. In no case shall any opening made by a permittee be considered in the
charge or care of the township, or any of its officers or employees, and
no officer or employee is authorized in any way to take or assume any
jurisdiction over any such opening, except in the exercise of the police
power, when it is necessary to protect life and property; provided,
however, that the township shall assume charge if and when it makes
the final restoration.
I. During the period of time between November 1 and May 31 of the
subsequent year, when permanent restoration materials are not
available, temporary restoration in accordance with township
regulations may be used; however, the permittee shall complete the
permanent restoration by June 30 of said year or be subject to the
provisions of Articles VII and X.
J. Where any pavement markings are destroyed or covered by any
excavated opening or restoration work, said markings shall be repaired
or replaced by the permittee in a manner authorized by the township. In
the event that the township determines that the pavement markings are
essential to the public safety, temporary markings shall be in place prior
to the roadway being opened to the public.
A. In any area where three or more openings are excavated within 50
lineal feet of one lane of roadway pavement and/or the disturbed
pavement area, including any pavement restoration requirements, is 75
square feet or more within 50 lineal feet of the full width roadway
pavement, as determined by the township, the street restoration shall
include the milling and overlayment of the disturbed travel lane, or the
entire roadway width shall be overlayed with bituminous pavement in
accordance with specifications which are adopted by resolution.150
B. If disturbed lanes adjacent to shoulders are overlayed, the shoulder
shall be raised, with material and in a manner authorized by the
township, so the overlaid pavement and the shoulder edges are at the
same elevation.
C. At each end of an overlaid area, the permittee shall install a paving
notch in accordance with PADOT Standards and provide a minimum
ten-foot transition. All pavement materials, methods of construction
150. Editor's Note: The specifications are on file in the township offices.
§ 212-26 SOLID WASTE § 212-27
207:439
and contractors shall be in accordance with PADOT specifications and
certifications.
§ 212-27 RICHLAND CODE § 212-27
207:440
ARTICLE VII
Deposits
§ 212-28. Computation of deposit.
The township, upon receipt of a properly completed application, shall
determine the amount of the deposit to be made by the permittee, which
amount shall equal the approximate expense to meet the requirements of
this Part 2; provided, however, that the minimum amount of the deposit
shall be $500. The deposit shall be paid at the time the permit is received,
and the deposit shall be used to reimburse the township for the costs of
any work and/or materials furnished by it in connection with the work
authorized by the permit, to cover all necessary inspections of said work
and for any other purpose set forth in this Part 2. The township may
elect to waive this requirement insofar as it pertains to a public utility
company if such company files with the township its corporate bond in a
form satisfactory to the Township Solicitor, conditioned upon the payment
to the township of all costs which would otherwise be covered by and paid
out of such a deposit. In the event that any public utility or authority elects
to file such a bond, the township shall bill such utility or authority monthly
for such costs as they accrue.
§ 212-29. Form of deposit.
The deposit may be either in the form of a certified, treasurer's or cashier's
check or in lawful money of the United States.
§ 212-30. Insufficient deposit.
If any deposit is less than sufficient to pay all costs, the permittee shall,
upon demand, pay to the township an amount equal to the deficiency. If the
permittee fails or refuses to pay such deficiency, the township may institute
an action to recover the same in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until
such deficiency is paid in full, no additional permits shall be issued to such
permittee.
§ 212-31. Decision on costs.
The township shall determine the cost of any work done or repairs made
by it or under its direction, pursuant to the provisions of this Part 2. In
the event that a permittee disputes the amount charged by the township
for work done or repairs made by the township, the permittee may appeal
pursuant to Article XI.
§ 212-32. Refund of deposit.
Upon notification by the permittee that all work authorized by the permit
had been completed, and after restoration of the opening, and after the
certificate of final inspection has been issued, the township shall refund
to the permittee his/its deposit less all costs incurred by the township in
connection with said permit. In no event shall the permit fee be refunded.
§ 212-28 SOLID WASTE § 212-32
207:441

ARTICLE VIII
Bond Requirements
§ 212-33. Bond.
No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has
filed with the township a bond in an amount not greater than $100,000,
which specific amount shall be within the reasonable discretion of the
township and shall depend upon the work being performed by the
permittee. The condition of said bond is to indemnify the township for
any loss, liability or damage to person or property that may result or
accrue from or because of the making, existence or manner of guarding
or construction of any such tunnel or excavation. Such bond shall have
as surety a corporation licensed to do business in the state as a surety
company.
§ 212-34. Optional bond posting.
In lieu of posting a bond for each road permit required, a utility or authority
(i.e., gas, electric, cable, telephone, water and sewer) may post a yearly
bond for all work requiring a permit under the terms of this Part 2 on a
yearly basis in an amount equal to 110% of the value of the work performed
during the prior calendar year. Such bond shall cover all work performed by
that utility or authority during the calendar year posted.
§ 212-33 SOLID WASTE § 212-34
207:443

ARTICLE IX
Prohibited Activities
§ 212-35. Prohibitions enumerated.
The following activities shall be prohibited on the rights-of-way of Richland
Township:
A. No part of the highway right-of-way shall be used for servicing of
vehicles, displays or conducting a private business.
B. The area between the edge of the pavement and the right-of-way line
shall be kept clear of all buildings, fences, pillars, walls, structures,
pumps, bars, sales exhibits, business signs, service equipment,
excluding mailboxes installed in accordance with the United States
Postal Service and approved driveway reflectors (not to exceed two in
number).
C. No person shall deposit, push or excavate dirt, debris onto the right-ofway
of the township.
D. No person shall damage, deface and/or remove curbing, traffic signs,
culverts, roadway surface or other township property.
E. No person shall damage or divert any drain or ditch without the
approval of the township.
F. No person shall stop or obstruct any public road in the township, or
commit any nuisance thereof by felling trees, making fences or parking
on the road or in any other way.
G. No person shall cause stormwater to flow onto the right-of-way at a
detrimental rate or cause of hazard or a public nuisance.
H. No person shall deposit or place any debris or any other material
whatsoever, or cause such to be thrown or placed, in any drainage ditch
or drainage structure in such a manner as to obstruct free flow.
I. No person shall construct, install, repair or maintain a driveway,
drainage pipe, road gutter, drainage area not in compliance with this
Part 2 or other ordinances of the township.
§ 212-35 SOLID WASTE § 212-35
207:445

ARTICLE X
Violations and Penalties
§ 212-36. Fine.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Part
2 shall, upon conviction and a summary proceeding before a district justice,
be fined not more than $1,000 together with costs of suit and attorneys'
fees.
§ 212-37. Work done by township; costs assessed to property.
In the event of a noncompliance by any person, firm or corporation with
the requirements of this Part 2 regarding refilling and resurfacing, the
same shall be done by the township after notice in writing to said person,
firm, corporation, utility or authority, and the entire cost thereof, plus
collection charges, including attorneys' fees, shall be assessed against the
property for which the improvement was rendered or against the person,
firm, corporation, utility or authority, whose obligation it was to complete
the job, by municipal lien, or like proceeding as provided in several acts
of assembly governing the same or collected by other methods provided by
law.
§ 212-36 SOLID WASTE § 212-37
207:447

ARTICLE XI
Appeal Procedure
§ 212-38. Right to appeal.
Any person, firm, corporation, utility or authority who disagrees with any
decision of the township rendered pursuant to this Part 2 shall have the
right of appeal pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. 133, entitled the
"Administrative Board of Appeals Ordinance,"151 as amended.
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Administrative Board of Appeals.
§ 212-38 SOLID WASTE § 212-38
207:449

Part 3
[AdoptedC5u-r2b6in-2g0 A0s6sBesysmOredn.t No. 304]
ARTICLE XII
Installation of Curbing Throughout Township
§ 212-39. Authorization.
Pursuant to Article XXIV § 2401(c)(3) of the Second Class Township Code,
the Supervisors of Richland Township hereby authorize the installation of
curbing within the Township as follows:
A. All curbing shall be installed to Township specifications by the
Supervisors of Richland Township pursuant to Article XXIV § 2401(c)(3)
in such locations as designated by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Payment for such curbing shall be assessed against the abutted
property owners in proportion to their frontage; provided, however,
that no property owner shall be liable for the cost of construction of the
curb in an amount greater than 15% of the assessed valuation of the
abutting property. Any expense above the maximum liability of abutting
property owners shall be paid by the Township.
C. Assessments pursuant to Subsection B may be paid as follows:
(1) The first payment shall not be due until 90 days from the notice of
completion of the installation of curbing adjacent to the owner's
property. Prior to the first payment, the landowner shall elect the
payment method from the options set forth in Subsection C(2).
Those electing an installment method shall enter into an
appropriate agreement, and a municipal claim for the appropriate
amount shall be filed as set forth in § 3303(b) et seq., of the Second
Class Township Code.
(2) The amount due may be paid as follows:
(a) If the amount is paid in full within the ninety-day period, there
will be a five-percent discount.
(b) The owner may pay the sum in 36 equal monthly payments
with no interest (other than statutory interest for late
payments).
(c) The owner may pay the sum in 60 equal monthly payments
with interest not to exceed 6%.
D. Any person who contests any assessment approved by any other matter
hereunder shall be entitled to a hearing on same pursuant to the Local
Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105 et seq.)
§ 212-39 SOLID WASTE § 212-39
207:451
Chapter 215
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 42.
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 138.
Soil erosion and grading — See Ch. 204.
Water — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 212-39 RICHLAND CODE § 212-39
215:452
ARTICLE I
Purpose
§ 215-1. Purpose of provisions.152
The purpose of this chapter is to assure sites suitable for building purposes
and human habitation and to provide for the harmonious and healthful
development of the Township of Richland; for coordination of existing
streets with proposed streets; for ensuring adequate open space for traffic,
recreation, light and air; and for proper distribution of population, thereby
creating conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the citizens of the township. The further purpose of this chapter
is to provide uniform and equitable land subdivision and development
regulations, procedures and standards for observance by land developers,
land users, the Township Planning Commission and the Board of
Supervisors of the township.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 215-1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-1
215:453

ARTICLE II
Title
§ 215-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Richland Township
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations of 1996."
§ 215-2 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-2
215:455

ARTICLE III
Terminology
§ 215-3. Word usage and interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 215-4. Definitions.
Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and
phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. All words and terms
not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard usage.
ACREAGE OF PROPERTY — The area contained within the property lines of
a lot.
AMENDMENT — Any change or revision of this chapter.
APPLICANT — A subdivider, owner or developer, as hereinafter defined,
who has filed an application for subdivision or land development, including
his heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets and usually divided into lots.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The governing body of the Township of
Richland, County of Cambria, Pennsylvania.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender, and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation or any other
similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained or arranged to be used or occupied."
§ 215-3 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-4
215:457
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line nearest the front of and across a lot
establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the front line
of buildings and structures and the front lot line.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public
facilities.
CUL-DE-SAC (COURT or DEAD-END STREET) — A short street having
one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by vehicle
turnaround.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
EASEMENT — A grant by the property owner to the use of a strip of land by
the public, a corporation or persons for specified purposes.
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for the
township.
ESCROW — A deposit of cash in lieu of an amount required and still in force
on a performance or maintenance bond.
IMPROVEMENT — Those physical additions and installations required to
render land suitable for the use intended, and including streets, curbs
and gutters, street signs and lights, walkways, sewer and water facilities,
monuments and markers, grading, and stormwater drainage facilities.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
A subdivision of land; excluding, however, the addition of an accessory
building, including farm buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an
existing principal building.
B.
§ 215-4 RICHLAND CODE § 215-4
215:458
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LICENSED ENGINEER or LAND SURVEYOR — Licensed professional
engineer or land surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as
a unit. In determining the size of a lot, no part of a right-of-way, street,
crosswalk or easement may be included.
NORTH POINT — An arrow on a plan depicting North.
OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the owner, or other persons having a
proprietary interest in the land, shall be deemed to be an owner for the
purposes of this chapter; landowner.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Richland
Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by
the governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain
public comment prior to taking action in accordance with the Municipalities
Planning Code. 153
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act." 154
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
153. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
154. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
§ 215-4 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-4
215:459
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land dedicated and publicly owned for use as a street,
alley or crosswalk.
STREET — Any road, highway, lane or other way designed for vehicular
traffic, whether or not the same is a private street or a dedicated street,
classified as follows:
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the division by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the township
representative, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required
improvements for which financial security was posted pursuant to Section
509) of those improvements required as a condition for final approval have
been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the project
will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Richland, County of Cambria,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP REPRESENTATIVE — The person or persons designated by the
Board of Supervisors to receive, review and/or inspect subdivision and/or
land development plans and improvements.
Major streets or highways are those designed for heavy or fast
intercommunity traffic, including all four-lane highways within the
township.
A.
Collector streets are those which serve to collect and distribute
volumes of traffic from local residential streets to major streets. They
are designed to carry the intermediate volumes of community traffic.
B.
Minor streets are those which are used for access to the abutting
properties and which will carry limited volumes of traffic. These streets
are designed to discourage through traffic.
C.
§ 215-4 RICHLAND CODE § 215-4
215:460
ARTICLE IV
Establishment of Controls
§ 215-5. Types of control.
This chapter contains regulations governing the following: submission
procedures for the review and disposition of subdivision and land
development plans; graphic and written information to be contained on or
filed with such plans; and regulations governing the design and installation
of required improvements, the layout and arrangements of lots and blocks
and the reservation of land for public use.
§ 215-6. New subdivision and land developments.
No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land
shall be made, and no street, sanitary sewer, stormwater, water main or
other improvements in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed,
opened or dedicated for public use or travel, or for the common use of
occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 215-7. Effective date of application.
This chapter shall apply to all plans submitted for initial approval of a
subdivision or land development after the effective date of enactment of this
chapter.
§ 215-8. Existing subdivisions and land developments.
The ordinance of 1991 and any subsequent amendments shall affect plats
as follows:
A. From the time an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary
or final, is duly filed as provided in the subdivision and land
development ordinance, and while such application is pending approval
or disapproval, no change or amendment of the zoning, subdivision or
other governing ordinance or plan shall affect the decision on such
application adversely to the applicant and the applicant shall be
entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was duly
filed. In addition, when a preliminary application has been duly
approved, the applicant shall be entitled to final approval in accordance
with the terms of the approved preliminary application as hereinafter
provided. However, if an application is properly and finally denied, any
subsequent application shall be subject to the intervening change in
governing regulations.
B. When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final,
has been approved without conditions or approved by the applicant's
acceptance of conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in the
zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall be
§ 215-5 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-8
215:461
applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and
to complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance
with the terms of such approval within five years from such approval.
C. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the aforesaid
five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary
approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms of a preliminary
approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of the provisions of
the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time when the
application for such approval was duly filed.
D. Where the landowner has substantially completed the required
improvements as depicted upon the final plat within the aforesaid fiveyear
limit, or any extension thereof as may be granted by the Board of
Supervisors, no change of municipal ordinance or plan enacted
subsequent to the date of filing of the preliminary plat shall modify or
revoke any aspect of the approved final plat pertaining to zoning
classification or density, lot, building, street or utility location.
E. In the case of a preliminary plat calling for the installation of
improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by
the landowner with the preliminary plat delineating all proposed
sections as well as deadlines within which applications for final plat
approval of each section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be
updated annually by the applicant on or before the anniversary of the
preliminary plat approval, until final plat approval of the final section
has been granted and any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall
be subject to approval of the Board of Supervisors in its discretion.
F. Each section in any residential subdivision or land development, except
for the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number
of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser
percentage is approved by the Board of Supervisors in its discretion.
Provided that the landowner has not defaulted with regard to or
violated any of the conditions of the preliminary plat approval,
including compliance with landowner's aforesaid schedule of
submission of final plats for the various sections, then the aforesaid
protections afforded by substantially completing the improvements
depicted upon the final plat within five years shall apply and for any
section or sections, beyond the initial section, in which the required
improvements have not been substantially completed within said fiveyear
period the aforesaid protections shall apply for an additional term
or terms of three years from the date of final plat approval for each
section.
G. Failure of landowner to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of submission
of final plats for the various sections shall subject any such section to
any and all changes in zoning, subdivision and other governing
ordinance enacted by the township subsequent to the date of the initial
preliminary plan submission.
§ 215-8 RICHLAND CODE § 215-9
215:462
§ 215-9. Relationship with other restrictions.
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to interfere with, abrogate
or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, provided that where this
chapter imposes a greater restriction than that imposed by such other
rules, easements, covenants, restrictions, regulations or ordinances, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 215-10. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any subdivision or land development
expressly exempted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended,155 or other laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or to
property owned by the township.
155. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 215-9 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-10
215:463

ARTICLE V
Plan Review Procedures
§ 215-11. General stages of review.
Tentative subdivision and land development plans shall be reviewed by
the Township Planning Commission and shall be approved or not approved
by the Township Board of Supervisors in accordance with the procedures
specified in this article. Unless specifically exempted, all plans shall be
reviewed in two stages, preliminary and final.
§ 215-12. Preapplication conference.
A potential applicant for subdivision or land development, all or part of
which is situate in the township, may request a conference with the
Planning Commission for the purpose of discussing or reviewing such
proposed subdivision or land development.
§ 215-13. Preliminary review of plan.
All applications for township approval of subdivision and land development
plans shall commence with the official submission of a plan and all required
supplementary data to the Township Secretary. All applications for
preliminary review of a plan shall be acted upon by the township within
such time limits as established in this chapter, provided that the Board of
Supervisors shall render its decision and communicate it to the applicant
not later than 90 days after the date of the next regular meeting of the
Planning Commission following the date the application is filed, provided
that should said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days following
the filing of the application, said ninety-day period shall be measured from
the 13th day following the day the application was filed. At any time during
the review process, the applicant may substitute an amended plan for that
A. The preapplication conference shall not be mandatory and shall not be
regarded as formal application for subdivision or land development.
The filing of any report, sketch plan, plat or map prior to or at such
conference shall not constitute submission of a plan or application for
land development or subdivision.
B. Any report, sketch plan, plat or map to be considered by the Planning
Commission at such conference shall be provided by the potential
applicant in three copies and the Township Secretary shall distribute a
copy of the same to the Township Planning Commission and the
Township Engineer or township representative for information
purposes only.
C. The Planning Commission may, at its sole discretion, make or refuse to
make recommendations as the result of the preapplication conference.
Any recommendations made by the Planning Commission at or in
response to the preapplication conference shall not be binding upon the
Planning Commission in its review of the plan after formal application.
§ 215-11 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-13
215:465
originally submitted solely for the purpose of correcting the original plan to
the extent necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
A. A plan shall be deemed to have been submitted for preliminary review
when the applicant has furnished to the Township Secretary the
following documents:
(1) One copy of a completed application for subdivision or land
development, plus payment of all application fees.
(2) Five copies, black (or blue) on white prints, of the plan which shall
fully comply with Articles VI and VII.
B. Upon receipt of the above, the Township Secretary shall forward
immediately one copy of the plan to the Board of Supervisors; the
Township Planning Commission; the Township Engineers or township
representative; and, if the proposed subdivision or land development is
to have direct access to a state or federal highway, the district office of
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) in
Hollidaysburg, Pennsylvania.
C. Review by the Township Planning Commission.
(1) At its next regular meeting, provided that such application was
made at least 14 days prior to the meeting, or at a special meeting
called for that purpose after receipt of the plan, the Planning
Commission may review the plan to determine its conformance to
the provisions contained in these regulations.
(2) The Planning Commission shall notify the Township Board of
Supervisors, in writing, of any recommended action, changes or
modifications to the plan after such decision is made, provided that
the Planning Commission shall make such recommendations within
45 days after the beginning of the ninety-day review period
stipulated above. If review by the Township Planning Commission
results in an unfavorable recommendation because the
requirements of this chapter have not been met, notification to the
Township Board of Supervisors should specify the defects found in
the plan and describe the requirements which have not been met,
and should cite the provisions of this chapter from which such
defects or requirements originate.
D. Review by the Township Board of Supervisors. Upon receipt of the
recommendations of the Planning Commission or upon expiration of 45
days from the beginning of the ninety-day review period stipulated
above, whichever comes first, the plan shall be placed upon the agenda
of the Board of Supervisors for review at its next regularly scheduled
public meeting or, at the Board of Supervisors' discretion, at a special
public meeting to be held for that purpose.
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall review the plan and the written
reports thereon of the Township Planning Commission to determine
§ 215-13 RICHLAND CODE § 215-13
215:466
if the plan meets the provisions contained in these regulations.
Before acting on any plan, the Board of Supervisors may hold a
public hearing thereon after public notice. Prior to final review of
a plan for which off-site sewer or water service is proposed, the
Board of Supervisors shall require, as a condition of preliminary
approval, if water is to be provided by means other than private
wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within
the subdivision or development, that the subdivision or
development is to be supplied by a certificated public utility, a
bona fide cooperative association of lot owners or by a municipal
corporation, authority or utility. A copy of the certificate of public
convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or
an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever
is appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.
(2) The decision of the Township Board of Supervisors shall be in
writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or
mailed to him at his last known address not later than 15 days
following the decision.
(a) If the plan receives preliminary approval by the Township
Board of Supervisors, the action of the Board of Supervisors
shall be noted, together with the date of action and signature
of the Chairman and Secretary, on two copies of the plan. One
copy of the plan shall be given to the applicant, while the other
copy shall be retained in the township files. After the
signatures are obtained, the applicant may immediately begin
to lay out all lots, parcels, blocks, easements and rights-of-way
and construct all streets, sanitary sewage disposal systems,
water supply systems, storm drainage facilities and
monuments in accordance with the approved plan, but no
parcel or lot may be conveyed or recorded until after final
approval of the plat.
(b) If the plan is not approved, the decision shall specify the
defects found in the plan and describe the requirements which
have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of
this chapter from which such defects or requirements
originate.
(c) Within 30 days after the issuance of the decision, the applicant
may submit a corrected plan for review by the Township Board
of Supervisors. If submitted, the Board of Supervisors shall
consider the plan at a regularly scheduled meeting or at a
special meeting held within 45 days after resubmission. A plan
resubmitted under this action need not be sent to any planning
commission prior to consideration by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 215-13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-13
215:467
§ 215-14. Final review of plan.
A plan shall be officially submitted to the Township Secretary for final
township review after all improvements indicated on the plan receiving
preliminary approval have been installed or, in lieu of the completion of the
improvements, after deposit with the township of a corporate bond or other
security acceptable to the Township Board of Supervisors in accordance
with Subsections D(1) and (2). All plans which have received preliminary
approval shall be entitled to final approval in accordance with the terms of
the approved preliminary application for a period of five years from the date
of the preliminary approval.
[1] If the plan as resubmitted corrects all the defects cited in
the denial, the Township Board of Supervisors shall
approve the corrected plan.
[2] If changes are made by the applicant which were not cited
as defects in the plan by the Township Board of
Supervisors in their decision disapproving the plan, such
plan may be considered as a new plan and must be
submitted for approval in accordance with § 215-13 of this
article.
(3) Failure of the Township Board of Supervisors to render a decision
and communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the
manner required herein shall be deemed an approval of the plan in
terms as presented unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to
an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation of communication of the decision, in which case,
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
A. All applications for final approval of a plan shall be acted upon by the
township within such time limits as established in this chapter, provided
that the Board of Supervisors shall render its decision and
communicate it to the applicant not later than 90 days after the date of
the next regular meeting of the Board of Supervisors following the date
the application is filed, provided that should said next regular meeting
occur more than 30 days following the filing of the application, said
ninety-day period shall be measured from the 13th day following the
day the application was filed. The plan shall conform to that which
received preliminary approval by the Township Board of Supervisors,
including all conditions and modifications attached hereto.
(1) In the case where subdivision and land development is projected
over a period of years, the Board of Supervisors may authorize final
review of the plan by sections or stages of development subject to
such requirements or guaranties as to improvements in future
sections or stages of development as it finds essential for the
protection of any finally approved section or stage of development.
In each such case, prior to preliminary approval of the plan, the
§ 215-13 RICHLAND CODE § 215-14
215:468
Board of Supervisors and the developer shall enter into a written
agreement specifying the sequence of development of sections
or stages, the maximum time permitted the developer for final
submission of the plan for each subsection, and any other
requirements or guaranties as are applicable to that particular
development. Where development is permitted in stages, all
improvements installed subsequent to the 50th anniversary of
preliminary approval of the plan shall conform to standards for
such improvements in effect at the time of installation of the same.
(2) Final official submission of the plan to the Township Board of
Supervisors shall consist of six copies of black (or blue) on white
prints of the plan, which shall fully comply with Article IX, § 215-43,
of these regulations and the conditions for which the plan received
preliminary approval, plus financial security specified in
Subsection D; all offers of dedication and deeds of easements to the
municipality; and all other required documents.
B. Review by the Township Board of Supervisors. Upon receipt of the
material listed in Subsection A(2), the Township Secretary shall forward
one copy of the plan to the Township Board of Supervisors; the
Township Planning Commission; the Township Engineers and/or
representatives; and, if the proposed subdivision or land development is
to have direct access to a state or federal highway, the district office of
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation in Hollidaysburg,
Pennsylvania.
(1) The final review of the plan shall be conducted by the Township
Board of Supervisors in the same manner as prescribed for
preliminary review of the plan specified in § 215-13D, except that
final review shall be limited to determining if: the plan conforms to
the plan which received preliminary approval, including all
conditions and modifications required by the Township Board of
Supervisors; and the requirements for final plan review as listed
under Article IX, § 215-43, of this chapter have been met.
(2) As a condition of approval, the applicant shall permit the Township
Engineer and/or representative to make periodic site inspections of
such nature and extent as is necessary to ensure that the required
improvements are being installed and constructed in conformity
with the design standards contained herein or otherwise specified
in the preliminary approval of the plan. The township may charge a
review fee or fees according to a schedule adopted by the Board of
Supervisors by resolution. In no event shall the review fees exceed
the rate or cost charged by the engineer or consultant.
(3) If the applicant has completed all of the required improvements, he
shall notify the Township Board of Supervisors, in writing, by
certified or registered mail, of the completion of the improvements
and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer and/or
representative. The Board of Supervisors hereby directs and
§ 215-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-14
215:469
authorizes the Township Engineer and/or representative to make
a final inspection of all the aforesaid improvements after receipt
of such notice. The Township Engineer and/or representative shall,
thereupon, file a written report with the Board of Supervisors
and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the applicant by
certified or registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed
within 30 days after the receipt by the Township Engineer and/
or representative of the aforesaid authorization from the Board
of Supervisors. The report shall be detailed and shall indicate
approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in
part, and if the improvements or any portion thereof shall not be
approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer and/or
representative, the report shall contain a statement of the reasons
for such nonapproval or rejection. For subdivisions and land
developments served by off-site sewer and water service, the
Engineer and/or representative shall coordinate his review with
that of the appropriate authorities and/or companies providing
such service to ensure that the provisions of this chapter are met.
(a) The Board of Supervisors shall notify the applicant, in writing,
by certified or registered mail, of action taken with relation to
the improvements.
(b) If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer and/or
representative fail to comply with the time limitation
provisions contained herein, all improvements will be deemed
to have been approved and the applicant shall be released from
all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other
security agreement.
(c) If any portion of said improvements shall not be approved or
shall be rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the applicant
shall proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the
same procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be
followed.
C. No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plat
have been improved as may be required by this chapter and any curbs,
gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary sewer, storm
drains and other improvements as are required by this chapter have
been installed in accordance with this chapter.
D. Financial security.
(1) In lieu of the completion of any improvements required as a
condition for the final approval of a plan, the applicant or
subdivider shall provide for deposit with the township financial
security in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of any
improvements or common amenities, including but not limited to
roads, stormwater detention and/or retention basins and other
related drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open space
§ 215-14 RICHLAND CODE § 215-14
215:470
improvements, or buffer or screen plantings which may be
required. When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate
financing, the Board of Supervisors shall furnish the developer with
a signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final plat
contingent upon the developer obtaining a satisfactory financial
security. The final plat or record plan shall not be signed nor
recorded until the financial improvements agreement is executed.
The resolution or letter of contingent approval shall expire and be
deemed to be revoked if the financial security agreement is not
executed within 90 days unless a written extension is granted by
the Board of Supervisors; such extension shall not be unreasonably
withheld and shall be placed, in writing, at the request of the
developer. Without limitation as to other types of financial security
which the township may approve, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld, the following shall be deemed acceptable
financial security for the purpose of this section:
(a) Federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts
in such lending institutions. Such financial security shall be
posted with a bonding company or federal or commonwealth
chartered lending institution chosen by the party posting the
financial security, provided that said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business
within the commonwealth.
(b) Such bond or other security shall provide for, and secure to the
public, the completion of any improvements which may be
required within one year of the date fixed in the subdivision
plan for the completion of such improvements.
(c) The amount of financial security shall be equal to 110% of the
cost of the required improvements for which financial security
is to be posted. The amount of financial security to be posted
for the completion of the required improvements shall be equal
to 110% of the cost of completion estimated as of 90 days
following the date scheduled for completion by the developer.
Annually, the Board of Supervisors may adjust the amount of
the financial security by comparing the actual cost of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated
cost for the completion of the remaining improvements as of
the expiration of the 90th day after either the original date
scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of completion.
Subsequent to said adjustment, the Board of Supervisors may
require the developer to post additional security in order to
assure that the financial security equals said 110%. Any
additional security shall be posted by the developer in
accordance with this subsection. The amount of financial
security required shall be based upon an estimate of the cost of
completion of the required improvements, submitted by an
§ 215-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-14
215:471
applicant or developer and prepared by a professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified
by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such
cost. The Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of
the Township Engineer and/or representative, may refuse to
accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant
or developer and the Board of Supervisors are unable to agree
upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and
recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such
in this commonwealth and chosen mutually by the Board of
Supervisors and the applicant or developer. The estimate
certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and
reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that
a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said
engineer shall be paid equally by the Board of Supervisors and
the applicant or developer.
(d) If the party posting the financial security requires more than
one year from the date of posting of the financial security to
complete the required improvements, the amount of financial
security may be increased by an additional 10% for each oneyear
period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of
financial security or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the
cost of completing the required improvements as
reestablished, on or about the expiration of the preceding oneyear
period by using the above bidding procedure.
(2) In the case where development is projected over a period of years,
the Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of final plans by
section or stages of development subject to such requirements or
guaranties as to improvements in future sections or stages of
development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally
approved section of the development.
(3) As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Board of
Supervisors to release, or authorize the release of, from time to
time, such portions of the financial security necessary for payment
to the contractor or contractors performing the work.
(a) Such requests shall be in writing, addressed to the Board of
Supervisors, and the Board of Supervisors shall have 45 days
from receipt of such request within which to allow the
Township Engineer and/or representative to certify, in writing,
to the Board of Supervisors that such portion of the work upon
the improvements has been completed in accordance with the
authorized plan.
(b) Upon such certification, the Board of Supervisors shall
authorize release by the bonding company or lending
institution of an amount as estimated by the Township
§ 215-14 RICHLAND CODE § 215-14
215:472
§ 215-15. Release from improvement bond.
Engineer and/or representative fairly representing the value of
the improvements completed, or if the Board of Supervisors
fails to act within said forty-five-day period, the Board of
Supervisors shall be deemed to have approved the release of
funds, as requested. The Board of Supervisors may, prior to
final release at the time of completion and certification by its
Engineer and/or representative, require retention of 10% of
the estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
(4) Where the Board of Supervisors accepts dedication of all or some of
the required improvements following completion, the Board of
Supervisors may require the posting of financial security to secure
structural integrity of said improvements, as well as the
functioning of said improvements in accordance with the design
and specifications as depicted on the final plan for a term not to
exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication.
(a) Said financial securities shall be of the same type as otherwise
required in this section with regard to installation of such
improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall
not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said
improvements.
(b) If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with
apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be installed under
the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a
public utility or municipal authority separate and distinct from
the township, financial security to assure proper completion
and maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with
the regulations of the controlling public utility or municipal
authority and shall not be included within the financial security
as otherwise required by this section.
A. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, the developer shall notify the Board of Supervisors, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township
Engineer and/or representative. The Board of Supervisors shall, within
10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Township
Engineer and/or representative to inspect all of the aforesaid
improvements. The Township Engineer and/or representative shall,
thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the Board of Supervisors, and
shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or
registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days
after receipt by the Township Engineer and/or representative of the
aforesaid authorization from the Board of Supervisors; said report shall
be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of
aid,improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said improvements
or any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the
§ 215-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-15
215:473
Township Engineer and/or representative, said report shall contain a
statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall notify the developer, within 15 days of
receipt of the Engineer's and/or representative's report, in writing, by
certified or registered mail, of the action of said Board of Supervisors
with relation thereto.
C. If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer and/or
representative fails to comply with the time limitation provisions
contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have been
approved and the developer shall be released from all liability, pursuant
to its performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.
D. If any portion of said improvements shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the developer shall proceed to
complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
E. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question, by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Board of Supervisors or the
Township Engineer and/or representative.
F. Where herein reference is made to the Township Engineer and/or
representative, he shall be as a consultant thereto.
G. The township may prescribe that the applicant shall reimburse the
township for the reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the
inspection of improvements. Such reimbursement shall be based upon a
schedule established by ordinance or resolution. Such expense shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees
charged by the Township Engineer and/or representative and/or
consultant for work performed for similar services in the community,
but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the
engineer and/or representative or consultant to the township when fees
are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
(1) In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any such
expense in connection with the inspection of improvements, the
applicant shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify
the Board of Supervisors that such expenses are disputed as
unreasonable or unnecessary, in which case the Board of
Supervisors shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land
development application or any approval or permit related to
development due to the applicant's request over disputed engineer
expenses.
(2) If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Board of Supervisors
and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which
are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and Board of
Supervisors shall jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another
§ 215-15 RICHLAND CODE § 215-15
215:474
§ 215-16. Record plan.
After completion of the procedures required by these regulations, and after
final approval by the Board of Supervisors, all endorsements shall be so
indicated on the approved plan and on as many other copies of the plan as
may be desired by the Board of Supervisors. Upon approval and signing of
the plan by the Board of Supervisors, a record plan shall be recorded in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cambria County by the applicant within
90 days of such approval and signing. Such recording shall be otherwise
in conformity with § 513 of the Municipalities Planning Code.156 Within 10
days after the Recorder of Deeds has properly recorded a subdivision or
land development plan, a copy of such shall be forwarded to the Township
Secretary by the applicant, including the endorsement of the Recorder of
Deeds.
professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to review said expenses and make a determination as
to the amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the Board of Supervisors and applicant cannot
agree upon the professional engineer to be appointed within 20
days of the billing date, then, upon application of either party, the
President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial
district in which the municipality is located (or, if at the time there
be no President Judge, then the senior active judge then sitting)
shall appoint such engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the
Municipal Engineer and/or representative nor any professional
engineer who has been retained by or performed services for the
Board of Supervisors or the applicant within the preceding five
years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Board of Supervisors shall pay the fee of the professional engineer,
but otherwise the township and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of
the fee of the appointed professional engineer.
156. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10513.
§ 215-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-17
215:475
§ 215-17. Review of minor subdivisions.
All subdivisions or land developments having an area of three acres or less
and/or which do not require the installation of streets, storm drain facilities
or curbs, and is not adjoined by other unplatted land in the same ownership,
are exempt from the requirement to have a preliminary review and may
commence final approval procedures by only having one plan submission,
and the plan shall be considered in all respects a final plan, subject to the
same endorsement of approval as any other final plan. In order to expedite
the plan approval, the applicant shall submit his intentions to the Planning
Commission for review, prior to the preparation and submission of the final
plan to the Board of Supervisors. The plan shall show the same engineering
information otherwise required and the submission shall include all other
information as required by this chapter. No construction may commence
until the plan has received final approval by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 215-18. Adjoining land merger subdivision.
A. Definition. The term "adjoining land merger subdivision," as used
herein, is intended to include only those subdivisions which divide a
single lot, tract or parcel of land, or a part thereof, into two or more
lots, tracts or parcels of land, all of which shall be conveyed to the
owner(s) of abutting lot(s), tract(s) or parcel(s) of land for the
enlargement thereof and merger therein. In addition, the term
"adjoining land merger subdivision," as used herein, is intended to
include only those subdivisions which do not plan, propose or require
for their completion, or their compliance with applicable law, the
construction, erection, extension, improvement or alteration of any
public or private street, water line, sewer line, storm drainage line,
watercourse or public work. The term "adjoining land merger
subdivision," as used herein, also is intended to include only those
subdivisions which can be completed and fully used or enjoyed in
accordance with applicable law without the construction or
improvement of any public facilities and without the creation or
extension of any public service.
B. Plan requirements.
(1) Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, a submission
for approval of an adjoining land merger subdivision shall consist of
at least an original and five copies of the deed descriptions of the
properties proposed to be increased and/or diminished by the plan
along with an original and five copies of legible black line or blue
line paper prints and one print on linen and two on Mylars of a plat
of said property drawn to a scale which permits the information
required in this section to be read without enlargement when
presented to the Township Board of Supervisors and its Planning
Commission. After approval, said plan shall be placed on a medium
which is sized and prepared in a manner acceptable for recording
by the Recorder of Deeds in and for Cambria County, Pennsylvania.
§ 215-17 RICHLAND CODE § 215-18
215:476
(2) An adjoining land merger subdivision plan shall show or contain the
following information:
(a) The date, including the month, day and year, that the plan was
completed and the date of each revision.
(b) The name of the record owner of the tract to be subdivided and
the name of the record owner of the tract, lot or parcel into
which part of the subdivided land shall be merged.
(c) The name, address, license number and seal of the professional
land surveyor responsible for the subdivision plan.
(d) A key map for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided, drawn at a scale which permits the information
required by this section to be read without enlargement as set
forth elsewhere in this section.
(e) The total tract boundaries of the property being subdivided,
the property being conveyed for merger; and the tract, lot or
parcel into which part of the subdivided land shall be merged.
(f) All residue property must conform with all existing township
zoning ordinances and regulations. No parcel may be
subdivided which will create a nonconforming lot or building
setback.
(g) All existing buildings or other structures shall be shown upon
the land being subdivided and/or the property into which the
conveyed land shall be merged.
(h) All existing streets (public or private) which abut, being within
or are recorded as lying within the property being subdivided
and/or the property into which the conveyed land shall be
merged shall be shown.
(i) All property corners of the new lot(s) of parcel(s) or tract(s)
must be identified with iron pins of five-eighths-inch diameter
or larger.
(j) Information to be transcribed on plat:
1. I hereby certify that the plan shown and described hereon,
as well as all drawings bearing my seal, are true and
correct to the accuracy required by the Richland Township
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations, and were
prepared by me or under my direction and for which
I accept full responsibility. The iron pins have been
accurately.placed as required by Article V, § 215-18.
(2)
_______________,
_________
_______________(1)________
§ 215-18 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-18
215:477
(1) Signature of the registered surveyor responsible for
the preparation of the plan.
(2) Apply seal of the surveyor.
2. Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania
County of
Cambria SS
On this, the _________ day of ______________ _____, before
me the undersigned officer, personally appeared
_________________, who being duly sworn according to law,
deposes and says that he is the _____________(1)___________
of the property shown on this plan, that the subdivision
plan thereof was made at his/its direction, that he
acknowledges the same to be his/its act and plan
__________(2)______________________, and that all streets
___________(3)__________ shown and not heretofore
dedicated are hereby dedicated to the public use
___________(4)_____________________________.
_______(5)_______ ____________(6)________________
(7)
______________(8)______
(9)
My commission expires ___________
(1) Insert either:
owner
equitable owner
President of the (name of corporation)
which is the owner
(2) Whenever applicable, insert: "and desires the same to
be recorded as such according to law"
(3) Whenever applicable, insert: "rights-of-way and other
sites for public use"
(4) If necessary, insert: "except those labeled 'not for
dedication' " (and other restrictions or reservations)
(5) Where necessary, signature of secretary of
corporation
(6) Signature of individual, of partners or of President of
corporation
(7) If necessary, Corporate Seal
(8) Signature and (9) seal of notary public or other
officer
§ 215-18 RICHLAND CODE § 215-18
215:478
3. Approved by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of
Richland Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, at a
public meeting held on the _____ day of __________ ______.
Township Seal
__________________________________
__________________________________
__________________________________
__________________________________
__________________________________
C. Preliminary review exemption. All adjoining land merger subdivisions
are exempt from the requirement to have a preliminary review and may
commence final approval procedures by only having one plan
submission and the plan shall be considered in all respects a final plan,
subject to the same endorsement of approval as any other final plan.
The plan shall show the information required by Subsection B(2) above.
The time periods for review by the Planning Commission and the Board
of Supervisors shall be as set forth in Article V.
D. Deed recording requirements. Upon approval and signing of the plan by
the Board of Supervisors, the approved plat shall be recorded at the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cambria County, Pennsylvania, by the
applicant along with a deed combining the descriptions of the
subdivided parcel with the land to which it is to be joined within 90 days
of such approval and signing. Proof of such recordings shall be provided
to the township.
§ 215-18 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-18
215:479

ARTICLE VI
Design Standards
§ 215-19. General provisions.
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets,
lots and blocks shall conform to the following design standards.
§ 215-20. Land requirements.
Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided.
§ 215-21. Types of streets.
A. Minor streets shall be so laid out as to discourage through traffic, but
provisions for street connections into and from adjacent areas will
generally be required.
B. Half streets shall be prohibited except to complete an existing half
street in an adjacent tract.
C. Dead-end streets are permitted as temporary stubs for future street
extensions into adjoining property where in the opinion of the Planning
Commission it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining
property and shall be paved and placed with curbing and shall be
extended by dedication to the boundary of such property.
D. Dead-end streets are permitted when designed as culs-de-sac, where
the length does not exceed 600 feet and where a turnaround or cul-desac
with a minimum inside curb of 50 feet as a turning space for
vehicles is provided and a radius of 63 feet at the right-of-way (property
line) is provided.
E. Private streets (streets not offered for dedication) are prohibited within
developments where it is anticipated that the majority of the dwellings
or other structures are to be owned by separate individuals rather than
jointly by a person, firm or corporation. When private streets are
permitted, they shall meet design standards of these regulations.
F. Alleys shall be prohibited except where found to be necessary.
G. Where a subdivision abuts an existing street of improper width or
alignment, the Planning Commission may require the dedication of land
sufficient to widen the street or correct the alignment.
H. Provisions for additional street width (right-of-way, cartway or both)
may be required when determined to be necessary by the Planning
Commission in specific cases:
(1) For public safety and convenience.
(2) In commercial and industrial areas and in areas of high-density
development.
§ 215-19 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-21
215:481
§ 215-22. Street specifications.
I. No utilities shall be located within the roadway between the curbs.
A. Street width and paving width. Widths shall be as follows:
Type of Street
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Paving Width
(feet)
Major 80 As per PennDOT
specifications
Collector 50 24
Minor 50 24
B. Street alignment and grade.
(1) Streets shall be logically related to the terrain and topography so
as to produce usable roads with reasonable alignments and grades.
(2) Whenever street center lines are deflected in excess of 1º,
connection shall be made by horizontal curves. Tangents shall be
required between curves.
(3) Minimum center line radii for horizontal curves shall be as shown
as follows:
Type of Street
Center Line Radius
(feet)
Major As per PennDOT specifications
Collector 300
Minor 200
(4) Vertical curves shall be used wherever changes in grades (or slope)
exceed 1% and shall be corrected by a vertical curve of sufficient
length to afford easy transition.
(5) Center line grades shall not be less than 1% and shall not be
greater than as follows:
Type of Street
Center Line Grades
(percent)
Major As per PennDOT specifications
Collector 10.0%
Minor 10.0%
Cul-de-sac streets 10.0%
Cul-de-sac turnarounds 3.0%
§ 215-21 RICHLAND CODE § 215-22
215:482
§ 215-23. Lots and lot dimensions.
Lot dimensions and areas shall be not less than specified by the provisions
of Chapter 240, Zoning, as amended, or a minimum of frontage of at least
50 feet on the street, whichever is greater, unless a variance is first granted
under the provisions of said chapter; however, no parcel may be subdivided
which will create a nonconforming lot or building setback.
§ 215-24. Blocks.
C. All streets shall have a crown of four inches from the center line down
to the curb to facilitate adequate drainage.
D. Streets.
(1) No intersection shall involve the junction of more than two streets.
(2) Angle of intersections shall be at right angles (90º) and shall follow
a straight line for a distance of at least 100 feet from the
intersection center lines.
(3) Intersections shall be approached on all sides by a straight leveling
area, the grade of which shall not exceed 5% within 50 feet of the
intersection of the nearest right-of-way line.
(4) Arcs for intersecting street right-of-way (property lines) lines shall
be parallel to curb arcs.
E. Street intersections curbing shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a
minimum inside curb radius as follows:
(1) Twenty feet for intersections involving only minor streets.
(2) Thirty feet for all intersections involving a collector street.
(3) Forty feet for all intersections involving a major street.
F. Streets intersecting another street shall either intersect directly
opposite to each other or shall be separated by at least 150 feet
between center lines measured along the center line of the street being
intersected.
G. Streetlighting shall be installed as per specifications by the local
electric company and approved by the township.
H. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited.
A. Blocks shall not exceed 1,600 feet in length nor be less than 300 feet.
B. Blocks should have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of
appropriate depth.
§ 215-22 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-25
215:483
§ 215-25. Easements for utilities.
Utility easements shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width and shall be
located along side or rear lot lines wherever possible and shall include 7 1/
2 feet of lots abutting in the rear or side. All utility lines, cables, conduits
and/or pipes shall be underground.
§ 215-25 RICHLAND CODE § 215-25
215:484
ARTICLE VII
Improvement Requirements
§ 215-26. Completion of improvements.
The subdivider or land developer shall complete or assure the completion
of the following improvements as a prerequisite to the approval of the final
plat.
§ 215-27. Street construction standards.
A. General.
(1) All streets shall be graded to the grades shown on the street profile
and cross-section plans submitted with the approved preliminary
and final plans.
(2) The slope of banks outside of the right-of-way line along streets
measured perpendicular to the street center line shall be no
steeper than the following:
(a) Fills: one foot of vertical measurement for three feet of
horizontal measurement.
(b) Cuts: one foot of vertical measurement for two feet of
horizontal measurement.
(3) Concrete streets are prohibited.
B. Inspections. Inspections shall be as follows:
(1) All street construction shall be subject to inspection at any time by
the township or its agent.
(2) Inspection at the following stages shall be made prior to the start of
subsequent stages:
(a) Inspection and approval of the subgrade immediately prior to
the installation of the base course.
(b) Inspection and approval of the base course immediately prior
to the installation of the binder course.
(c) Inspection and approval of the binder course immediately prior
to the installation of the wearing course.
(3) Final inspection of the completed roadway and related
improvements.
(4) The developer shall notify the township a minimum of 24 hours in
advance of each required inspection.
§ 215-26 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-27
215:485
C. Specifications. The subgrade, base course and surface grade of new
subdivisions or land development streets shall be constructed
according to the following specifications:
(1) Collector streets and major streets.
(a) Subgrade.
[1] Prior to the installation of the base course, the subgrade
shall be prepared according to the specifications set forth
in Section 210 of the PennDOT Specifications, Form 408,
1990, as amended, or the latest revised edition.
[2] Pipe underdrains shall be installed according to the
specifications set forth in Section 210 of the PennDOT
Specifications, Publication Form 408, 1990, as amended,
or the latest revised edition.
(b) Base course.
[1] The base course shall consist of 10 inches of compacted
crushed stone constructed according to the specifications
set forth in Section 310 of the PennDOT Specifications,
Publication Form 408, 1990, as amended, or the latest
revised edition.
[2] As an alternative, a bituminous concrete base course with
a minimum compacted thickness of five inches may be
constructed according to the specifications set forth in
Section 305 of the PennDOT Specifications, Publication
Form 408, 1990, as amended, or the latest revised edition.
(c) Surface course.
[1] The surface course shall consist of a binder course with a
compacted thickness of four inches and a wearing course
with a compacted thickness of two inches.
[2] Both the binder and surface course shall be prepared and
constructed in accordance with the requirements of
Section 401 of the PennDOT Specifications, Publication
Form 408, 1990, as amended, or the latest revised edition.
(2) Minor streets and culs-de-sac. Minor streets and culs-de-sac shall
be constructed to the same specifications as set forth for collector
streets, except that:
(a) The base course shall consist of eight inches of compacted
crushed stone constructed according to Section 310 of the
PennDOT Specifications, Publication Form 408, 1990, as
amended, or the latest revised edition.
§ 215-27 RICHLAND CODE § 215-27
215:486
§ 215-28. Storm drains and drainage facilities.
§ 215-29. Curbs.
Curbs shall be required on all streets. All gutters and curbs shall be
installed by the subdivider in accordance with township specifications as
adopted by resolution by the Board of Supervisors from time to time.
§ 215-30. Sewage disposal.
§ 215-31. Water supply.
Water supply shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the
water authority serving that area. If water is to be provided by means other
than private wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots
within the subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence
to the township that the subdivision or development is to be supplied by a
certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners or
by a municipal corporation, authority or other utility. A copy of a certificate
of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or
(b) The surface course shall consist of a binder course with a
compacted thickness of three inches and a wearing course with
a compacted thickness of 1 1/2 inches constructed according
to Section 310 of the PennDOT Specifications, Publication
Form 408, 1990, as amended, or the latest revised edition.
A. Adequate stormwater drainage facilities shall be installed to control
water runoff on subdivision streets. Said facilities shall be constructed
and approved as for resolution No. 18 of 1989 or any subsequent
amendment thereto, which resolution is incorporated herein by
reference.
B. All storm drains and drainage facilities, such as gutters, manholes,
inlets, bridges, culverts and underground piping, when necessary, shall
be installed and the land graded for adequate drainage as shown on the
surface drainage plan submitted and approved with the preliminary
plan. A detailed plan of storm drainage culverts, drains and inlets shall
be submitted.
C. All construction of improvements shall be in conformance with the
provisions of Chapter 204, Soil Erosion and Grading, as amended.
A. All sewage disposal shall be in accordance with the Sewage Facilities
Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as amended.157
B. All sanitary sewers shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the Highland Sewer and Water Authority, based upon
the rules and regulations of the Authority.
157. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 215-27 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-31
215:487
application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment
or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall
be acceptable evidence.
§ 215-32. Monuments and markers.
Permanent reference monuments of precast concrete or poured on-site
concrete shall be installed by a professional land surveyor, as that term is
defined by Act No. 367 of 1990. Precast monuments shall be at least six
inches square at the top and bottom and at least 30 inches in depth, with
a steel dowel. Poured on-site monuments shall be at least nine inches in
diameter and at least 30 inches in depth, with a steel dowel. Monuments
shall be set at all corners and angle points of the boundaries of the original
tract to be subdivided prior to approval of the plat. Markers shall be
installed at all lot corners and shall consist of iron or steel bars at least 18
inches long and not less than three-fourths-inch in diameter.
§ 215-33. Community facilities.
As a condition precedent to the final plan approval, the applicant or
developer, upon agreement with the township, shall dedicate land for the
construction of recreational facilities, pay fees in lieu thereof or reserve
private land, or a combination thereof, for park or recreational purposes
as provided for in the Richland Township Planning and Feasibility Study
of 1987 and the Richland Township Recreation Action Plan of 1976. The
standards for determining the proportion of a development to be dedicated
and/or the amount of any fee to be paid in lieu thereof shall be as follows:
A. Land within residential subdivisions to be dedicated to the township for
community facilities shall be calculated as follows:
Number of Lots
Land to be Dedicated
(square feet)
1 to 9 N/A
10 to 25 15,000
26 to 50 32,000
51 to 75 55,000
76 to 100 75,000
101 to 150 100,000
151 to 200 135,000
201 to 250 150,000
251 to 300 180,000
B. The fee in lieu of the dedication of public land or the reservation of
private land shall be set by the Board of Supervisors, by resolution, and
shall be an amount per lot for the purchase of recreational equipment
and/or the repair or maintenance of recreation facilities presently
§ 215-31 RICHLAND CODE § 215-33
215:488
§ 215-34. Street signs.
Street signs shall be installed at all intersections by the subdivider or land
developer, in accordance with the township's standards, as may be set from
time to time by resolution.
§ 215-35. Swimming pools.
Swimming pools and their sanitary facilities shall be constructed in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, and before construction can be started, a
permit to construct and operate the pools must be obtained from the
Sanitary Water Board and under the certificate of a registered professional
engineer. Access roads, if adjacent to present or future residential areas,
shall contain buffer zones.
§ 215-36. Fire hydrants.
A suitable hydrant fire protection system shall be installed by the subdivider
or land developer in accordance with the specifications of the water
authority serving that area.
§ 215-37. Streetlights.
The applicant shall cause to be installed, at the applicant's expense,
streetlights adequate for the area and type of intensity of use. Such
installation shall be in accordance with a plan prepared by the applicant's
engineer and approved by the electric company, in consultation with the
Township Engineer and/or representative. The applicant shall be
responsible for all costs involved in lighting the streets until such time that
the streets are accepted as public streets by the township.
existing within the township recreational system accessible to the
development and as are specified at the time of payment upon
agreement of the township and the developer.
C. The fee authorized under this section shall, upon its receipt by the
township, be deposited in an interest-bearing account, clearly
identifying the specific recreational facilities for which the fee was
received. Interest earned on such account shall become funds of that
account. Funds from such account shall be expended only in properly
allocable portions of the cost incurred to construct and/or repair the
specific recreational facilities for which the funds were collected.
D. Upon request of any person who paid any fee under this section, the
township shall refund said fee, plus interest accumulated thereon, from
the date of payment, if the township has failed to utilize the fee paid for
the purposes set forth in this section within three years from the date
such fee was paid.
§ 215-33 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-38
215:489
§ 215-38. Filing plans and profiles.
Upon completion of the improvements in a subdivision or land development,
plans and profiles of the same as constructed shall be filed with the
Township Supervisors in the form of as-built.
§ 215-39. Cemeteries and burial grounds.
Where a cemetery or burial ground is located on a lot affected by a
subdivision or land development, the Board of Supervisors must be assured
of the future care and maintenance thereof.
§ 215-38 RICHLAND CODE § 215-39
215:490
ARTICLE VIII
Requirements for Preliminary Plats
§ 215-40. Information required.
The preliminary plat shall conform to the provisions of Articles VI and VII
as set forth in these regulations and shall have the following information
insofar as possible:
A. Map data.
(1) Map scale not less than one inch to 100 feet.
(2) Name of subdivision; names and addresses of the owner; deed book
volume and page; the signatures of the engineer or surveyor, and
the owners of adjacent land; and stamp of engineer or registered
surveyor.
(3) Date, North point and graphic scale.
(4) Acreage of the land to be subdivided.
(5) Boundary lines of the area to be subdivided and bearings and
distances.
(6) Physical features on the site, such as major tree formations,
streams, rock outcrops, drainage ditches, retaining walls, etc.
(7) Existing structures located on the site with a notation of the
existing use and proposed future disposition.
(8) Existing and proposed easements, and their location, width and
purpose.
(9) Controlled topographic mapping with contours at an interval of not
greater than five feet.
(10) Existing streets on and adjacent to the tract and their names,
width, approximate grade and other dimensions as may be
required.
(11) Existing public utilities on and adjacent to the tract, including line
sizes or capacity and location.
(12) Proposed lot lines, lot numbers, streets, street grades, easements,
crosswalks, building setback lines, etc.
(13) Sites, and their acreage, if any, to be dedicated for parks,
playgrounds or other public uses and areas for semipublic
commercial or other use.
(14) A permanent benchmark.
(15) Survey closure information indicated with known error of not more
than one foot in 20,000 feet.
§ 215-40 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-40
215:491
§ 215-41. Fees.
The Board of Supervisors may establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees
and a collection procedure for review and inspection of all applications for
approval of a subdivision or land development plan.
(16) All distances, directions and legal descriptions.
B. Supporting data.
(1) An engineer's report on the feasibility of connecting to the existing
public water and sewage facilities if they are available; or an
engineer's report on the feasibility of installing a community
project-type sewerage disposal system; or an engineer's report on
the feasibility of on-lot water supply and sewerage disposal to
include the results of soil absorption tests and groundwater
availability and quality.
(2) An engineer's plan or report for handling storm drainage if new
streets are to be involved in the proposed subdivision.
A. All such fees shall be payable to the Township of Richland.
B. No plan shall be considered as having been filed or accepted for review,
inspection or approval unless and until all fees are first paid in full.
C. Disputed expenses.
(1) In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any such
expense in connection with the inspection of improvements, the
applicant shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify
the Board of Supervisors that such expenses are disputed as
unreasonable or unnecessary, in which case the Board of
Supervisors shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land
development application or any approval or permit related to
development due to the applicant's request over disputed engineer
expenses.
(2) If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Board of Supervisors
and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which
are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and Board of
Supervisors shall jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another
professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to review said expenses and make a determination as
to the amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
§ 215-40 RICHLAND CODE § 215-41
215:492
(4) In the event that the Board of Supervisors and applicant cannot
agree upon the professional engineer to be appointed within 20
days of the billing date, then, upon application of either party, the
President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial
district in which the municipality is located (or, if at the time there
be no President Judge, then the senior active judge then sitting)
shall appoint such engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the
Township Engineer nor any professional engineer who has been
retained by or performed services for the Board of Supervisors or
the applicant within the preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Board of Supervisors shall pay the fee of the professional engineer,
but otherwise the township and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of
the fee of the appointed professional engineer.
§ 215-41 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-41
215:493

ARTICLE IX
Requirements for Final Plat
§ 215-42. Conformity to preliminary plat.
The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved. It may constitute only a portion of the preliminary plat which the
developer proposes to record and develop.
§ 215-43. Information required.
The following list of specific items shall be adhered to in preparing the final
plat for submission:
A. Map data.
(1) The plat should be at a minimum scale of one inch to 100 feet.
(2) Sheet sizes should conform to the dimensions of the standard
County Plat Book. It may be necessary to break a larger plat into
two or more smaller sheets with match lines in order to conform to
the map scale and Plat Book dimensions. Tracings shall be of
acceptable cloth or Mylar.
(3) All dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data or the plat should
be tied to primary control points as approved by the Township
Engineer and/or representative.
(4) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and
other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other
sites with accurate dimensions to the nearest 1/100 of a foot;
bearings or deflection angles, radii, arcs and central angles of all
curves to the nearest minute.
(5) Name and purpose of each street, easement or reservation.
(6) Lot numbers and minimum building setback lines.
(7) Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets, and the
location and names of owners of adjoining unplatted property.
B. Information to be transcribed on plat.
(1) Certification on plat of title showing that the applicant is the owner
and a statement by such owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way
and any other sites for public use.
(2) Certification on the plat by a registered surveyor or registered
engineer as to the accuracy of the survey and plat.
(3) Certification on the plat that it has been approved by the Board of
Township Supervisors.
§ 215-42 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-43
215:495
(4) Notice that a highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to
Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known
as the "State Highway Law,"158 before driveway access to a state
highway is permitted.
C. Supporting data.
(1) In cases where community project-type water and package-type
sewerage facilities are being planned for the subdivision or in cases
where individual on-lot sewerage disposal and water systems are
being planned, there shall be attached to the final plat a
certification by the Sewerage Enforcement Officer that such
installations as have been planned are acceptable.
(2) Certification by the Township Supervisors that the subdivider has
complied with Article V, § 215-14D, as to assurance of
improvements.
(3) Approved cross sections and profiles of public streets showing
grades, and drawn to scales and elevations acceptable to the
Township Supervisors, shall accompany the final plat.
(4) In the event that protective covenants are to be applied by the
owner to the plan of lots, they shall be placed directly on the final
plat or attached thereto in the form of recording.
(5) A sanitary sewer plan of the facilities to be accepted by the lawful
authority having jurisdiction shall be required in cases where a
connection is made to an existing sewerage system or in a case
where a package-type sewerage treatment installation is involved.
(6) A public water plan of the facilities to be accepted by the lawful
authorities having jurisdiction shall be required in cases where a
connection is made to an existing public water system or in a case
where a community-type distribution system is involved.
(7) A surface drainage plan of the facilities to be accepted by the lawful
authorities having jurisdiction shall be required.
158. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-101 et seq.
§ 215-43 RICHLAND CODE § 215-43
215:496
ARTICLE X
Exceptions to Standard Procedures
§ 215-44. Requests for modification; conditions.
A. Whereas, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this
chapter would result in undue hardship, the Board shall make
reasonable exceptions to the regulations as will not be contrary to the
public interest. The request for modification shall be in writing and
shall accompany and be a part of the application for development. The
request shall state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions of
this chapter involved and the minimum modifications necessary. The
following shall serve as a general guide in determining the issuance of
an exception:
(1) That there exist special physical circumstances or conditions which
render the strict application of the requirements as undue or
unnecessary hardship;
(2) That the hardship created cannot be ameliorated by a reasonable
change in plans;
(3) That the unnecessary or undue hardship has not been created by
the applicant;
(4) That the waiver or varying of the strict terms of this chapter will
not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this
chapter;
(5) That the property cannot be reasonably developed without the
waiver or the varying of the strict terms of this chapter; and
(6) That the waiver or varying of the strict terms of this chapter will
represent the minimum deviation that will afford relief and will
represent the least modification possible of the regulations in issue.
B. In granting such exceptions or modifications, the Township
Supervisors, upon the advice of the Planning Commission, may require
such conditions as will substantially secure the objectives of the
standards or requirements so varied or modified. Financial
disadvantage to the property owners is not in and of itself adequate
proof of hardship within the intent of these regulations.
§ 215-44 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-44
215:497

ARTICLE XI
Remedies and Enforcement
§ 215-45. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final
plat, the Board of Supervisors is hereby granted the power to enforce
any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable
remedies. If proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to
pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Board of Supervisors may, at its
option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision
or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action
to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the
improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or
from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both,
shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by
such.security, and not for any other municipal purpose.
§ 215-46. Preventive remedies.
A. In addition to other remedies, the township may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer, or other
document used in the process of selling or transferring, shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
B. The township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation, without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation, without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
§ 215-45 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-46
215:499
§ 215-47. Violations and penalties.159
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the township, pay a judgment of
not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by the township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence
or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good
faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter
to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall
be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following
the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order
of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.160
C. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the township may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
160. Editor's Note: The resolution regarding the adoption of certain design standards and fees,
which originally accompanied this chapter, is on file in the township offices.
§ 215-46 RICHLAND CODE § 215-47
215:500
Chapter 220
TAXATION
§ 215-47 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 215-47
215:501

ARTICLE I
Mercantile Tax
[Adopted 12-31-1962 by Ord. No. 20]
§ 220-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — Includes cash and credit transactions
and mail order business.
LICENSE YEAR — The calendar year from January 1 to December 31,
and to continue thereafter on a January-to-December basis.[Amended
11-22-1976]
PERSON, WHOLESALE DEALER, WHOLESALE VENDOR, RETAIL DEALER
and RETAIL VENDOR —
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place, indoors or outdoors, where the
general public or a limited or selected number thereof may, upon payment
of an established price, attend or engage in any amusement, contest or
recreation, including, among other places, but not limited to theaters,
outdoor motion-picture theaters, opera houses, motion-picture houses,
amusement parks, stadiums, arenas, baseball or football parks or fields,
skating rinks, circus or carnival tents or grounds, fair grounds, bowling
alleys, billiard or pool rooms, nine- or ten-pin alleys, riding academies, golf
courses, bathing and swimming places, dance halls, tennis courts, archery,
rifle or shotgun ranges, trampoline and go-car courts, and other like places.
The term does not include any exhibition, amusement, performance or
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
association or corporation.
A.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who
sells to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and
defined herein as a retail dealer or retail vendor, and to no other
persons.
B.
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer
in or vendor of goods, wares and merchandise who is not a wholesale
dealer or vendor, and who sells to the general public.
C.
The terms "person," "wholesale dealer," "wholesale vendor," "retail
dealer" and "retail vendor" shall not include nonprofit corporations
organized for religious, charitable or educational purposes; any
association organized for such purposes; agencies of the government
of the United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; or any
person vending or disposing of articles of his own growth, production
or manufacture for shipment or delivery from the place of growth,
production or manufacture thereof.
D.
§ 220-1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-1
215:503
contest conducted by a nonprofit corporation or association organized for
religious, charitable or educational purposes.
TAX COLLECTOR — The Tax Collector appointed by the Supervisors of
Richland Township for the purpose of collecting this tax.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive days.
§ 220-2. Levy and collection of tax. [Amended 11-22-1976]
For the calendar year from January 1 until December 31, the township
hereby imposes an annual mercantile license tax in the manner and at the
rates hereinafter set forth.
§ 220-3. License required; display. [Amended 11-22-1976]
Beginning in the calendar year from January 1 until December 31, every
person desiring to continue to engage in, or hereafter to begin to engage
in, the business of wholesale or retail vendor or dealer in goods, wares and
merchandise, and any person conducting a restaurant or other place where
food, drink or refreshments are sold, or place of amusement, whether or not
the same be incidental to some other business or occupation, shall, on or
before the 15th day of February 1963, procure a mercantile license for his
place of business or, if more than one, for each of his places of business in
the township, from the Tax Collector as required by law. Such license shall
be conspicuously posted at the place of business or each of the places of
business of every person at all times.
§ 220-4. Imposition and rate of tax. [Amended 11-22-1976]
Every person engaged in any of the following occupations or businesses in
the township shall pay an annual mercantile license tax for the calendar
year January 1 to December 31 at the rate set forth.
§ 220-5. Computation of volume of business. [Amended 11-22-1976]
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced his business at least one year prior to the beginning of the
license year shall compute his annual gross volume of business upon
the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the
preceding calendar year.
B. Computation of the amount due to be due to the township shall be made
on the actual gross volume from commencing of business until
December 31 annually, and/or, upon the termination of a business,
computation is to be made from January 1 to the date of termination
and payment of tax is to be made on the actual gross volume of
business.
C. The business shall report its gross volume of business on a cash basis.
§ 220-1 RICHLAND CODE § 220-6
215:504
§ 220-6. Filing of returns.
§ 220-7. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing the return, the person making the same shall pay the
amount of tax shown as due thereon to the Tax Collector.
§ 220-8. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
A. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Tax Collector.
Every person making a return shall certify the correctness thereof by
affidavit.
B. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commenced
his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of any license
year shall, on or before the 15th day of April, file with the Tax Collector
a return setting forth his name, his business and business address and
such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual
gross amount of business transacted by him during the preceding tax
year, and the amount of the tax due.
C. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business less than one full year prior to the beginning
of any license year shall, on or before the 15th day of April 1963, file
with the Tax Collector a return setting forth his name, his business,
business address and such other information as may be necessary in
arriving at the actual gross amount of business transacted by him
during the first month of business and the amount of the tax due.
D. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of any license year shall, within
40 days from the date of commencing such business, file a return with
the Tax Collector setting forth his name, his business and business
address and such information as may be necessary in arriving at the
actual gross amount of business transacted by him during his first
month of business and the amount of the tax due.
E. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article
who engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature shall, within seven days from the day he completes such
business, file a return with the Tax Collector setting forth his name, his
business address and such information as may be necessary in arriving
at the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during such
period and the amount of the tax due.
A. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive the taxes,
fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to
keep a record showing the amount received by him from each person
paying the tax and the date of each receipt. The Tax Collector shall
receive 3% for all amounts of taxes collected under the provisions of
this article.
§ 220-6 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-8
215:505
§ 220-9. Confidential nature of returns.
Any information gained by the Tax Collector or any other officer, official,
agent or employee of the township as a result of any returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by this article shall be
confidential except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, and divulgence of any information so gained is hereby
declared to be a violation of this article, which may be punished by dismissal
from office or employment.
§ 220-10. Suit on collection; penalty.
§ 220-11. Violations and penalties.161
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on his return, or who refuses
to permit inspection of the books, records or accounts of any business
in his custody or control, when the right to make such inspection by the
Tax Collector is requested, and whoever fails or refuses to file a return
required by this article, and whoever fails or refuses to procure a mercantile
B. The Tax Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article, and is hereby empowered
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of this article, including provisions for the reexamination and correction
of returns, and payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to
which an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector shall have the right to
appeal to a court or courts of competent jurisdiction as in other cases
provided.
C. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers
and records of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to verify the
accuracy of any return made, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the
tax due. Every such taxpayer, or supposed taxpayer, is hereby directed
and required to give to the Tax Collector the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
A. The Tax Collector may sue for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid by
or under this article.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due in each year, interest at
the rate of 6% per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional
penalty of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction
thereof during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and
collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the
person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of
collection and interest and penalties herein imposed.
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-8 RICHLAND CODE § 220-11
215:506
license when so required under this article, or fails to keep his license
conspicuously posted at his place of business as herein required, shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 220-12. Saving clause.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
township to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person or
any business, or any portion of any business, not within the taxing
power of the township under the Constitution of the United States and
the Laws and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax or any portion thereof imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the decision of the court shall
not affect or impair the right to impose the taxes, or the validity of the
taxes so imposed upon other persons as herein provided.
§ 220-11 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-12
215:507

ARTICLE II
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 3-6-1972 by Ord. No. 70]
§ 220-13. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS — The carrying on or exercising, whether for gain or profit or
otherwise, within the Township of Richland any trade, business, profession,
vocation, service, construction, communication or commercial activity,
making sales to persons or rendering services from or attributable to a
Richland Township office or place of business.[Added 8-14-1978 by Ord.
No. 98]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association or
corporation, but shall not include a wage earner, a nonprofit corporation
organized for religious, charitable or educational purposes, any association
for such purposes, any agency of the government of the United States or of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any public utility.
PRIVILEGE YEAR — The period beginning January 1 and ending December
31 of 1972 and succeeding years.
SERVICE — Any act or instance of helping or benefiting another for a
consideration.
TAX COLLECTOR — The Tax Collector appointed by the Supervisors of the
Township of Richland for the purpose of collecting this tax.
§ 220-14. Imposition and rate of tax. [Amended 8-14-1978 by Ord.
No. 98]
For the privilege year, the Township of Richland hereby imposes on all
persons doing business within the Township of Richland, who are not
subject to the mercantile tax of the Township of Richland, a business
privilege tax of one mill on the gross receipts derived from all services and
sales rendered to customers, clients, patients and other persons.
§ 220-15. Computation of gross receipts.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning
of the privilege year, shall compute his annual gross receipts of
business for the privilege year upon the actual gross amount of
business transacted by him during the preceding calendar year.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced his business less than one full year prior to the
beginning of the privilege year, shall compute his annual gross receipts
of business for the privilege year upon the gross volume of business
§ 220-13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-15
215:509
§ 220-16. Registration with Tax Collector; fee.162
Any person subject to the tax hereby imposed shall, on or before the 15th
day of April 1972, or prior to commencing business, register with the Tax
Collector, who shall charge a fee as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors to cover the cost of said registration, and having
once registered with the Tax Collector registration for the privilege year is
not required.
§ 220-17. Filing of returns.
Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall, on or before
the 31st day of March of 1973 and each succeeding year, file with the Tax
Collector a return, upon a form furnished by said Tax Collector, setting
forth the name, business and business address, and such other information
as may be necessary in arriving at the amount of the tax due, except a
person who has commenced business during the privilege year who shall
file said return within 40 days after commencing business. Every person
making a return shall certify the correctness thereof by affidavit and shall
furthermore affix to said return, where applicable under the terms of this
article, a copy of the previous year's federal income tax return.
§ 220-18. Appointment and compensation of Tax Collector.
The Supervisors of Richland Township are hereby authorized to appoint a
Tax Collector to collect and receive the taxes, fines and penalties imposed
by this article. The Tax Collector shall receive 3% for all amounts of taxes
collected under the provisions of this article.
§ 220-19. Payment of tax.
The tax hereby imposed shall be due and payable to the Tax Collector at the
same time the aforesaid returns are required to be filed.
§ 220-20. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
transacted by him during the first full month he engaged in business,
multiplied by 12.
C. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
commences his business subsequent to the beginning of the privilege
year, shall compute his annual gross receipts for such privilege year
upon the gross volume of business transacted by him during the first
full month of his engaging in business, multiplied by the number of
months he engaged in business in such privilege year.
A. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive the taxes,
fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-15 RICHLAND CODE § 220-20
215:510
§ 220-21. Confidential nature of returns.
Any information gained by the Tax Collector or any other official, agency
or employee of the Township of Richland as a result of any returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
article shall be confidential, except in accordance with proper judicial order
or as otherwise provided by law, and divulgence of any information so
gained is hereby declared to be a violation of this article, which may be
punishable by dismissal from office or employment.
§ 220-22. Suit on collection; penalty.
§ 220-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No.
272]
Whoever makes any false or untrue statements on his return, or who refuses
to permit inspection of the books, records or accounts on any business in
his custody or control, when the right to make such inspection by the Tax
Collector is requested, and whoever fails or refuses to file a return required
by this article, shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
keep a record showing the amount received by him from each person
paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Tax Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article, and is hereby empowered
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of this article, including provision for the examination and correction of
returns, and payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to which
an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector shall have the right to
appeal to the appropriate court or courts as in other cases provided.
C. The Tax Collector or his duly appointed representative or agent is
hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any
return made, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Every
such taxpayer, or supposed taxpayer, is hereby directed and required to
give the Tax Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such
examination and investigation as are hereby authorized.
A. The Tax Collector may sue for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid
under this article.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due in each year, interest at
the rate of 6% per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional
penalty of 1% per annum on the amount of the unpaid tax for each
month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be
added and collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such
tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of
collection and penalties herein imposed.
§ 220-20 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-23
215:511
proceeding commenced by the township before a District Justice, pay a
fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney's fees, incurred by the township in the enforcement of this article.
No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 220-24. Saving clause.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
township to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person or
any business or any portion of any business not within the taxing power
of the township under the Constitution of the United States and the
Laws and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax or any portion thereof imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the decision of the court shall
not affect or impair the right to impose the taxes, or the validity of the
taxes so imposed upon other persons as herein provided.
§ 220-23 RICHLAND CODE § 220-24
215:512
ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 1-5-1976 by Ord. No. 91; amended in its entirety
11-26-2007 by Ord. No. 310]
§ 220-25. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein
proposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 relating to
earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
21, 1965, P.L. 1251 § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision, for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Township of Richland.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 220-26 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 220-25 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-26
215:513
§ 220-26. Levy of tax; uses.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment with the Township of
Richland during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such
privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that
year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro-rata basis, in accordance with
the provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the following
purposes as the same may be allocated by the Township of Richland from
time to time: emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services; road construction and/or
maintenance; reduction of property taxes; or property tax relief through
implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with
53 Pa.C.S.A., Chapter 95, Subchapter F (relating to homestead property
exclusion). The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds
derived from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to
all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political
subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each
calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within
which a person maybe employed.
§ 220-27. Exemption and refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
§ 220-26 RICHLAND CODE § 220-27
215:514
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy
of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the
tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption from the tax for
a given calendar year, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
§ 220-27 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-27
215:515
§ 220-28. Duty of employers to collect.
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Township of Richland, in consultation with the collector
and DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund
claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption,
which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general
municipal law relating to refunds or overpayments and interest on
overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75
days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the
last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject
to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a
calendar year that do not exceed $1. Richland Township or the collector
shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt
persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro-rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro-rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods,
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro-rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, combined rate shall mean the aggregate annual rate of the
tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
§ 220-27 RICHLAND CODE § 220-28
215:516
§ 220-29. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 220-30. Manner of determining tax liability and payment;
deadline.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the collector on or before the 30th day following the end of
each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 220-31. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the collector on or
before the thirtieth day following the end of each year.
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person maybe employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Subsection B
of § 220-27 of this article and this section and remits the amount so
withheld in accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 220-28 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-32
215:517
§ 220-32. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 220-33. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 220-34. Administration of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claims to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which the person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him for each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
§ 220-32 RICHLAND CODE § 220-34
215:518
§ 220-35. Suits for collection; interest; penalty for nonpayment.
§ 220-36. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 220-37. Interpretation of provisions.
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of
1998.163
C. The collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
163. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A., § 8421 et seq.
§ 220-34 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-37
215:519
§ 220-38. (Reserved)
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 220-37 RICHLAND CODE § 220-38
215:520
ARTICLE IV
Occupation Tax
[Adopted 1-5-1976 by Ord. No. 92]
§ 220-39. Definitions.
§ 220-40. Imposition of tax.
There is hereby imposed for general revenue purposes a flat rate occupation
tax of $10 on all occupations having a valuation as assessed on the
assessment rolls of Cambria County, Pennsylvania, for the year 1976, and
annually thereafter, of all persons residing in said Township of Richland
over the age of 21 years and made taxable by the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania for the year 1976, and annually thereafter.
§ 220-41. Notice of tax due.
On or after the first day of July 1976, said Tax Collector shall send to
every adult resident of said Township of Richland a notice of the flat rate
occupation tax due from such resident for the year 1976, and subsequent
years. The failure or omission of the Tax Collector to send or of any adult
resident to receive such notice shall not relieve such person from the
payment of such tax.
A. The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ADULT RESIDENT — Any person who has attained the age of 21 years
or more before the first day of January 1976, and who shall be domiciled
in the Township of Richland.
ASSESSED VALUE — The value of occupations as assessed on the
assessment rolls of Cambria County, Pennsylvania.
OCCUPATION — Any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business,
enterprise, vocation or any other activity in which a person is regularly
or habitually engaged, which occupation has some value.
PERSON — Any natural person.
RESIDENT — Any person domiciled in the Township of Richland.
TAX COLLECTOR — The collector of the tax of the Township of
Richland. Said Tax Collector shall collect and receive all taxes, interest
and penalties provided for the use and benefit of said Township of
Richland.
B. The singular shall include the plural; and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
§ 220-39 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-42
215:521
§ 220-42. Collection of taxes.
It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive all taxes,
penalties and interest provided for in this article in the same manner as
other township taxes are collected, or otherwise as provided by law.
§ 220-43. Rebate.
In the event that any taxpayer shall pay the tax due under this article within
two months of the date of the notice, he shall be entitled to a rebate of 2%
of the tax herein levied.
§ 220-44. Late payment; suit for recovery of taxes; violations and
penalties.
A. If any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not be paid within four
months of the date of the notice, a penalty of 10% of the tax due and
unpaid shall be added thereto. [Amended 12-29-1981 by Ord. No.
129]
B. The Board of Supervisors of said township may sue in assumpsit for the
recovery of all taxes, interest and penalties unpaid, which are required
to be paid by this article, and in the event that suit is brought, the
taxpayer shall, in addition, be liable for the cost of suit.
C. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article or who
fails, neglects or refuses to pay any tax or penalty imposed under this
article, or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of
the whole or any part of the tax imposed hereunder, shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by
the township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or
agents of the township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief,
including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.164
D. Provided further that said township shall, in addition to the remedies
herein provided, have the right to collect said occupation tax in the
same manner and with the same methods as other township taxes are
collected or as otherwise provided by law.
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-42 RICHLAND CODE § 220-45
215:522
§ 220-45. Tax to be in addition to other levies.
This occupation tax shall be in addition to all other property, per capita,
personal or other taxes levied by said Township of Richland.
§ 220-46. Husbands liable for payment of tax.
Every husband against whose wife said occupation tax is levied shall be
liable for the payment of said tax. Collection thereof from said husband may
be made and enforced in the manner provided by law for the collection and
enforcement of other taxes owing by such husband, including the collection
thereof from the husband's employer.
§ 220-47. Statutory authority.
This article has been adopted by virtue of authority vested in townships
under the Local Tax Enabling Act, December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257 (53 P.S.
§ 6901), as amended and supplemented.
§ 220-45 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-47
215:523

ARTICLE V
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 12-23-1983 by Ord. No. 154]
§ 220-48. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for the
purposes of this article, the following meanings:
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent, and whether in cash or in property; not including, however,
wages or compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic
payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received
during a period of sickness, disability or retirement or payments arising
under workmen's compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation, or payments commonly recognized as old age benefits,
retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment, or payments
commonly known as "public assistance," or unemployment compensation
payments made by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse
expenses or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and
salary supplemental programs, including but not limited to programs
covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental
unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business or other
activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs and expenses
incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash or accrual
basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such business,
profession or other activity, but without deduction of taxes based on income.
PERSON — Any male or female natural person.
TAXPAYER — Any person required hereunder to pay the per capita tax.
§ 220-49. Imposition of tax; exception.
A. A per capita tax of $5 for the year 1984, and each year thereafter, is
levied and assessed upon every male or female resident of the Township
of Richland 18 years of age and over, which tax shall be in addition to all
other taxes levied and assessed by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to
any other laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; provided,
however, that any person who has attained the age of 65 years on or
before December 31 of the prior taxable year (i.e., December 31, 1983,
for the taxable year 1984, December 31, 1984, for the taxable year
1985, etc.), and whose total earned income and/or net profits, as
defined herein, is less than $5,000 during said prior taxable year is
exempt from the payment of said tax upon filing with the Tax Collector
an affidavit providing the following information on or before the date
that the face amount of the tax is due as listed on the tax notice:
§ 220-48 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-49
215:525
§ 220-50. Manner and time of collection.
Collection of said tax herein imposed shall be made by the Tax Collector
of Richland Township in the same manner and at the same time as other
taxes are collected, as provided by the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as
amended.166
§ 220-51. Tax Collector to give bond.
The Tax Collector shall give bond secured and conditioned for the collection
and payment of such taxes as provided by law for other township taxes.
§ 220-52. Entry in tax duplicate.
The entry of said per capita tax in the tax duplicate and issuance of said
duplicate to the Tax Collector shall constitute his warrant for the collection
of said per capita tax hereby levied and assessed.
§ 220-53. Notice to taxpayers.
The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayers at the same time and in
the same manner as provided by the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as
amended.167
(1) Name.
(2) Address.
(3) Birthdate.
(4) A statement, under oath, that during the prior calendar year said
person's total earned income and/or net profits, as defined by this
article, was less than $5,000.
(5) Exemption requested for tax year.
(6) Signature of taxpayer.
(7) Date filed with Tax Collector.
B. It is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that, upon receipt of the tax
notice, each person who is eligible for the exemption must file the form
providing the information each year that the taxpayer is eligible for the
exemption. Failure to file for the exemption each year on the date
specified above shall subject the taxpayer to payment of the tax and the
collection procedure provided herein.165
165. Editor's Note: The application for exemption is on file in the township offices.
166. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
167. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 220-49 RICHLAND CODE § 220-54
215:526
§ 220-54. Discount; late payment; penalty.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of the per capita tax herein levied and
assessed shall be entitled to a discount of 2% of the amount of such tax
upon making payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after
the date of the tax notice. All taxpayers who fail to make payment of any
such taxes charged against them for a period of four months after the date
of the tax notice shall be charged a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be
added to the taxes by the Tax Collector and be collected by him. The unpaid
balance shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum beginning at the
end of the calendar year.
§ 220-55. Tax Collector to maintain records.
The Tax Collector shall keep a correct account of all per capita tax collected
by authority of this article and shall remit said taxes to the Treasurer of the
Board of Supervisors by separate statement at the same time as other taxes
are remitted. The Tax Collector shall also keep a record of all persons who
file an affidavit claiming the exemption as provided for in § 220-49.
§ 220-56. Collection of tax by distress.
The Tax Collector shall be and is hereby empowered with the authority to
collect said tax by distress and sell all goods and chattels of the taxpayer, as
provided therefor by the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as amended;168
and to sue for this recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the persons liable
therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the
interests and penalties herein imposed. In the collection of any judgment
for such delinquent tax, the defendant therein shall not be entitled to the
benefit of any exemption, appraisement law or stay of execution.
§ 220-57. Deduction of tax by employers.
There is hereby conferred upon the Tax Collector the power and authority
to demand, receive and collect from all corporations, political subdivisions,
associations, companies, firms or individuals employing persons owing per
capita taxes, or, if in possession of unpaid commissions or earnings
belonging to any person owing per capita taxes, upon the presentation
of written notice or demand containing the name of the taxable and the
amount of the tax due. Upon the presentation of such notice and demand
it shall be the duty of such corporation, political subdivision, association,
company, firm or individual to deduct from the wages, commissions or
earnings of such individual employees then owing or that shall within 60
days thereafter become due, or from any unpaid commissions or earnings of
any taxable in its or his possession, or that shall within 60 days thereafter
come into its or his possession, the sum sufficient to pay the respective
amount of the per capita taxes and costs shown upon the written notice
168. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 220-54 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-57
215:527
or demand, and to pay the same to the Tax Collector of the Township
of Richland within 60 days after such notice shall have been given. The
employer shall be entitled to deduct not more than 2% for his expenses
for such moneys paid over to the Tax Collector. Upon the failure of such
employer to make such deduction when properly notified as herein
provided, such employer shall forfeit and pay the amount of such tax
for each taxable whose taxes are not withheld and paid over to the Tax
Collector as herein provided, which amount may be recovered by an action
of assumpsit in a suit to be entered by the Tax Collector on behalf of the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Richland.
§ 220-58. Conferral of powers.
It is the intent of this article and there is hereby conferred upon the Tax
Collector all the powers, together with all the duties and obligations, to the
same extent and as fully as provided for in the Local Tax Collection Law of
1945, as amended.169
§ 220-59. Compensation of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall receive as compensation for the collection of any
taxes and penalties herein imposed 4% of all amounts collected under
the terms and provisions of this article, except costs and penalties as
hereinbefore provided.
169. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 220-57 RICHLAND CODE § 220-59
215:528
ARTICLE VI
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 1-5-1987 by Ord. No. 3]
§ 220-60. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of
Richland Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania."
§ 220-61. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or any interest in real estate situated within
Richland Township, Cambria County, regardless of where the documents
making the transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual
settlements on such transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local
Real Estate Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 220-62. Definitions.170
As used in this article, the words and phrases defined in 72 P.S. § 8101-C
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that section.
§ 220-63. Imposition and payment of tax; interest.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document, or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer, then the tax levied by the township under the authority of that
Act shall during the time such duplication of the tax exists, except as
hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate and such one-half
rate shall become effective without any action on the part of the
township; provided, however, that the township and any other political
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-60 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-63
215:529
§ 220-64. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 220-65. Excluded transactions.
subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or transfer may
agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2 of the rate
herein provided, they will impose respectively different rates, the total
of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted under the Local
Tax Enabling Act.
D. Any tax imposed under this article that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent
municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53
P.S. § 7101 et seq.), as amended, known as "The Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate
imposed upon delinquent Commonwealth taxes as provided in Section
806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (71 P.S. § 806), as
amended, known as "The Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate
permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
[Amended 3-5-2007 by Ord. No. 309]
A. The tax imposed by § 220-63 of this article shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the township is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
§ 220-63 RICHLAND CODE § 220-65
215:530
co-tenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife; between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce; between parent
and child or the spouse of such child; between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister; and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild; except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) Transfers between principal, agent or straw party.
(a) A transfer:
[1] For no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or
[2] From or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or
straw party were his principal, no tax would be imposed
under this article.
(b) Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property was
acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his
principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property
is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the
grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
§ 220-65 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-65
215:531
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)], and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities; or a transfer from such a
conservancy to the United States, commonwealth or to any of its
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions.171
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-65 RICHLAND CODE § 220-65
215:532
§ 220-66. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 220-65 hereof, documents which make,
confirm or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 220-67. Acquired companies.
(20) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the
partnership.172
(21) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate.173
(22) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(23) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
172. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-65 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-67
215:533
§ 220-68. Credits against tax.
§ 220-69. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
partnership or when, because of transfer of partnership interests or
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm partnership under this article.174
D. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition to the Recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
174. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-67 RICHLAND CODE § 220-70
215:534
§ 220-70. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 220-71. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 220-72. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based an family relationship. Other documents presented
A. The Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the local realty
transfer tax; provided, however, that if the correct amount of tax is not
paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Township,
pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S.
§ 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the
tax, interest and penalties. [Amended 3-5-2007 by Ord. No. 309]
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax. The two-percent commission shall be
paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee have been
tendered.
§ 220-70 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-72
215:535
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 220-73. Civil penalties.
§ 220-74. Tax to become lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part, within the boundaries of the township, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable, and to continue until discharge
by payment, or in accordance with the law. The Township Solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas
of Cambria County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 220-75. Recovery of taxes.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 220-76. Enforcement; incorporation of statutory provisions.
The Treasurer of the township is charged with the enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under
72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
§ 220-76.1. Collection and compliance with Act 32. [Added
10-10-2011 by Ord. No. 321]
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 220-72 RICHLAND CODE § 220-76.1
215:536
A. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Local
Tax Enabling Act, P.L. 1257, known as Act No. 511 of 1965, effective
January 1, 1966, as thereafter amended through in Act 166 of 2002 and
Act No. 32 of 2008, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq. (known as and herein
referred to as the "LTEA"). The provisions contained herein are made
for the purpose of amending and supplementing the Richland Township
Ord. No. 288, adopted on May 17, 2004.
B. Incorporation by reference. The Supervisors hereby adopt by reference
the LTEA and the amended provisions of Act 32 (53 P.S. § 6924.101
through 53 P.S. § 6924.901) and its definitions, duties, directives, rules,
regulations, powers and penalties as if the same had been set forth
herein. Amendments pursuant to Act 32 include but are not limited to
the following: amendments to the definitions contained in Richland
Township Code § 220-78 insofar as they do not include or are
inconsistent with the definitions contained in 53 P.S. § 6924.501;
amendments to the Richland Township Code § 220-82, Powers and
duties of Officer, insofar as it is inconsistent with 53 P.S. § 6924.509;
and amendments to Richland Township Code § 220-85, Fines and
penalties, insofar as it is inconsistent with 53 P.S. § 6924.509(j) 1-4. As
set forth above, it is the intention of the Supervisors to incorporate the
provisions of Act 32 of 2008 in the Richland Township Code, and, to the
extent any provisions of the Richland Township Code are inconsistent
with the language of Act 32 the language of Act 32, shall control.
C. Imposition of tax. The rate of 1% on each dollar is hereby reimposed on
all earned income and net profits, as defined by Act 32, earned by
residents of the Richland Township and on all earned income and net
profits earned by nonresidents of the Township of Richland employed in
or receiving work assignments within the Township of Richland. All
changes shall remain in effect on a calendar year basis without annual
reenactment unless the rate of tax is subsequently changed.
D. Administrative: powers and duties of Officer. The collection and
administration of the tax provided for in this section shall be performed
by the Tax Officer appointed by the Cambria County Tax Collection
Committee ("CCTCC"). Said Tax Officer shall receive such
compensation for his services and expenses as determined from time to
time by the CCTCC. Such Tax Officer shall have the powers and duties
as provided for by Act 32 and the Local Tax Enabling Act.
E. Severability. Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase
of this section be declared invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the section in its entirety or
of any part thereof other than that part declared to be invalid.
F. When effective. This section shall be effective January 1, 2012. It is the
intention of the governing body of Richland Township that this section
shall provide procedural modification only to the previously adopted
Earned Income Tax Ordinance, and no gap as to imposition of the tax
set forth herein should be inferred.
§ 220-76.1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-76.1
215:537

ARTICLE VII
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 288175]
§ 220-77. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Earned Income Tax Ordinance." The
provisions hereof shall become effective on the 1st day of January, 2004
A.D. and the tax shall continue in force on a calendar-year or a taxpayer
fiscal-year basis, without annual reenactment, unless the rate of the tax
is subsequently changed. Changes in rate become effective on the date
specified in the amending ordinance.
§ 220-78. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Richland.
BUSINESS — Any enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking
of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit, or ordinarily conducted
for profit, whether by a person, partnership, association, or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt
some other permanent home. In the case of businesses, or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, including salaries, wages,
commissions, bonuses and incentive payments whether based on profits
or otherwise, fees, tips and similar remuneration for services rendered,
whether in cash or in property, such as:
Items of remuneration received, directly or through an agent, in cash
or in property, based on payroll periods or piecework, for services
A.
175. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VII, Earned Income Tax, adopted
3-28-1988 by Ord. No. 183, as amended.
§ 220-77 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-78
215:539
rendered as an employee or casual employee, agent or officer of an
individual, partnership, business or nonprofit corporation, or
government agency. These items include salaries, wages, commissions,
bonuses, stock options, incentive payments, fees, tips, dismissal,
termination or severance payments, early retirement incentive
payments and other additional compensation contingent upon
retirement, including payments in excess of the scheduled or customary
salaries provided for those who are not terminating service, rewards,
vacation and holiday pay, paid leaves of absence, payments for unused
vacation or sick leave, tax assumed by the employer, signing bonuses,
amounts received under employee benefit plans and deferred
compensation arrangements.
Scholarships, stipends, grants and fellowships, if services are rendered
in connection therewith.
When used in this subsection, the following words have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
FELLOWSHIP STIPEND or FELLOWSHIP AWARD — A fixed
sum of money paid periodically for services or to defray
expenses to a graduate student who is enrolled in a graduate
degree program at a university.
(a)
GRANT-IN-AID — Financial support given by a public agency
or private institution to an individual to further the individual's
education.
(b)
POSTDOCTORAL RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP STIPEND or
POSTDOCTORAL RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP AWARD — A fixed
sum of money paid periodically for service or to defray
expenses of an individual who has obtained a doctoral degree
at a university and is conducting research at a research facility.
(c)
(d) SCHOLARSHIP — A grant-in-aid to a student.
(1)
B.
Other forms of remuneration characterized as taxable compensation
by the Tax Reform Code of 1971, as amended, and its implementing
regulations, as amended, and any future amendments to said Code and/
or its implementing regulations.
C.
Compensation does not include:
Periodic payments for sickness and disability other than the regular
wages received during a period of sickness or disability;
(1)
Disability, retirement or other payments arising under workmen's
compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation by any government;
(2)
Payments commonly recognized as old age or retirement benefits
paid to persons retired after reaching a specific age or after a
stated period of employment;
(3)
D.
§ 220-78 RICHLAND CODE § 220-78
215:540
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership. association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — Person, public employee or private
agency designated by the governing body to collect and administer the tax
on earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS —
Payments commonly known as "public assistance," or
unemployment compensation payments by any governmental
agency;
(4)
(5) Payments to reimburse actual expenses;
Payments made by employers or labor unions for employee benefit
programs covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death,
supplemental employment benefits or strike benefits, subject to
certain conditions identified in the Tax Reform Code of 1971, as
amended, and its implementing regulations;
(6)
Any compensation received by United States servicemen serving in
a combat zone;
(7)
Payments received by a foster parent for in-home care of foster
children from an agency of the commonwealth or a political
subdivision thereof, or an organization tax exempt from federal tax
under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, which is
licensed by the Commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof as
a placement agency;
(8)
Payments made by employers or labor unions for employee benefit
programs covering social security or retirement; or
(9)
Personal use of an employer's owned or leased property or of
employer-provided services.
(10)
The net income from the operation of a business, profession, or other
activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs and expenses
incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash or accrual
basis in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and
practices, as defined in the Tax Reform Code of 1971, as amended,
its implementing regulations, and any subsequent amendments to said
Code and/or regulations. Net profits do not include income which is not
paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from
an investment.
A.
To constitute net profits, all of the following must apply:
(1) The gross profits shall be derived from one of the following:
B.
§ 220-78 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-78
215:541
The marketing of a product or service to customers on a
commercial basis or from securities employed as working
capital in the business operations.
(a)
Accounts and notes receivable from sales of products or
services in the ordinary course of the business operations.
(b)
Assets which serve an operational function in the ordinary
course of business, operations.
(c)
The marketing activity shall be conducted with the manifest
objective of achieving profitable operations.
(2)
The marketing objective shall be conducted with regularity and
continuity and may not be limited or exclusive
(3)
In computing net profits, a deduction will not be allowed for any item
of cost, expense or liability derived or incurred in connection with, or
attributable to, any of the following:
The ownership or disposition of assets that are held for investment
purposes or otherwise serve an investment function.
(1)
The trading in securities for personal purposes and not for the
accounts of customers.
(2)
The sale, discontinuation or abandonment of a business or segment
thereof.
(3)
Any tax imposed on, or measured by, gross or net earned or
unearned income.
(4)
An isolated or nonrecurring transaction which is not a normal or
routine business activity.
(5)
C.
Choosing to form a partnership or other entity or to associate with
others, receiving and reporting income or gain as the income of the
partnership, entity or associates or dividing the same among its
partners, beneficial owners or associates or the trading in securities for
the benefit of shareholders, partners, members or associates does not
of itself make the income of the partnership, entity or associates net
profits.
D.
For purposes of this section, only the following participants in the
stock, securities, options, derivatives, futures or commodities market
are engaged in marketing of a product or service to customers:
Those who maintain or provide a marketplace or facilities for
bringing together purchasers and sellers of these financial
investment products
(1)
Those who are licensed to act as their customer's agents and
charge a negotiated commission for executing transactions and do
not take time to the particular portion they buy or sell.
(2)
E.
§ 220-78 RICHLAND CODE § 220-78
215:542
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the taxing district.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
Those who devote managerial attention to the financial investment
products holdings of others, or who employ other persons to assist
them in that management, in the capacity of a licensed investment
advisor.
(3)
Licensed dealers, including financial investment product
specialists and market makers, if the conditions in (a) through (d)
below are met:
The dealer maintains an inventory of financial investment
products with the objective of reselling his inventories at a
profit to customers or operates as a specialist or market maker.
(a)
The dealer makes market by quoting the bid and ask prices
at which he is willing to buy and sell the financial investment
products and by buying directly from or selling directly to
customers.
(b)
The dealer's profit is determined in whole or in part by a
markup based on cost.
(c)
The dealer elects to inventory securities held for resale to
customers or uses the mark-to-market system of accounting.
(d)
(4)
Underwriters who facilitate initial sales of financial investment
products by acting either as licensed dealers in a principal capacity
or as brokers in an agency capacity.
(5)
When a person operates as an investor or trader with respect to a
portion of that person's activities and as a market establishment,
broker, investment counselor or dealer with respect to the rest, this
section applies only to the operations as a market establishment,
broker, investment counselor or dealer.
F.
For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity of
farming, the term shall not include:
Any interest earnings generated from any monetary accounts or
investment instruments of the farming business;
(1)
(2) Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
(3)
(4) Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
G.
§ 220-78 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-78
215:543
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the taxing district.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXING DISTRICT — The Township of Richland, Cambria County,
Pennsylvania.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association, or any other entity,
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 220-79. Imposition of tax.
§ 220-80. Declaration and payment of tax.
A. A tax for general revenue purposes is hereby reimposed in the amount
of 1% earned income received and net profits earned by residents and
nonresidents of the Township of Richland, beginning on the first day of
January, 2004, and continuing for each taxable year thereafter.
B. Except as otherwise provided in § 14 of the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53
P.S. § 6914, as amended, allowing for crediting or deductions for
duplication of taxes, in the event the school district in which the
Township is situate shall impose or continue to impose an earned
income tax under the authority of the Act on residents or businesses
domiciled within that Township during the same year or part of year,
then the tax herein imposed shall be subject to the sharing provision
from the day such duplication becomes effective.
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or
approved by the Officer, a declaration of his estimated net profits
during the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of
the current year, and pay to the Officer in four quarterly
installments, as nearly equal as possible, the tax due thereon as
follows: The first installment at the time of filing the declaration,
and the other installments on or before June 15 of the current year,
September 15 of the current year, and January 15 of the succeeding
year, respectively.
(2) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of
the current year shall make and file the declaration hereinabove
required on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of
the current year, or December 31 of the current year, whichever of
these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit, and pay to the Officer in installments, as
nearly equal as possible, the tax due thereon, on or before the
quarterly payment dates which remain after the filing of the
declaration.
§ 220-78 RICHLAND CODE § 220-80
215:544
(3) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or approved by
the Officer a final return and reconciliation showing the amount of
net profits earned during the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, the total
amount of tax due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon.
At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the
Officer the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund
or credit in the case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of
paying the fourth quarterly installment of his estimated tax. elect to
make and file with the Officer on or before January 31 of the
succeeding year, the final return as hereinabove required.
(4) The officer is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the
making and filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits,
and for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a
taxpayer who has filed the declaration hereinabove required
anticipated additional net profits not previously declared or finds
that he has overestimated his anticipated net profits.
(5) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the
tax due.
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the
Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer a final
return showing the amount of earned income received during the
period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year. Such final return shall also show
the total amount of tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid
thereon, and the amount of tax thereon that has been withheld
pursuant to the provisions relating to the collection at source and
the balance of tax due. At the time of filing the final return, the
taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall make demand
for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to collection at source shall make and file with the Officer
on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer a quarterly return
on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year, and January 31 of the succeeding
year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding by him during the three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of the current
§ 220-80 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-80
215:545
§ 220-81. Collection at source.
year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the Officer may require. Every taxpayer making
such returns shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the Officer
the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
C. Death of taxpayer. In the event of the death of a taxpayer during a
taxable period, his personal representative shall file his return on or
before the 15th day of April of the year following the date of death and
on or before such date shall pay any tax due from such deceased
taxpayer under this article or demand refund in the case of
overpayment.
D. Guardian of taxpayer. Should a guardian of the estate be appointed for a
taxpayer such guardian shall be imputed with the same duties and
responsibilities as the taxpayer would have regarding the reporting and
paying of taxes under this article.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse,
or other place of business within the Township who employs one or
more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, who has not previously registered,
shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, register with the
Officer his name and address and such other information as the Officer
may require.
B. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse,
or other place of business within the Township who employs one or
more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission, or other compensation, shall deduct at the time of payment
thereof the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his
employment and shall, on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31
of the current year, October 31 of the current year, and January 31 of
the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the Officer the amount of
taxes deducted during the preceding three-month periods ending
March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30
of the current year, and December 31 of the current year, respectively.
Such return, unless otherwise agreed upon between the Officer and the
employer, shall show the name and social security number of each such
employee, the earned income of such employee during such preceding
three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the complete
address of each and every employee subject to withholding, the total
earned income of all such employees during such preceding threemonth
period, and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the
return. Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly
periods has failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has
failed to pay over the proper amount of tax to the taxing authority, may
be required by the Officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In
such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the Officer on or before
§ 220-80 RICHLAND CODE § 220-81
215:546
the last day of the month succeeding the month for which the tax was
withheld.
C. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted, and the total amount of tax paid
to the Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee' s name, address and social security number,
the amount of earned income paid to the employee during said
period, the amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions
imposing the tax upon such employee, and the amount of tax paid
to the Officer. Every employer shall furnish two copies of the
individual return to the employee for whom it is filed.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
E. Except as otherwise provided herein, every employer who willfully or
negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by this
section shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he was required to
withhold to the extent that such taxes have not been recovered from the
employee.
F. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no employer shall be held liable for
failure to withhold earned income taxes or for the payment of such
withheld tax money to a political subdivision other than the Township if
such failure to withhold or such incorrect transmittal of withheld taxes
arises from incorrect information as to the employee's place of
residence submitted by the employee, nor shall an employer be liable
for failure to withhold earned income taxes or to make reports of
wages. salaries, commissions or other compensation of his/its
employees unless the official continuing register of all earned income
taxes levied under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended, maintained and supplemented annually by the Department of
Community and Economic Development, lists the Township's levying of
the earned income tax.
G. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of tax or from complying with the requirements of the article
relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
§ 220-81 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-82
215:547
§ 220-82. Powers and duties of Officer.
A. The Board, by resolution, shall appoint the Officer.
B. It shall be the duty of the Officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each person or
business paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
C. Each Officer, before entering upon his official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the Township. If the Township shall by
ordinance, designate any bond previously given by the Officer as
adequate, such bond shall be sufficient to satisfy the requirements of
this subsection.
(1) Each such bond shall be joint and several with one or more
corporate sureties, which shall be surety companies authorized to
do business in this commonwealth and duly licensed by the
Insurance Commissioner of this commonwealth.
(2) Each bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the
Officer, his clerks, assistants and appointees of all trusts confided
in him by virtue of his office, upon the faithful execution of all
duties required of him by virtue of his office, upon the just and
faithful accounting or payment over, according to law, of all monies
and all balances thereof paid to, received or held by him by virtue
of his office and upon the delivery to his successor or successors in
office of all books, papers, documents, or other official things held
in right of his office.
(3) Each such bond shall be taken in the name of the Richland
Township and shall be for the use of the Township appointing the
Officer, and for the use of such other person or persons for whom
money shall be collected or received or as his or her interest shall
otherwise appear, in case of a breach of any of the conditions
thereof by the acts or neglect of the principal of the bond.
(4) The Township or any person may sue upon the said bond in its own
or his own name for its or his own use.
(5) Each such bond shall contain the name or names of the surety
company or companies bound thereon. The Township shall fix the
amount of the bond at an amount equal to the maximum amount of
taxes which may be in the possession of the Officer at any given
time. The Township may at any time, upon cause shown and due
notice to the Officer, and his surety or sureties, require or allow the
substitution or the addition of a surety company acceptable to the
Township for the purpose of making the bond sufficient in amount,
without releasing the surety or sureties first approved from any
accrued liability or previous action on such bond. The Township
shall designate the custodian of the bond required to be given by
the Officer.
§ 220-82 RICHLAND CODE § 220-82
215:548
§ 220-83. Suit for collection of tax.
D. The Officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of the article is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate, and enforce, rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the re-examination and correction of
declarations and returns, and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which any overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in case of overpayment for any period of
time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
of the article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable
unless it has been approved by ordinance by the Board. A copy of such
rules and regulations currently in force shall be available for public
inspection.
E. The Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary
business expenses to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer' s employer.
F. The Officer and any agent designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers, and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer, or of any person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be
an employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any
declaration or return or, if no declaration or return was filed, to
ascertain the tax due. Every employer and every taxpayer, and every
person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or
taxpayer, is hereby directed and required to give to the Officer, or to any
agent designated by him, the means, facilities and opportunities for
such examination and investigation as hereby authorized. The Officer
shall have such power to subpoena books, records and papers of the
employer or taxpayer as may be found in authority of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
G. Any information gained by the Officer, his agents, or by any other
official or agent of the Township as a result of any declarations, returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by the
article, shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with a proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by
law.
H. The Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
A. The Officer may sue in the name of the Township for the recovery of
taxes due and unpaid under this article.
§ 220-82 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-83
215:549
§ 220-84. Interest and penalties.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was flied by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of the article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return
in the possession of the Officer, reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) Tn the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and no fraud, suit shall be begin within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Officer,
or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the
deductions required by this section, there shall be no limitation.
(5) This section shall not be construed to limit the Board from
recovering delinquent taxes by arty other means provided by the
Act.
C. The Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund, provided such
suit is begun within two years after making such refund, except that the
suit may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the
refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
A. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of
1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof
during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected.
Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable
therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the
interest and penalties herein imposed.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, the Township may, by
ordinance, establish a one-time period during which interest or interest
and penalties that would otherwise be imposed for the nonreporting or
underreporting of earned income tax liabilities or for the nonpayment of
earned income taxes previously imposed and due shall be waived in
total or in part if the taxpayer voluntarily files delinquent returns and
pay the taxes in full during the period so established. The Township
shall adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this subsection.
§ 220-83 RICHLAND CODE § 220-84
215:550
§ 220-85. Fines and penalties.
§ 220-86. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257; 53 P.S. § 6901, as amended.
§ 220-87. Reconciliation with prior ordinances.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board that this article replace
in its entirety all prior ordinances adopted, motions approved, or other
actions taken by the Board of Supervisors of the Richland Township levying
C. The provisions of Subsection B shall not affect or terminate any
petitions, investigations, prosecutions or other proceedings pending
under the provisions of this article or event the commencement or
further prosecution of any proceedings by the proper authorities for
violations of this article, No proceedings shall, however, be commenced
on the basis of delinquent returns filed pursuant to Subsection B if the
returns are determined to be substantially true and correct and the
taxes are paid in full within the prescribed time.
A. Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article; any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees, or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees; any person who refuses to permit the Officer or any agent
designated by him to examine his books, records, and papers; and any
person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent
return, or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full
disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income in order to
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
article, shall, upon conviction thereof before any justice of the peace,
alderman or magistrate, or court of competent jurisdiction in Cambria
County, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each
offense, and costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of the article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
district justice or court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and costs and, in default of
payment of said fines and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of the article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by the article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
§ 220-84 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-87
215:551
an earned income tax, and/or in any manner affecting the specific terms
or provisions of said earned income tax as levied; the provisions of which
shall remain in full force and effect for each year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, unless the rate of tax is subsequently changed.
§ 220-88. (Reserved)
§ 220-89. (Reserved)
§ 220-90. (Reserved)
§ 220-91. (Reserved)
§ 220-87 RICHLAND CODE § 220-91
215:552
ARTICLE VIII
Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 4-9-1999 by Ord. No. 269]
§ 220-92. Adoption of regulations and related documents; appeals.
A. The rules and regulations attached hereto as Schedule 1 and
incorporated herein are hereby approved and adopted.176
B. The disclosure statement, substantially in the form set forth in Schedule
2 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby approved and
adopted.177
C. The form of petition for appeal and refund, substantially in the form set
forth in Schedule 3 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby
approved and adopted.178
D. The Board of Supervisors hereby determines that administrative appeal
procedures relating to petitions for appeal and refund submitted by
taxpayers in connection with the assessment, determination or refund
of an eligible tax under the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights (LTBR) shall
be undertaken by the Joint Local Tax Collection Appeals Board
comprised of three members, two of whom shall be chosen, and their
amount of compensation determined, by the Board of Supervisors by
resolution. At least one member shall be knowledgeable in municipal
tax laws. The third member shall be appointed by the Richland School
District. The amount of compensation and qualifications of the third
Board member shall be at the discretion of the Richland School District
Board of Directors.
E. The administrative appeal procedures set forth in the rules and
regulations and substantially in the form set forth in Schedule 4,
attached hereto and incorporated herein, are hereby approved and
adopted.179
176. Editor's Note: Schedule 1, Rules and Regulations for Compliance with the Local Taxpayers
Bill of Rights, is on file in the township offices.
177. Editor's Note: Schedule 2, Disclosure Statement Under the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights,
is on file in the township offices.
178. Editor's Note: Schedule 3, Petition for Appeal and Refund, is on file in the township
offices.
179. Editor's Note: Schedule 4, Administrative Appeal Procedures Applicable to Petitions for
Appeal and Refund, is on file in the township offices.
§ 220-92 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-92
215:553
Chapter 228
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 228-1. Definitions.
As used herein, the words shall have the following meanings:
COMMERCIAL PARKING AREA — An area set aside by the owner or lessee
of property, zoned commercial by Chapter 240, Zoning, (or which property
is a nonconforming commercial use), to provide for the parking of motor
vehicles.
CROSSWALK — Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on
the surface.
EDUCATIONAL PARKING AREA — An area set aside by the owner or lessee
of an elementary, middle or high school or vocational-technical school,
college or university to provide for parking of motor vehicles.
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel. The term includes a roadway open to the
use of the public for vehicular travel on grounds of a college or university
or public or private school or public or historical park.
INDUSTRIAL PARKING AREA — An area set aside by the owner or lessee of
a property zoned L-1 Light Industrial District or M Manufacturing District
by Chapter 240, Zoning, (or which property is a nonconforming industrial
or manufacturing use), to provide for the parking of motor vehicles.
INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the prolongation or
connection of the lateral curblines or, if none, then the lateral boundary
lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled except one which
is propelled solely by human power or by electric power obtained from
overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
MULTIFAMILY PARKING AREA — An area set aside by the owner or lessee
of a property zoned R-4 Multiple-Family District (or which property is
a nonconforming multifamily use) to provide for the parking of motor
vehicles.
PARK or PARKING —
When permitted, means the temporary storing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, off the roadway.
A.
When prohibited, means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, except momentarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading property or passengers.
B.
§ 220-92 RICHLAND CODE § 228-1
228:554
PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY — A way or place in private ownership and
use for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
REGISTERED GROSS WEIGHT — Maximum gross weight at which a vehicle
or combination is registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
operate upon a highway or registered in another state, or otherwise
authorized to operate by such state.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between curblines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by
pedestrians.
SNOW ROUTE — A street or highway designated by the Board of
Supervisors, by resolution, as a street or highway upon which no parking
shall be permitted between November 1 and April 15 of the succeeding
year, based upon a determination that the street or highway is of insufficient
width to permit parking on the cartway and the efficient use of snow
removal equipment so as to assure passage by emergency vehicles such as
police, fire and ambulance.
STAND or STANDING — When prohibited, means the halting of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except momentarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
STOP or STOPPING —
TRUCK — A motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
§ 228-2. Parking restrictions.
A. When required, means complete cessation from movement.
When prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
B.
A. It shall be unlawful to permit any motor vehicle to stand or park in any
of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with a direction of a policeman or traffic
control device; provided, however, that this chapter shall be effective
only in those commercial, educational, industrial and multifamily
parking areas designated by the Richland Township Board of
Supervisors, by resolution, upon written request of the property owners
or lessees:
(1) In an intersection.
(2) In a crosswalk.
(3) Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the
approach thereto.
§ 228-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 228-2
228:555
(4) Within 30 feet of a traffic signal beacon, or sign on the approaching
side.
(5) Within 20 feet of any intersection or crosswalk.
(6) At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than 18 feet.
(7) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(8) Within 15 feet of a sign erected by the Cambria County Transit
Authority or other designated transit agency designating the area
as a bus stop.
(9) At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a private
road or driveway.
(10)Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any Fire Department
station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any
such station within 75 feet of such entrance.
(11) On any sidewalk or parkway.
(12) In any commercial, educational, industrial or multifamily parking
area, except in actual spaces so provided by the owners or lessees
of the areas.
(13) In any of the running or parking lanes of a commercial,
educational, industrial or multifamily parking area.
(14) Fire lanes, as established below.
(15) Temporary no-parking areas as established below.
(16)On any public highway or street in the township designated by the
Board of Supervisors as a snow route.180
(17) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
B. It shall be unlawful to park in an area designated as a fire lane.
(1) Method of establishing fire lanes. Whenever the Chief of the
Richland Township Police Department shall determine that the
parking of motor vehicles in any commercial, educational,
industrial or multifamily parking area is likely to interfere with the
operations of the Richland Fire Companies or seriously hamper
egress of occupants from buildings in case of fire, he shall
designate such area, in writing, including the use of maps or
sketches, numbered consecutively, to the Township Supervisors.
The Township Supervisors shall consider such recommendations of
the Chief of Police and shall approve or disapprove, by resolution,
180. Editor's Note: The resolution establishing said snow routes is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 228-2 RICHLAND CODE § 228-2
228:556
§ 228-3. Handicapped parking.182
each of such designated locations. Once approved, each such
location shall be added to a list, numbered consecutively, and
maintained in the office of the Chief of Police. Such list may be
modified, added to or reduced from time to time by resolution
of the Township Supervisors after written recommendation by the
Chief of Police or the Township Supervisors on their own motion.
(2) Marking of fire lanes. Once fire lanes are established as set forth in
Subsection B(1) hereof, such fire lanes shall be marked by and
under the direction of the Chief of Police by any one or more of the
following methods:
(a) By posting signs in such areas reading "FIRE LANE - NO
PARKING."
(b) By the painting of lines four inches or more in length on the
road or surface indicating the area.
(c) By painting the words "FIRE LANE - NO PARKING" in letters
three feet high in height on the roadway or parking lot surface.
C. It shall be unlawful to park in an area designated as a temporary noparking
area. In the event of an emergency or special condition
whereby the Chief of Police shall determine that the parking of motor
vehicles is likely to interfere with the operation of Fire Companies in
any commercial, educational, industrial or multifamily parking area, the
Chief of Police shall direct "PARKING TEMPORARY FIRE
REGULATION" by order of the Chief of Police. Such signs shall be
removed at the direction of the Chief of Police when such emergency or
special condition ceases.
D. Posting. Those areas listed in Subsections A, B and C above shall be
posted with official signs when required by the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code181 or this chapter.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
HANDICAPPED PARKING PLACARD — The placard issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Motor Vehicles,
which is prominently displayed on the right front dash of a vehicle
designating the vehicle in which it is displayed as being used for the
transportation, or use and benefit, of (a) handicapped person(s).
HANDICAPPED PERSON — Any person who does not have the full
use of a leg or both legs, as evidenced by the use of a wheelchair,
walker, crutches, quadcane or other such device; is blind; or is a person
physically limited by a cardiopulmonary condition, such as severe
181. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
182. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 228-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 228-3
228:557
emphysema or chronic bronchitis, restricting substantially his/her
movements.
RESERVED HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACE — A parking space
designated by the Board of Supervisors of Richland Township for use
by a handicapped person or severely disabled veteran which is posted
with a sign as provided herein.
SEVERELY DISABLED VETERAN — Any veteran whose serviceconnected
disability is certified at 100% by the United States Veterans'
Administration or who has a service-connected disability of the type
enumerated in the definition of "handicapped person" above.
SEVERELY DISABLED VETERAN PLACARD — The placard issued by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Motor
Vehicles, which is prominently displayed on the right front dash of a
vehicle designating the vehicle in which it is displayed as being used for
the transportation of (a) severely disabled veteran(s).
B. Any handicapped person, severely disabled veteran or parent or person
in loco parentis of a handicapped person on behalf of the handicapped
person may apply to Richland Township for a reserved handicapped
parking space by filing an application with the Police Department
supplying the following information:
(1) Name of handicapped person or severely disabled veteran.
(2) Date of birth.
(3) Address.
(4) If not a full-time resident at the above address, provide a part-time
address and length of time spent at the part-time address.
(5) Phone number where the applicant can be reached in the event of
the necessity to remove the vehicle for reasons of snow removal or
other emergency situation.
(6) Make and year of vehicle and the license plate number on the place
issued to the handicapped person or severely disabled veteran by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Motor
Vehicles, or the vehicle in which a handicapped person or severely
disabled veteran placard is to be displayed.
(7) Medical report signed by a physician licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania stating the following:
(a) Nature of the applicant's disability.
(b) Date of onset of disability.
(c) Whether said disability is of a permanent or temporary nature
and, if of a temporary nature, anticipated length of
convalescence.
§ 228-3 RICHLAND CODE § 228-3
228:558
(d) How said disability affects the applicant's ability to be fully
ambulatory.
(e) United States Veterans' Administration certification, if
applicable.
(8) Desired location of reserved handicapped parking space.
(9) Statement that the undersigned verifies that the statements
contained in the application are true and correct; and that the
applicant understands that false statements made therein are
subject to penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 relating to unsworn
falsification to authorities.
(10) Signature of the applicant or the parent or person in loco parentis
of the handicapped person.
(11) Date of the application.
C. Upon receipt of the application, the Richland Township Police Chief
shall, after investigation, report to the Richland Township Board of
Supervisors the following:
(1) Number and location of any other reserved handicapped parking
space within two blocks of the applicant's residence.
(2) Number of other parking spaces available within 500 feet of the
applicant's residence.
(3) Availability of on-site parking on the applicant's property.
(4) The effect, if any, which the reserved handicapped parking space
would have as an impediment to the free flow of traffic, snow
removal, fire protection or other access by emergency vehicles.
(5) The effect, if any, that the reserved handicapped parking space
would have on the efficient and orderly usage of other nonreserved
parking spaces in the area.
D. Upon receipt of the application and the report of the Richland Township
Police Chief, the Richland Township Board of Supervisors shall, in its
discretion, determine the need for and location of the designated
reserved handicapped parking space for the applicant.
E. If the Board of Supervisors determines that a reserved handicapped
parking space shall be so designated, the space so designated by the
Board shall be posted with a sign or signs stating the following: "This
parking space is reserved for a handicapped person or severely
disabled veteran. No parking is allowed by others. Any unauthorized
person parking here shall be subject to a fine."
F. Any reserved handicapped parking space may be temporarily
suspended during any emergency or snowfall by the placement of a
cover over the sign when, in the opinion of the Richland Township
§ 228-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 228-3
228:559
§ 228-4. Controls on speed and stopping.
Police Chief, the continued use would create an impediment to
emergency cleanup or snow removal.
G. The Richland Township Board of Supervisors reserves the right to
terminate the designated reserved handicapped parking space for
cause shown after written notice is given to the applicant stating the
reason(s) for the termination and advising the applicant of the right to
an administrative hearing before the Board of Supervisors according to
the Local Agency Law.183
H. Within 60 days after the effective date of this section, all prior reserved
handicapped parking spaces are hereby terminated. Within 30 days
after the effective date of this section, all persons who have a
designated reserved handicapped parking space issued prior to the
effective date of this section shall apply to the township pursuant to this
section to continue said use.
I. Any person who parks a vehicle in a designated reserved handicapped
parking space as provided herein shall be subject to a fine pursuant to
the provisions of § 228-6, unless said motor vehicle is displaying a
handicapped license plate tag or a severely disabled veteran license
plate tag, or handicapped or severely disabled veteran placard, as is, or
may be in the future, issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
A. It shall be unlawful:
(1) To operate any motor vehicle on any highway or street in the
Township of Richland, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, not under the
jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, at a speed in
excess of 25 miles per hour when said highway or street is posted
with speed limit signs on the right-hand side facing traffic at
intervals as provided by the applicable sections of the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code;184 provided, however, that if the Board of
Supervisors, by ordinance, sets or has set other limits as provided
by law, then such limits shall govern the rate of speed on the
highways or streets indicated in such ordinances.
(2) To operate any motor vehicle upon a commercial, educational,
industrial or multifamily parking area carelessly, disregarding the
rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger any
person or property or at a speed in excess of that posted by the
owner or lessee by signs authorized by the Chief of Police.
(3) For the driver of any motor vehicle to fail to stop in obedience to a
stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or
183. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105.
184. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 228-3 RICHLAND CODE § 228-4
228:560
§ 228-5. Weight and class of vehicles.
§ 228-6. Violations and penalties.
more entrances thereto. The operator of a motor vehicle shall
proceed cautiously, yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop
which are within the intersection or approaching so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection
is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the
directions of the police officer shall be complied with. The Board
of Supervisors shall cause to be posted suitable signs at the
designated stop intersections.
B. The Police Department of Richland Township is hereby authorized to
monitor, control and enforce the established restrictions and limits on
streets and highways located within the boundaries of Richland
Township by use of the Excessive Speed Preventor (ESP) Model TK100,
Aqutrak, Vascar, or such other electrical speed-timing devices or any
other speed-monitoring device as may be hereafter authorized by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for use by local authorities.
C. Posting. Those areas listed in Subsection A above shall be posted with
official signs as required by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code or this
chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful to:
(1) Operate a motor vehicle having a registered gross weight of 11,000
pounds upon any street or highway designated by the Board of
Supervisors, by resolution, as weight restricted.185
(2) Operate, park or stand any truck upon any street or highway
designated by the Board of Supervisors, by resolution, as off limits
to such vehicles except for local delivery.186
B. Posting. Those areas listed in Subsection A(1) and (2) above shall be
posted with official signs as required by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle
Code or this chapter.
A. Parking violations. Any person who violates any of the provisions of
§ 228-2 of this chapter shall be given a violation notice by the Police
Department and the violator shall within seven days forward the
violation notice, together with a fine of $5, with the exception of a
violation of § 228-2A(14) dealing with fire lanes, which fine shall be $15,
to the Richland Township Police Department by mail or by paying the
fine in person at the Township Municipal Building between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and, on failure to do
185. Editor's Note: The resolution establishing said weight restrictions is included at the end
of this chapter.
186. Editor's Note: The resolution establishing said areas off limits to trucks is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 228-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 228-6
228:561
Chapter 234
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authorities — See Ch. 11.
so, shall be subjected to prosecution before a District Justice and,
upon summary conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine and cost of
prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned not
more than five days; provided further that the continued violation of
any provision of § 228-2 of this chapter for a period of more than two
hours shall constitute a new and separate offense for each successive
additional two-hour period; subject, however, to the further provision
that if within 72 hours of the date and time listed on the violation notice
the violator appears in person at the Richland Township Municipal
Building between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, or sends by mail, postmarked within 72 hours of said date
and time, the violation notice and pays $5, the fine shall be reduced.
Otherwise, the enforcement provisions shall be for a violation of
§ 228-2A(14) as set forth above. [Amended 2-21-1994 by Ord. No.
235]
B. Speed/stopping violations. Any person who violates any of the
provisions of § 228-4A of this chapter shall, upon summary conviction
before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$10 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof,
undergo imprisonment not more than five days.
C. Weight violations. Any person who violates any of the provisions of
§ 228-5A(1) shall, upon summary conviction before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 or no more than $100 and
costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof, undergo
imprisonment not more than five days.
D. Class violations. Any person who violates any of the provisions of
§ 228-5A(2) of this chapter shall, upon summary conviction before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $10 and not
more than $75 and costs of prosecution and, in default thereof, undergo
imprisonment of not more than 10 days and costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment thereof, undergo imprisonment not more than five
days.
§ 228-6 RICHLAND CODE § 228-6
234:562
ARTICLE I
Connection to System
[Adopted 12-28-1979 by Ord. No. 110]
§ 234-1. Connection required.
Every owner of property in the Township of Richland whose property
presently abuts or will abut upon any portion of the water system of the
Windber Area Authority in the future shall connect, at his own cost, the
house, building or other structures located on said property with the
aforementioned water system as presently constructed or upon completion
of construction of any extensions thereof.
§ 234-2. Prohibited activities.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupier of any of said
aforementioned properties abutting upon said water system as presently
constructed or after completion of construction of any extensions thereof to
employ any means of obtaining water for purposes of human consumption
on said property other than from said water system.
§ 234-3. Notice to connect; time limit; extension.
It shall be the duty of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Richland
or the Windber Area Authority, as the agent for the township, to notify the
owner, lessee or occupier of each structure covered hereunder, in writing,
either by personal service or registered mail, to connect the same to said
water system as herein provided within 90 days after receipt of such notice.
Any owner, lessee or occupier of a structure who cannot comply with the
provisions of this section as to connection within the ninety-day period
stipulated above due to causes beyond his control should apply to the Board
of Supervisors or said Authority within said ninety-day period for a time
extension of up to six months in duration. Said application shall be made
on a form to be furnished by the Board of Supervisors or said Authority
and shall contain a voluntary agreement on the part of the applicant under
which the applicant shall agree to commence paying the regular monthly
water bill immediately thereafter even though actual connection to said
water system will not be accomplished until some later date within said sixmonth
extension period.
§ 234-4. Interconnections prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation connected to said
water system to connect with or permit the connection thereto of any other
property by any other person, firm or corporation or to interconnect any
other source of water supply for human consumption within the property
and said water system herein mentioned.
§ 234-1 WATER § 234-5
234:563
§ 234-5. Application; fees; inspection.
No person, firm or corporation shall make or cause to be made any
connection with said water system until he has fulfilled all of the following
conditions:
§ 234-6. Construction of connections.
The construction of all connections between the building and said water
system shall be done in accordance with the specifications, plans and
procedures contained in the Water System Rules and Regulations of the
Windber Area Authority, as the same have been or may be from time to
time published and amended, copies of which are, or will be, upon adoption
by the Authority, maintained on file with the Township Secretary and the
Authority Secretary.
§ 234-7. Noncompliance; township to do work; collection of costs.
If the owner or owners of any occupied houses, buildings or structures
in the township affected by this article shall neglect or refuse to comply
with the provisions of this article or the written notice as prescribed in
§ 234-3 hereof, the township or said Authority, as the agent of the township,
may perform or cause to be performed such work and labor and furnish or
cause to be furnished such material as may be necessary to comply with the
A. He shall make application to the Windber Area Authority ("Authority"),
as the agent for the township, upon a permanent form to be formulated
and supplied by said Authority for permission to connect to the
aforementioned water system. Among other things, the applicant must
state the character and use of each structure located on his property.
B. He shall pay the required applicable initial service charge and/or
tapping fee as established and imposed by said Authority, at the time of
making application for permission to make a connection.
C. No work shall commence before the payment of the aforesaid initial
service charge and/or tapping fee and issuance of the aforementioned
connection permit.
D. He shall give the designated inspector of said Authority at least 24
hours' notice of the time when such connection shall be made in order
that said inspector can be present to inspect and approve the work of
connection. The inspector shall signify his approval of the connection by
endorsing his name and the date of approval of the aforementioned
connection permit in the possession of the permittees.
E. At the time of inspection of the connection, the owner or owners of the
property shall permit the inspector full and complete access to all water
system facilities in each building and in and about all parts of the
property. No water connection line shall be covered over or in any way
concealed until after it has been inspected and approved by said
inspector.
§ 234-5 RICHLAND CODE § 234-7
234:564
provisions of this article at the cost and expense of such owner or owners,
together with 10% additional thereof on all charges and expenses incidental
thereto, which sum shall be collected from said owner or owners for the
use of the township or said Authority as debts are by law collectible, or
the township or said Authority may, by its proper officer, accept installment
payments as provided by law or file a municipal claim or lien therefor
against said premises as provided by law.
§ 234-8. Violations and penalties.187
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 234-7 WATER § 234-8
234:565

ARTICLE II
Water Shortage Response Plan
[Adopted 2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 192]
§ 234-9. Adoption of plan.
The Water Shortage Response Plan of the Highland Sewer and Water
Authority, attached hereto,188 is adopted herein by reference. This plan may
be modified and updated by said Highland Sewer and Water Authority.
§ 234-10. Nonessential water uses.
Those uses of water not essential to the protection of public health and
safety are deemed nonessential. Nonessential uses of water may be
restricted by both voluntary and mandatory measures as prescribed and
outlined within the Water Shortage Response Plan. A list of nonessential
water uses is included in the plan.
§ 234-11. Mandatory restriction; surcharge for noncompliant
users.189
If, during a water shortage period, a voluntary ban on nonessential uses
of water has not sufficiently reduced the rate of depletion of water supply
sources, and those sources have reached a level at which the response
plan prescribed more severe demand reduction measures, a mandatory
restriction of nonessential water uses shall be imposed. Those water service
customers found not cooperating with this action shall face a surcharge as
set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors for each day
of noncompliance, or the curtailment of water service, whichever is deemed
most appropriate.
§ 234-12. Water rationing.
If a water shortage emergency is declared by the Governor of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania within an area which includes the service
area of the Township of Richland and both voluntary and mandatory
restrictions of nonessential water uses have failed to sufficiently reduce the
rate of depletion of all available water supply sources, and if the Highland
Sewer and Water Authority Plan for water rationing has been reviewed
and approved by the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Council, water
rationing may be implemented. The Highland Sewer and Water Authority's
Water Rationing Plan is included in the Water Shortage Response Plan.
§ 234-13. Request for variance from restrictions.
Whereas, owing to special circumstances, a literal enforcement of the
restrictions imposed by the Local Water Rationing Plan would impose an
188. Editor's Note: The Water Shortage Response Plan is on file in the township offices.
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 234-9 WATER § 234-13
234:567
"extraordinary hardship," as defined in said plan, on a residential or
nonresidential customer, said customer may apply for a variance from said
restrictions according to the procedures and standards set forth below.
§ 234-14. Filing of variance; required information.
A request for a variance from said restrictions imposed herein shall be
filed at the office of the Highland Sewer and Water Authority and state the
following information:
§ 234-15. Hearing on variance; notice.
Upon receipt of a request for a variance from the restrictions imposed
herein, a hearing shall be scheduled before the Highland Sewer and Water
Authority Board. Public notice of said hearing setting forth the name,
address and nature of the request for a variance and the time and place
of said hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the
township not less than three or more than 10 days prior to said hearing.
Further, notice of said hearing shall be posted on the Authority's office and
written notice shall be given to the Richland Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 234-16. Variance guidelines; conditions.
A. Name of the customer.
B. Address of the customer.
C. Type of usage, i.e., residential, nonresidential.
D. If nonresidential, the nature of business, including hours of operation.
E. Details of the nature of the extraordinary hardship imposed upon the
customer.
F. Amount of variance requested from the restrictions.
A. The following shall serve as general guidelines in determining the
issuance of a variance:
(1) That there exist special circumstances which render the strict
application of the restrictions an extraordinary hardship.
(2) That the extraordinary hardship has not been created by the
customer's actions but by the imposition of the restrictions
generally.
(3) That the varying of the restrictions for the customer will not have
the effect of the nullifying the intent and purpose of the water
restrictions or undermine the public's perception of equitable
sharing of the hardships caused by the restrictions.
§ 234-13 RICHLAND CODE § 234-16
234:568
(4) That the varying of the strict terms of the restrictions will represent
the minimum variation that will afford relief and will represent the
least modification possible of the regulations in issue.
(5) That it will not affect the public health, safety and welfare.
B. In granting such variations, the Highland Sewer and Water Authority
Board of Directors may require such conditions as will substantially
secure the objectives of the restrictions so varied.
§ 234-16 WATER § 234-16
234:569
Chapter 240
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 42.
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 134.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 138.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 186.
Sewers - See Ch. 198.
Soil erosion and grading — See Ch. 204.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
§ 234-16 RICHLAND CODE § 234-16
234:570
ARTICLE I
Preliminary Provisions
§ 240-1. Enacting clause.
Be it ordained and enacted by the Richland Township Supervisors
assembled, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the
same, that from and after the passage and approval of this chapter the
several classes of districts specified herein shall be established and the
following regulations shall be in full force and effect.
§ 240-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Richland Township
Zoning Ordinance," and the official map referred to herein and made a part
of this chapter shall be known as the "Richland Township Zoning District
Map."
§ 240-3. When effective.
The effective date of this chapter shall be five days after the date of its
signature of approval by the Supervisors.
§ 240-4. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter, said
provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
and protection of the public health, welfare and safety. Where the provisions
of this chapter impose greater restrictions then those of any other
ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling.
Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose
greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute,
ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
§ 240-5. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause or provision of this
chapter shall be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or of any
other part.
§ 240-6. Purposes and community development objectives.
A. This chapter is enacted under and pursuant to the Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968,190 as amended, for the following
purposes:
(1) To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the
public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and
190. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 240-1 WATER § 240-6
234:571
§ 240-7. Filing.
This chapter, including the Zoning District Map, together with succeeding
amendments thereto, shall be on file and may be viewed by any interested
party in the township office.
practical community development, proper density of population,
civil defense,disaster evacuation, airports and national defense
facilities, the provisions of adequate light and air,police protection,
vehicle parking and loading spaces, transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, public grounds and other public requirements.
(2) To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land,
blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of
health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
Zoning ordinances shall be made in accordance with an overall
program and with consideration for the character of the
municipality, its various parts and the suitability of the various
parts for particular uses and structures.
(3) To preserve prime agriculture and farmland considering
topography, soil type and classification, and present use;
B. The above is in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan for Richland
Township which sets forth the community development objectives for
Richland Township.
C. The regulations and districts contained herein represent reasonable
consideration as to the character of the districts and their peculiar
suitability for particular uses of land. These provisions have been drawn
with a view to preserving the existing environment and assuring the
development of a future environment that realizes the greatest possible
use and enjoyment of land on individual properties, balanced against
the necessary protection of the values of buildings and land and the use
and enjoyment of land on adjacent properties, with the objective of
promoting and protecting the public welfare through the regulation of
land use and the process of land development.
§ 240-6 RICHLAND CODE § 240-7
234:572
ARTICLE II
Rules and Definitions
§ 240-8. Rules.
The following rules of construction shall apply to this chapter:
§ 240-9. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS OR ACCESSORY USE — A building or use
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use and
located on the same lot with such principal building or use. For the purposes
of this section, a trailer, van or any vehicle which was transported to a site
cannot be used as an accessory building. An accessory use includes, but is
not limited to, the following:
AIRPORT (and definitions related thereto) — See Article XIII.
ALLEY — A service way at least 15 feet wide, providing a secondary public
means of access to abutting properties.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities, or an
A. The particular shall control the general.
B. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is
permissive.
D. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in
the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular,
unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
E. The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended
for," "maintained for," and/or "occupied for."
F. The word "structure" shall include the word "building."
A. Children's playhouse, garden house, doghouse or private greenhouse.
B. Garage, shed or building for domestic storage.
Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot with
any commercial use unless such storage is excluded by the district
regulations.
C.
D. Off-street motor vehicle parking area; loading and unloading facility.
E. Home occupation.
§ 240-8 WATER § 240-9
234:573
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height or
the moving from one location to another, or any change in use from that of
one zoning district classification to another.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting members of
a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.
APARTMENT — A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure
which is used as a single housekeeping unit and which contains complete
kitchen, bath and toilet facilities permanently installed.
APARTMENT HOTEL — A building consisting of guest rooms, suites of
rooms or dwelling units which are occupied more or less permanently
wherein the occupants are furnished so-called hotel services, including
dining room and mail service.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building used by three or more families living
independently of each other and containing dwelling units.
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at
the main level of the principal building exclusive of uncovered porches,
terraces, steps, garages and other accessory buildings.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR — Engine rebuilding or major
reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision
service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; overall
painting of vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR — Incidental repairs; replacement of parts;
motor service to automobiles; state inspection; but not including any
operation specified under automobile repair, major above.
BASEMENT — A substructure for a main building partly below the finished
grade but having at least one-half of its height (measured from finished floor
to finished ceiling) above the average level of the finished grade where such
grade abuts the exterior walls of the building.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — The provision of overnight accommodations for
transient guests on a daily or weekly basis as an accessory use to a
residence. The owner of the dwelling must live on the premises, and food
service shall be provided for guests only.
BILLBOARD — A structure, building wall or other outdoor surface used
to display lettered, pictorial, sculptured or other matter which directs
attention to any product, commodity or service offered only elsewhere than
on the premises or as a minor and incidental service on the premises.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The duly elected/appointed Supervisors of
Richland Township.
BUFFER PLANTING STRIP — A strip of required yard space adjacent to
the boundary of a property or district, not less in width than is designated
in this chapter, which is landscaped for the full width (or as otherwise
specified) and on which is located a screen of sufficient density not to
be seen through and of sufficient height to constitute an effective screen
and give immediate visual screening to an abutting property or district.
§ 240-9 RICHLAND CODE § 240-9
234:574
The required screen shall be permanently maintained and shall constitute
a planting of dense evergreens or a compact evergreen hedge or, where
otherwise specifically designed, an appropriate wall, fence, suitable
planting, natural vegetation, or combination thereof. All planting shall
comply with the provisions of the Township of Richland Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance,191 if such ordinance provides for the same.
BUILDING — A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for
the shelter of persons, animals, chattels or property. When separated by
walls which are common with the walls of adjoining dwellings, each portion
of such structure shall be considered a separate building.
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal cross section
areas, excluding steps, cornices, eaves and gutters, of all buildings on a lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs
and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the street right-of-way line at a
distance therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard or setback required
for the district in which the lot is located, except in the case of an interior
lot not fronting on a street or highway for its full width, in which case the
building line shall be a line parallel to the right-of-way at a distance from
the property line nearest to the highway or street equal to the depth of the
front yard required for the district in which the lot is located. If the property
or lot abuts more than one street or highway, the front of the lot shall, in the
case of an existing building, be deemed to be that part or portion of the lot
toward which the main entrance of the building faces and, in the case of a
building proposed to be constructed, the part or portion of that lot toward
which the main entrance of the building is proposed to face.
BUILDING PERMIT — An official document or certificate issued by the
Codes Enforcement Officer or agency appointed by the township, pursuant
to the Richland Township BOCA Building Codes, as amended, authorizing
the construction of a specific building or structure or performance of a
specific activity.
CELLAR — An unfinished structure having one-half or more of its height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground. In a dwelling, a cellar may
not contain living quarters.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area covered by the building area.
CURB, RAISED —
Standard eight inches by 18 inches concrete curbs.
The standard concrete curb shall be constructed with PennDot
Class A cement concrete and shall be a minimum of eight inches
(1)
A.
191. Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 240-9 WATER § 240-9
234:575
DISTRICT, ZONING — A section of the township for which uniform
regulations governing the use, height, area and intensity of use of buildings
and land and open spaces about buildings are herein established.
DORMITORY — A building designed or used exclusively or primarily for
the housing of students of an educational institution, faculty, staff and
paying and nonpaying guests utilizing university facilities for universitysponsored
or university-supported activities, which buildings are owned by
the educational institution. The term "dormitory" shall include, but shall not
be limited to, fraternity and sorority houses.
DWELLING — A building designed or used exclusively as the living quarters
for one or more families.
DWELLING GROUP — A group of two or more one-family, two-family or
multiple-family dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership and having a
yard in common.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A dwelling or group of dwellings on one
plot or lot containing separate living units or dwelling units for three or
more families, but which may have joint services or facilities, or both.
DWELLING, MULTISTORY MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A multiple-family
dwelling of more than three stories.
thick and 18 inches high with a minimum of 10 inches below grade,
except the top eight inches shall be seven-inches thick to permit
rolling.
The top of the curb shall be 2 inches higher than the finish grades
at the center line of the street. Approved forms shall be used
and, when completed, the curbs shall be in a neat and finished
condition.
(2)
The curbs shall be constructed in accordance with a standard detail
plan prepared by Richland Township and shall conform to Section
630 of Form 408, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation-
Specifications, latest edition.
(3)
Integral cement concrete curbs and gutters. The integral cement
concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed with PennDot Class
A cement concrete and shall be constructed in accordance with a
standard detail prepared by Richland Township and shall conform to
Section 631 of Form 408, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation-
Specifications, latest edition. The top of the curb shall be two inches
lower than the finish grade at the center line of the street. When
completed, the integral curbs shall be in a neat and finished condition.
B.
State highway curbs. When located on a state highway, the concrete
curbs and gutters shall conform to the types as permitted in Form
408, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation- Specifications, latest
edition, which is incorporated herein by reference. However, at no time
shall bituminous concrete curbs be permitted.
C.
§ 240-9 RICHLAND CODE § 240-9
234:576
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or occupied
exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, ROW — A multiple-family dwelling divided by party walls into
distinct and noncommunicating units, each dwelling unit of which has direct
access to the outdoors.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by two families living independently of each other, with separate
dwelling unit entrances.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing one or more
rooms arranged for the use of one or more individuals living together as
a single housekeeping unit and having no cooking or sanitary facilities in
common with any other dwelling unit.
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or
three unrelated persons living as a household in a dwelling unit, except as
modified by the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. Family may
also include domestic servants and gratuitous guests.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior
walls or from the center line of common walls separating buildings. For
purposes of determining parking and loading space requirements for the
several zoning districts herein, the floor area of a building or buildings
shall include: basement space, penthouses, attic space providing structural
headroom of seven and one-half feet or more, interior balconies and
mezzanines, enclosed porches, accessory uses other than accessory offstreet
parking, lobbies and hallways. For determination of parking and
loading space requirements, the following areas shall not be included:cellar
space, elevator shafts and stairwells, floor space for mechanical equipment
as necessary to service the needs of the building, uncovered steps, terraces,
breezeways, open spaces unroofed unless specifically required in the
parking regulations herein and fitting and dressing rooms.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The total floor area of the building or
buildings on a lot divided by the area of such lot, or in the case of group
dwellings or multiple dwelling plan, by the net site areas.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building, housing only motor-driven
vehicles, the property of and for the use of the occupants of the lot on which
the private garage is located.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building, not a private garage, used for the repair,
servicing and/or storage of motor vehicles, but not to include a marshaling
yard, trucking facility or facility for the storage and repair of earth moving
or construction equipment.
GROUP HOME — Group home facilities are hereby deemed as a type of
residential use and not as an institutional use. Regulations are adopted
in the interest of protecting the residents of such facilities, to ensure the
residential character of the structure and of the surrounding neighborhood
and to prevent other types of facilities (specifically nonvoluntary and penal
§ 240-9 WATER § 240-9
234:577
living arrangements) which are likely to be disruptive to the residential
character of the neighborhood from being classified as a group home.
HABITABLE LIVING AREA — The floor area of a building or structure which
is furnished to the extent that it is customarily occupied by residents or
users of the buildings or structure.
HOME OCCUPATIONS —
HOME BUSINESS:
An accessory use of a service character within a dwelling by
residents which is clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for
living purposes and does not change the character thereof or have
any exterior evidence of such secondary use other than a small
name plate, measuring not more than 144 square inches and in
connection therewith there is not involved the exhibition of stock
in trade. The secondary use shall not be carried on in an adjacent
separate, attached or integral structure not designed for living
space such as a garage or other out building, shall not constitute
more than 25% of the habitable living area and shall not employ
more than one other person other than resident family members.
(1)
A home business shall be permitted by special exception according
to the criteria stated in § 240-104I. Instructions in violin, piano
or other musical instruments limited to a single person at a time
shall be deemed a home business. The business of dressmaker,
seamstress or other persons who offer skilled services to clients,
clergyman, tax preparer, consultant, writer and similar professions
shall be deemed a home business. The following are not permitted
as home businesses: dancing instruction, band instrument
instructions in groups, tourist homes, real estate offices,
physicians, dentists, architects, attorneys or any other
professional, convalescent homes, mortuary establishments,
stores, trades or auto body workshops.
(2)
A.
HOME OFFICE — An accessory use of a service character within a
dwelling by the residents of the structure which is clearly secondary
to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not change the
character thereof or have any evidence of such secondary use. A limited
business or commercial activity which meets all of the following criteria
is considered a home office and is permitted by approval by the Zoning
Officer in any dwelling unit:
No exterior evidence (e.g., noise, light, heat, dust, odor, signs,
electromagnetic interference, etc.) of the home office shall be
permitted that is uncharacteristic of a residential setting.
(1)
No retail sales or display of goods, exclusive of telephone, Internet
or other electronic network solicitation, is permitted.
(2)
No on-site storage of commercial vehicles shall be permitted,
except as may be provided under Article XI, § 240-110A.
(3)
B.
§ 240-9 RICHLAND CODE § 240-9
234:578
HOSPITAL — Includes sanitarium, sanatorium, preventorium, clinic for the
diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments and shall be deemed
to be limited to such places. This term shall also include the term "medical
facility."
HOTEL — A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public
for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from rooms is
made from an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at
all hours and which is open to transient quests, in contradistinction to a
boardinghouse, lodging house or rooming house.
HOTEL, MOTOR — A building in which lodging is provided and offered
to the transient public for compensation and in which egress and ingress
to and from rooms may be made either through an inside lobby or office
supervised by a person in charge at all times or directly from the exterior.
LEGAL RIGHT-OF-WAY OF A ROAD OR STREET — The right-of-way
obtained for the installation of the cartway of said road or street adjacent
to the property in question. Said right-of-way shall not include rights-of-way
obtained for other purposes including, but not limited to, retention ponds,
required slope grading or directional signs.[Added 12-16-2013 by Ord.
No. 327]
LOADING SPACE — A space within a main building or on the same lot
therewith providing for the standing, loading or unloading of vehicles.
LOT — A parcel of land on which a principal building or, where authorized
by this chapter, a unified group of buildings are or may be placed, together
with the required open space. The use of a lot for more than one principal
building shall be considered a subdivision, and the use of a lot for a
unified group of buildings shall be considered a land development; the
plan for any such use shall be subject to approval in accordance with the
Township of Richland Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.192 For
the purposes of these definitions, unified group of buildings shall include a
single commercial building designed to house more than one commercial
use or entity and shall include also a multidwelling group.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting on two or
more intersecting streets and which has an interior angle of less than 135º
at the intersection of two street lines.
Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home office
activity.
(4)
The home office activity may be conducted only within the dwelling
unit and may not occupy more than 10% of the habitable floor area.
(5)
The use shall not require the delivery of materials and goods by
trucks larger than standard panel trucks
(6)
The use shall not involve regular visitations by customers, clients,
salespersons or suppliers.
(7)
192. Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 240-9 WATER § 240-9
234:579
LOT, DEPTH OF — The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the rear lot line, measured midway between the side lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — In the case of an interior lot, the line separating the
lot from the street right-of-way line. In the case of a corner lot, the line
separating the narrowest frontage of the lot from the street right-of-way
line.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets and which is not a corner lot.
LOT WIDTH — The dimension of a lot, measured between the side lot lines
on the building line.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly contained in one unit
or in two units designed to be jointed into one integral unit capable of
again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home, which is leased by the park
owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for
nontransient use consisting of two or more mobile home lots.
MOTEL — See "hotel, motor."
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use provisions in a
zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where
such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance
or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment
to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures
include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a zoning ordinance or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior
to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason
of annexation.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A school designed to provide daytime care or
instruction for two or more children of preschool age.
NURSING, REST or RETIREMENT HOMES — Facilities designed for the
housing, boarding and dining associated with some level of nursing care.
§ 240-9 RICHLAND CODE § 240-9
234:580
PARKING LOT — Any lot, parcel or yard used in whole or in part for
the storage or parking of two or more vehicles where such usage is not
incidental to or in conjunction with a one-family dwelling.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of one
motor vehicle and having a width of not less than nine feet and a length of
not less than 20 feet, exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant
thereto, and given access thereto and having direct access to a street, alley,
passageway or driveway.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Richland
Township appointed pursuant to Chapter 42, Planning Commission, of the
Richland Township Code.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SCHOOLS — Publicly owned elementary. junior high
or high schools or privately owned elementary, junior high or high schools
having a curriculum similar to that ordinarily given in a publicly owned
school, but which may also include religious or other instruction.
RIDING ACADEMY — Any establishment where horses are kept for riding,
driving, stabling for compensation or incidental to the operation of any club,
association, ranch or similar establishment.
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY — A business that provides home-type washing,
drying or ironing machines or dry-cleaning machines for hire to be used by
customers on the premises.
SERVICE STATION — A building(s), premises or portions thereof which
are used, arranged, designed or intended to be used for the retail sale of
gasoline or other fuel for motor vehicles, boats or aircraft, as well as for
minor automobile repair, including state inspection.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult book store,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, place of adult
entertainment, adult theater, escort agency, massage establishment, nude
model studio or sexual encounter center, as further defined in Chapter 71,
Adult Entertainment, of the Richland Township Code.
SIGN — Any surface, fabric or device bearing lettered, pictorial, sculptured
or other matter designed to convey information visually and exposed to
public view; any structure designed to carry the above visual information;
and any structure or device designed or installed principally to direct or
attract attention, except traffic signs or devices.
SITE PLAN — A drawing prepared to scale which indicates all lot lines,
adjacent streets, easements, rights-of-way, the size and location of all
buildings, including setbacks, parking areas, driveways, and other
prominent features, and a list of all reference drawings with their drawing
numbers. The engineering site plan shall be prepared by a registered
architect, professional engineer or registered surveyor and approved by the
Township Planning Commission in accordance with § 240-19 prior to the
start of construction.
STABLE, PRIVATE — An accessory building in which horses are kept for
riding, driving, stabling for private use and not for hire or sale.
§ 240-9 WATER § 240-9
234:581
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET — A public street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians.
STREET LINE — The edge or side limit line of the legal right-of-way of a
road or street.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground.
UNIVERSITY — A publicly or privately owned post-secondary educational
institution which offers, at a minimum, bachelor of arts or bachelor of
science degrees. The term "university" shall include college.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it may be occupied or maintained. The
term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any
nonconforming use.
YARD — A space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied
and unobstructed by structures, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot,
unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lampposts,
overhanging eaves or gutters, the depth of which is the least distance
between the lot line and the building line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the
rear of the principal building and the rear lot line, unoccupied by other than
accessory buildings which do not occupy more than 30% of the space, and
steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lampposts, overhanging eaves, gutters,
cornices and similar structures and the depth of which is the least distance
between the rear lot line and the rear of such building.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the principal building and the side lot
line, extending the full depth of the lot, exclusive of steps, walks, terraces,
driveways, lampposts, overhanging eaves, gutters, cornices and similar
structures. The width of the required side yard is measured horizontally and
at 90º with the side lot line from the nearest part of the principal building.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — Under the provisions of this chapter the
Zoning Administrator, who shall be appointed by the Township Supervisors,
shall administer and enforce this chapter, including the receiving of
applications, the inspection of premises and the issuing of permits. The
Zoning Administrator may also from time to time be referred to as the"
Zoning Officer."
ZONING APPROVAL — A statement issued by and signed by the Zoning
Officer authorizing the use or construction of a structure and indicating
§ 240-9 RICHLAND CODE § 240-9
234:582
on its face that the proposed use or structure complies with this chapter
or with a decision and order of the Zoning Hearing Board or a court of
competent jurisdiction, rendered in connection with an application relative
to use of the premises involved. No approval shall be issued for any use
or construction unless the applicant shall submit written proof that the
designated authorities have granted approval of required sanitary sewage
and water facilities.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The duly appointed members of the Zoning
Hearing Board as created under Article XVI, § 240-99A.
§ 240-9 WATER § 240-9
234:583

ARTICLE III
Establishment of District
§ 240-10. Classes of districts.
For the purposes of this chapter, the Township of Richland is hereby divided
into the following classes of Districts:
R-1 District R-1 One-Family Residential District
R-2 District R-2 Two-Family Residential District
R-3 District R-3 Two-Family Residential District
R-4 District R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District
C-2 District General Commercial District
C-3 District Office Commercial District
L-1 District Light Industrial District
M District Manufacturing District
A District Airport District
U District University District
§ 240-11. Zoning Map
The boundaries of districts shall be as shown on the map attached hereto
and made a part of this chapter, which map shall be known as the "Zoning
Map of the Township of Richland." Said map and all notations, references
and data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this
chapter and shall be as much a part of this chapter as if all were fully
described herein.193
§ 240-12. Interpretation of district boundaries.
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
center line of streets, highways, street lines, highway right-of-way lines
or streams, such center line shall be construed to be such boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
C. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow or are parallel to the center line of streets, highways or the rightof-
way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed to be
parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the
Zoning District Map.
D. Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad, such boundary shall
be deemed to be located in the middle of the main tracks of such
railroad.
193. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the township offices.
§ 240-10 WATER § 240-12
234:585
§ 240-13. Federal, state, county or municipally owned property.
Wherever federal, state or county owned property is included in one or
more zoning districts, it shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter
only insofar as is permitted by the Constitution and laws of the United
States of America and of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. In the case
of municipally owned property, the use provisions of this chapter shall not
apply.
§ 240-14. Airport height limitations.
In addition to the classes of districts outlined in § 240-10 of Article III, a
special zone limiting height in the vicinity of the Johnstown Cambria County
Airport, or its successor, is created by Article XIII of this chapter, and
said height limitation zone is superimposed upon the districts created by
§ 240-10.
E. Where the boundary of a district follows a stream or other body of
water abutting another municipality, the boundary shall be deemed to
be the limits of jurisdiction of the township, unless otherwise indicated.
F. Where the boundary of a district traverses a lot, parcel or tract of
record, the zoning district designation shall be determined by review of
the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
§ 240-12 RICHLAND CODE § 240-14
234:586
ARTICLE IV
General Provisions
§ 240-15. Conformance and permits.
No building or land shall, after the effective date of this chapter, except for
existing nonconforming uses, be used or occupied and no building or part
thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless in conformity with the
regulations herein specified for the district and licenses required by all laws
and ordinances.
§ 240-16. Compliance with regulations.
No building shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed the height, to
accommodate or house a greater number of families, to occupy a greater
percentage of lot area or to have a narrower or smaller rear yard, side yard
or front yard than is herein specified for the district in which the building
is located except as authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to
Article IX.
§ 240-17. Yards.
No part of a yard or other open space about any building required for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included
as part of a yard or open space similarly required for another building.
§ 240-18. Substandard dwellings.
§ 240-19. Uses requiring site plan approval.
A. No structure shall be used or occupied as a dwelling if such structure is
in need of such major structural repairs as to render it unsafe or
unsanitary or if the premises does not have connection with the
municipal sewer system or alternative sanitary sewage facilities
approved by the local public health authorities having jurisdiction.
B. No structure shall be occupied as a dwelling unless said structure is
permanently attached to the ground by a permanent foundation or
crawl space or permanently attached to an on-grade slab except for
mobile homes located in a mobile home park.
C. No structure shall be used or occupied that is not in conformity with the
Richland Township Property Maintenance Code,194 as amended, the
Richland Township Building Code,195 as amended, or the Richland
Township Fire Prevention Code,196 as amended, or such other building
codes as are now or may hereafter be in effect.
194. Editor's Note: See Ch. 186, Property Maintenance.
195. Editor's Note: See Ch. 96, Building Construction.
196. Editor's Note: See Ch. 134, Fire Prevention.
§ 240-15 WATER § 240-19
234:587
A. Zoning approval issued for any purpose specified in § 240-93 in an R-4,
U, C, L-1, M or A District shall require site plan approval by the
Richland Township Planning Commission except for any of the
following:
(1) A change from a more restrictive permitted use to a less restrictive
permitted use. For purposes of this section, a less restrictive
permitted use is sought when the proposed use of the site plan
would require less restrictive area and height limitations, parking
requirements, storm sewer drainage requirement, and/or
floodplain requirements than those limitations and requirements
applying to the site use existing at the time of the zoning approval.
(2) Signs.
(3) Plans for one single-family or one two-family residence.
(4) The Zoning Officer shall have discretion to waive the requirement
of site plan approval for an addition to an existing structure or the
construction of an accessory building where the addition or the
accessory building does not exceed 250 square feet. In exercising
said discretion, the Zoning Officer shall evaluate the effect of the
addition or accessory building considering all relevant factors set
forth in Subsection C(1) through (11) below.
B. Three copies of the site plan and fee as provided for in § 240-95 shall be
submitted to the Commission at least seven days prior to the regularly
scheduled or special meeting at which it is to be reviewed. The sevenday
requirement may be waived by the Planning Commission if a
majority of the members present at the meeting agree that they have
had sufficient time to review the site plan. All site plans must be
approved by a majority of members present, provided that five
members must be present to constitute a quorum.
C. In addition to conforming to any specific requirements set forth in this
chapter, the Planning Commission may require changes in the site plan
which are deemed necessary to promote orderly development of the
area. In addition to specific requirements of the district regulations, the
site plan as defined in § 240-9 shall provide for and contain the
following:
(1) Location of the lot or lots with respect to adjacent streets and
property owners.
(2) Critical dimensions of setback, yard area, paving, driveways,
parking areas, landscape areas and other prominent features.
(3) Traffic circulation within the site.
(4) Location of vehicular access to the site.
(5) The height and bulk of structures.
§ 240-19 RICHLAND CODE § 240-19
234:588
§ 240-20. Public utility uses.
Public utility uses for the transportation, distribution and control of water,
gas, electricity, oil, steam, telegraph and telephone communications, cable
television and their supporting members other than buildings and railroads
shall not be required to be located on a zoning lot nor be held to reduce
yard dimensions for other buildings on a lot.
§ 240-21. Nonconforming lots.
A lot held in single and separate ownership or a lot in a recorded plan at
the effective date of this chapter or of any subsequent amendment hereto
which is not of the required minimum area or width may be used for the
construction, alteration or reconstruction of a building or may be otherwise
(6) Location and size of signs, walls and fences to be construed on the
site.
(7) Provisions for storm drainage, including the drainage flow, catch
basins size and location of any storm sewers and discharge points
from the site in conformity with § 240-26.
(8) Connections to all public utilities that are serving the site.
(9) Location, size and content of all underground storage tanks.
(10) Such additional information as may be required by the Richland
Township Floodplain Ordinance,197 as amended.
(11) Such additional information as may be necessary to determine
compliance with Article XIII of this chapter when the site is located
in zones surrounding the Johnstown Cambria County Airport or its
successors.
D. In considering any plan hereunder, the Planning Commission shall
endeavor to ensure safety and convenience of traffic movement. In this
connection, the Planning Commission shall refer to any traffic plan or
study adopted by the Township of Richland.
E. Likewise, the Planning Commission shall seek to assure harmonious
and beneficial relationship of buildings and uses on the site, as well as
to contiguous properties, and overall development in a manner not
detrimental to the public at large.
F. The Planning Commission shall report its findings and
recommendations in writing to the Zoning Officer within 48 hours
following the review meeting. The approval, for the purpose of
obtaining zoning approval and a building permit, shall be valid for a
period of 180 days unless extended by the Planning Commission for
reasonable cause shown.
197. Editor's Note: See Ch. 138, Floodplain Management.
§ 240-19 WATER § 240-21
234:589
used if the construction, alteration, reconstruction or other use itself is
in compliance with the use, yard, setback, density and other pertinent
provisions of this chapter.
§ 240-22. Nonconforming uses.
Except as hereinafter provided, the lawful use of a building or structure
or of any land or premises existing at the time of the effective date of this
chapter or any subsequent amendment, or at the time of a change in the
Zoning Map, may be continued although such use does not conform to the
provisions hereof or of any subsequent amendment.
A. A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use by
grant of special exception only upon determination by the Zoning
Hearing Board, after public hearing, that the proposed new use will be
no more detrimental to its neighborhood and surroundings than is the
use it is to replace.
(1) In determining relative detriment, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
take into consideration, among other things: traffic generated;
nuisance characteristics (such as emission of noise, dust and
smoke); fire hazards; and hours and manner of operation.
B. A nonconforming use shall not be extended or enlarged, and a
nonconforming building shall not be extended or structurally altered
unless the Zoning Hearing Board shall, as a special exception, authorize
the extension of a nonconforming use or the limited extension of a
building which houses a nonconforming use. The Zoning Hearing Board
may grant such special exception provided that:
(1) It is clear that such extension is not materially detrimental to the
character of the surrounding area or the interest of the
municipality.
(2) It is clear that denial of the use would work an undue hardship
upon the landowner.
(3) Any extension of a building shall conform to the area, height and
setback regulations of the district in which it is situated.
C. Whenever a nonconforming use of land, premises, building or structure,
or any part or portion thereof, has been discontinued for a period of one
year, the nonusage shall create a rebuttable presumption that the
nonconforming use has been abandoned and, in the absence of proof, by
a preponderance of the evidence, rebutting the presumption of
abandonment, the nonconforming use shall not thereafter be
reestablished, and all future uses shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 240-21 RICHLAND CODE § 240-23
234:590
§ 240-23. Nonconforming structures.
The continuation, alteration or extension of a nonconforming structure shall
be in compliance with the following requirements.
§ 240-24. As-built requirements.
Upon completion of all improved work and as a requirement for issuance
of a final occupancy permit, as-built drawings of the approved site work
shall be submitted to the township for review and acceptance. The asbuilt
information shall contain a certification by a registered architect,
professional engineer or registered surveyor indicating that the stormwater
management facilities are in place and functioning as per the approved
design.
§ 240-25. Site restoration bond.
A site restoration bond to assure restoration of the site to an approved
condition in the event that construction of a proposed development in
A. A nonconforming structure being used or proposed to be used for a
conforming purpose may continue and may be altered or enlarged
unless the alteration or enlargement would increase the nonconformity
of the structure with respect to the setback requirements (by reason of
the physical encroachments of such proposed alteration or enlargement
upon the setback areas), the land coverage requirements or the density
requirement of the district in which the structure is located at the time
such alteration or enlargement is proposed to be made.
B. A nonconforming building or structure which has been seriously
damaged or destroyed by fire or other casualty may be reconstructed in
its former location and to its former dimensions and used for the same
purpose for which it was used before its damage or destruction,
provided that such reconstruction shall be commenced within one year
from the date of damage or destruction and shall be completed within
one year after commencement of construction.
C. A nonconforming building shall not be expanded, enlarged or
structurally altered for a nonconforming purpose unless the Zoning
Hearing Board shall, as a special exception, authorize the expansion,
enlargement or structural alterations. The Zoning Hearing Board may
grant such a special exception provided that:
(1) It is clear that such extension is not materially detrimental to the
character of the surrounding area or the interest of the
municipality.
(2) It is established that denial of the expansion, enlargement or
alteration, etc., would work an undue hardship upon the landowner.
(3) Any expansion of a building shall conform to the area, height and
setback regulations of the district in which it is situated.
§ 240-23 WATER § 240-25
234:591
accordance with the approved plan and zoning requirements does not occur
may be required at anytime in an amount to be determined and approved
by the Township Supervisors.
§ 240-26. Stormwater.
Adequate stormwater drainage facilities shall be installed in order to ensure
that stormwater does not flow onto abutting property or abutting sidewalks
at a detrimental rate. The rate of stormwater runoff from a property after
construction and/or development shall not exceed the rate of runoff prior to
the construction and/or development. Runoff calculations shall be submitted
on forms provided by the township using formulas approved by the Richland
Township Board of Supervisors by resolution, along with the site plan for
review and approval.
§ 240-27. Safety limitations on fences, structures and shrubbery.
§ 240-28. Mobile homes.
Mobile homes shall be permitted only in mobile home parks.
§ 240-29. Garage and yard sales.
Private yard and garage sales. Such activities may be permitted in all
districts based on the following:
§ 240-30. (Reserved).
A. No fence, structures or obstacle shall be placed or maintained nor shall
any shrubbery be planted or maintained within the township in a
manner or at a location which creates a traffic hazard by impairing
visibility from or of a public highway.
B. The height of such objects are restricted to three feet above the
established street grade within a triangular area formed by the
intersecting street lines and equidistant from the point of intersection.
This distance shall be 30 feet from the corner.
A. Such sales are limited to four per calendar year per dwelling unit.
B. All activities are conducted in such a manner that no hazards or
nuisances are created.
C. The duration of such sale shall not exceed two consecutive days.
§ 240-25 RICHLAND CODE § 240-30
234:592
ARTICLE V
R-1 One-Family Residential District
§ 240-31. Purpose.
The R-1 One-Family Residential District is composed of certain quiet, lowdensity
residential areas of Richland Township, plus certain open areas
where similar residential development appears likely to occur. The
regulations for this district are designed to stabilize and protect the
essential characteristics of the district; to protect the amenities of certain
areas of Richland Township where the pattern has already been established
with single-family developments on relatively large lots; to promote and
encourage a suitable environment for family life; and to prohibit all
activities of a commercial nature except certain home occupations. To these
ends, development is limited to a relatively low concentration with relatively
large lot sizes, and permitted uses are limited basically to single-family
dwellings providing homes for the residents, plus certain additional uses
such as schools, parks, churches and certain public facilities which serve
the residents of the district.
§ 240-32. Use regulations.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) One-family detached dwelling.
(2) Public school or private school having a curriculum similar to that
ordinarily given in a public school, including religious instruction in
parochial school.
(3) Church and similar place of worship.
(4) Convent, monastery, rectory or parish house to be occupied by not
more than ten persons.
(5) Farm, operating, not under five acres, including private stable.
(6) Home office.
(7) Satellite dishes and antennas:
(a) Shall be installed in the rear yard at least 15 feet from the
property lines.
(b) Installation shall be mounted on the ground, shall have a
maximum height of 15 feet and shall have a maximum diameter
of 12 feet.
(c) If mounted on the roof, the height shall not exceed the height
limit within that district.
§ 240-31 WATER § 240-32
234:593
(8) Temporary building and use for construction purposes, not to
exceed a period of one year.
(9) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the foregoing permitted uses and including but not limited
to:
(a) Private garage.
(b) Fence or ornamental wall not over six feet in height as
measured from the established grade level.
[1] No fence shall be constructed within any street or alley
right-of-way. Except for farm use, fences in any residential
district shall not include barbed wire or other harmful
projections unless approved by the Zoning Hearing Board
for security reasons.
(c) Off-street parking and loading facility.
(d) Cultivation of plants, noncommercial.
(e) Private swimming pool appurtenant to a dwelling when
meeting the requirements of Article XXI hereof.
(f) Signs when meeting the requirements of Article XIX.
(g) Parking of boats, boat trailers and motor homes not used as
dwellings on the premises.
(h) Such permitted accessory uses as listed in the definition of
accessory use and which are incidental to residential use.
(i) No accessory buildings shall be located within the front yard.
The side yard setback to be in accordance with the district
requirements in this chapter and no less than 10 feet from the
rear of the property lines.
(j) No accessory building or buildings shall have an accumulative
area greater than 650 square feet, one story in height and a
height no greater than 15 feet.
(k) No accessory structure may be constructed prior to the
construction of the principle structure to which it is accessory.
(l) No accessory structure shall be used for dwelling purposes
unless expressly authorized by this chapter.
(m) An accessory structure shall be secured to the ground or
installed on a secure foundation or footer; in no event shall it
be erected on loose blocks or other temporary materials. The
footer or foundation shall be rodent proof.
§ 240-32 RICHLAND CODE § 240-32
234:594
§ 240-33. Area regulations.
(10) Similar type uses not specifically listed herein when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board according to the procedure authorized in
§ 240-100A(9).
B. Uses by special exception:
(1) Family day-care/group day-care home/day-care center as regulated
by Article XXII.
(2) Group home.
(3) Home business.
(4) Buildings for church-related uses. [Added 3-3-2008 by Ord. No.
311]
A. Lot area and width. The minimum lot area for every building hereafter
erected or altered shall be as follows:
(1) One-family detached dwelling, convent, monastery, rectory or
parish house: a minimum of 20,000 square feet and a width at the
building line of not less than 100 feet.
(2) Church or similar place of worship: one and one-half acres and a
width at the building line of not less than 200 feet.
(3) Public or private school:
(a) Elementary school: five acres, plus one acre for every 100
students at design capacity.
(b) Junior high school: eight acres, plus one acre for every 100
students at design capacity.
(c) High school: 12 acres, plus one acre for every 100 students at
design capacity.
B. Building area. All buildings, including accessory uses, shall cover not
more than 20% of the area of the lot.
C. Yard area setbacks.
(1) No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged unless the
minimum yard areas and setbacks are provided as follows:
(a) Front yard: not less than 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: not less than 15 feet.
(c) Rear yard: not less than 50 feet.
(2) Corner lots.
§ 240-32 WATER § 240-33
234:595
§ 240-34. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings hereafter erected or altered shall be as
follows:
§ 240-35. Dwelling standards.
Every one-family dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall have habitable
living area of not less than 1,400 square feet.
§ 240-36. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or
permitted under Article XVIII.
(a) Front yard: not less than 50 feet.
(b) Side yard abutting side street: not less than 35 feet.
(c) Interior side yard: not less than 15 feet.
(3) Exception. Where more than 50% of the lots within a block contain
existing structures, the front yard setback may be reduced to
conform to the average setback line of the existing structures.
A. One-family detached dwelling: 35 feet.
B. Church or similar place of worship: 45 feet for the principal building
and 75 feet for steeples or towers.
C. Accessory building: 25 feet.
D. Any other permitted building: 35 feet.
§ 240-33 RICHLAND CODE § 240-36
234:596
ARTICLE VI
R-2 Two-Family Residential District
§ 240-37. Purpose.
The R-2 Two-Family Residential District is composed of certain mediumdensity
residential areas of Richland Township representing compatible
mingling of single-unit and double-unit dwellings, plus certain open areas
where similar residential development appears likely to occur. The
regulations for this district are designed to stabilize and protect the
essential characteristics of the district; to promote and encourage a suitable
environment for family life; and to prohibit all activities of a commercial
nature except certain home occupations. To these ends, development is
limited to a relatively medium concentration and permitted uses are
typically single- and two-unit dwellings, providing homes for the residents
in this choice of dwelling types plus certain additional uses such as schools,
parks, churches and certain public facilities which serve the residents of the
district.
§ 240-38. Use regulations.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Any use and accessory use permitted in the R-1 District.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Similar type uses not specifically listed herein when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board according to the procedure outlined in
§ 240-100A(9).
B. Uses by special exception:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast.
(2) Family day-care/group day-care home/day-care center as regulated
by Article XXII.
(3) Group home.
(4) Home business.
(5) Nursing home.
(6) Planned residential developments.
(7) Private school not exceeding 30 students.
(8) Surface mining, provided that the parcel of land has received all
permits by state and federal agencies for surface mining and is
§ 240-37 WATER § 240-38
234:597
§ 240-39. Area regulations.
§ 240-40. Height regulations.
Height regulations shall be as permitted or required in the R-1 District.
contiguous to an "active surface mining operation" as that term is
defined by state and federal regulations.
(9) Two-family dwellings - subdivided for individual ownership.
[Added 12-23-2005 by Ord. No. 302]
A. Lot area and width. The minimum lot area for every building hereafter
erected or altered shall be as follows:
(1) One-family detached dwelling, convent, monastery, rectory or
parish house: 12,000 square feet and a width at the building line of
not less than 75 feet.
(2) Two-family dwellings: 15,000 square feet and a width at the
building line of not less than 75 feet.
(3) Church and similar place of worship: as required in the R-1 District.
(4) Public or private school: as required in the R-1 District.
(5) Private school not exceeding 30 students: 15,000 square feet and a
width at its building line of not less than 100 feet.
B. Building area. All buildings, including accessory uses, shall cover not
more than 25% of the area of the lot.
C. Yard area setbacks.
(1) No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged unless the
minimum yard areas and setbacks are provided as follows:
(a) Front yard: not less than 40 feet.
(b) Side yard: not less than 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard: not less than 35 feet.
(2) Corner lots.
(a) Front yard: not less than 40 feet.
(b) Side yard abutting side street: not less than 30 feet.
(c) Side yard: not less than 10 feet.
(3) Exception. Where more than 50% of the lots within a block contain
existing structures, the front yard setback may be reduced to
conform to the average setback line of existing structures.
§ 240-38 RICHLAND CODE § 240-41
234:598
§ 240-41. Dwelling standards.
Every one-family dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall have a building
area of not less than 1,000 square feet and two- family structures shall have
a minimum building area of 1,700 square feet.
§ 240-42. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or
permitted under Article XVIII.
§ 240-41 WATER § 240-42
234:599

ARTICLE VII
R-3 Two-Family Residential District
§ 240-43. Purpose.
The R-3 Two-Family Residential District is composed of certain mediumdensity
residential areas of Richland Township representing a compatible
mingling of single-unit and double-unit dwellings and mobile home trailer
parks by special exception, plus certain open areas where similar
residential development appears likely to occur. The regulations for this
district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics
of the district; to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family
life; and to prohibit all activities of a commercial nature except certain
home occupations. To these ends, development is limited to a relatively
medium concentration and permitted uses are typically single- and twounit
dwellings, providing homes for the residents in this choice of dwelling
types, plus certain additional uses such as schools, parks, churches and
certain facilities which serve the residents of the district.
§ 240-44. Use regulations.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes.
§ 240-45. Area regulations.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Any permitted use and accessory use permitted in the R-2 District.
B. Uses by special exception.
(1) Bed-and-breakfast.
(2) Family day-care/group day-care home/day-care center as regulated
by Article XXII.
(3) Group home.
(4) Home business.
(5) Hospital.
(6) Mobile home trailer park.
(7) Nursing home (to include assisted living/personal care facilities).
(8) Planned residential development.
(9) Two-family dwellings - subdivided for individual ownership.
[Added 12-23-2005 by Ord. No. 302]
A. Lot area and width. The minimum lot area for every building hereafter
erected or altered shall be as follows:
§ 240-43 WATER § 240-45
234:601
§ 240-46. Height regulations.
Height regulations shall be as permitted or required in the R-1 District.
§ 240-47. Dwelling standards.
Every one-family dwelling unit hereafter erected or altered shall have a
building area of not less than 700 square feet per dwelling unit. Every
dwelling unit of more than one story hereafter erected or altered shall have
a total floor area of not less than 1,000 square feet per dwelling unit. Every
two-family dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall have a building area
of not less than 1,400 square feet.
(1) One-family detached dwelling, convent, monastery, rectory or
parish house: 8,700 square feet and a width at the building line of
not less than 60 feet.
(2) Two-family detached dwelling: 11,000 square feet and a width at
the building line of not less than 60 feet.
(3) Church or similar place of worship: as required in the R-1 District.
(4) Public or private school: as required in the R-1 District.
(5) Private school not exceeding 30 students: as required in the R-2
District.
B. Building area. All buildings, including accessory uses, shall cover not
more than 30% percent of the area of the lot.
C. Yard area setbacks.
(1) No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged unless the
minimum yard areas and setbacks are provided as follows:
(a) Front yard: not less than 35 feet.
(b) Side yard: not less than 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard: not less than 35 feet.
(2) Corner lots.
(a) Front yard: not less than 35 feet.
(b) Side yard abutting side street: not less than 25 feet.
(c) Side yard, interior: not less than 10 feet.
(3) Exceptions. Where more than 50% of the lots within a block contain
existing structures, the front yard setback may be reduced to
conform to the average setback line of existing structures.
§ 240-45 RICHLAND CODE § 240-48
234:602
§ 240-48. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or
permitted under Article XVIII.
§ 240-48 WATER § 240-48
234:603

ARTICLE VIII
R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District
§ 240-49. Purpose.
The R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District is composed of certain mediumdensity
residential areas of Richland Township representing a compatible
mingling of single-unit and multiple-unit dwellings. The regulations for this
district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics
of the district; to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family
life; and to prohibit all activities of a commercial nature except certain
home occupations, controlled by specific limitations governing the size
and extent of such nonresidential activities. To these ends, development
is limited to a medium concentration and permitted uses are typically
single- and two-unit dwellings, townhouses, plus certain public facilities
which serve the residents of the district. However, high-rise apartments,
with corresponding proportions of open space, also may be developed under
prescribed standards of density and open space.
§ 240-50. Use regulations.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Any use and accessory use permitted in the R-1 District.
(2) Apartments and multistory multiple-family dwellings.
(3) Funeral homes.
(4) Multiple-family dwelling.
(5) Townhouses with not more than six dwelling units in one structure.
(6) Two-family dwelling.
B. Uses permitted by special exception.
(1) Family day-care/group day-care home/day-care center as regulated
by Article XXII.
(2) Group home.
(3) Home business.
(4) Hospital.
(5) Nursing home.
(6) Planned residential development.
(7) Private school not exceeding 30 students.
§ 240-49 WATER § 240-51
234:605
§ 240-51. Area regulations.
A. Lot area and width. The minimum lot area for every building unit
hereafter erected or altered shall be as follows:
(1) One-family detached dwelling, convent, monastery, rectory or
parish house: 8,700 square feet and width at the building line of not
less than 60 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 4,350 square feet per dwelling unit and a
width at the building line of not less than 60 feet.
(3) Multiple-family dwelling: 10,000 for the first unit and not less than
4,300 square feet per each additional dwelling unit or apartment
and a width at the building lines of not less than 150 feet.
(4) Townhouses: 10,890 square feet for the first unit and not less than
2,700 square feet per each additional unit and a width at the
building line of not less than 150 feet for a row dwelling containing
three or more dwelling units, but not to exceed six. If a row
dwelling is arranged, designed or intended to be sold or owned in
separate ownership between party walls, the minimum width of lot
between center lines of party walls shall be 16 feet and the onehundred-
fifty-foot minimum width of total site frontage shall apply
for the entire structure.
(5) Church and similar place of worship: as required in the R-1 District.
(6) Private school not exceeding thirty (30 students: as required in the
R-2 District.
(7) Public or private school: as required in the R-1 District.
B. Building area. All buildings, including accessory uses, except
multifamily dwellings shall cover not more than 35% of the area of the
lot. Multifamily dwellings shall cover not more than 40% of the area of
the lot.
C. Yard area setbacks.
(1) No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged unless the
minimum yard areas and setbacks are provided as follows:
(a) One-family detached dwelling and two-family dwellings:
[1] Front yard: not less than 35 feet.
[2] Side yard: not less than 10 feet.
[3] Rear yard: not less than 30 feet.
(b) Multiple-family dwelling, townhouses and multistory buildings.
All yards to be equal to building height or:
[1] Front yard: not less than 50 feet.
§ 240-51 RICHLAND CODE § 240-51
234:606
§ 240-52. Height regulations.
Height regulations shall be as permitted in the R-2 District, except that
multiple-family dwellings, townhouses and multiple-story apartment
buildings shall not exceed 60 feet in height.
§ 240-53. Dwelling standards.
Every one-family or two-family dwelling unit hereafter erected or altered
shall have a building area of not less than 700 square feet per dwelling
unit. Every dwelling unit of more than one story hereafter erected or altered
shall have a total floor area of not less than 1,000 square feet per dwelling
unit. Every two-family dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall have a
building area of not less than 1,400 square feet. Every apartment must
provide a minimum of not less than 400 square feet of habitable living
space, contain not less than two habitable rooms, at least one of which
shall be a private bathroom, and shall have separate and sanitary facilities,
cooking and dining accommodations provided for each unit.
§ 240-54. Recreational areas.
At least 500 square feet per family unit shall be set aside and maintained for
outdoor recreational area and maintained by the owner of the development
if the development contains three or more dwelling units.
§ 240-55. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or
permitted under Article XVIII.
[2] Side yard: not less than 25 feet.
[3] Rear yard: not less than 35 feet except where abutting on a
street, then a fifty-foot setback is required.
(c) Church and similar place of worship:
[1] Front yard: not less than 40 feet.
[2] Side yard: not less than 40 feet.
[3] Rear yard: not less than 30 feet.
D. Corner lots. Corner lot setbacks shall conform to the front yard
requirements set forth for this district.
E. Exception. Where more than 50% of the lots within a block contain
existing structures, the front yard setback may be reduced to conform
to the average setback line of existing structures.
§ 240-51 WATER § 240-55
234:607

ARTICLE IX
U University District
§ 240-56. Purpose.
The U University District is composed of post-secondary educational
facilities at which at least bachelor of arts or bachelor of science degree
programs are offered. These regulations recognize existing patterns of
university-type uses and are designed to stabilize and protect these uses
and to permit flexibility in student housing, educational and athletic
facilities and ancillary service facilities of a type generally found on a
university campus.
§ 240-57. Use Regulations.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes:
§ 240-58. Area regulations.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot or tract with and customarily
incidental to any of the permitted uses owned by or operated in
conjunction with the university.
(2) Ancillary service facilities selling or providing books, educational
supplies, art supplies, athletic supplies or other incidental clothing
or food items owned by or operated in conjunction with the
university.
(3) Buildings designed and used for instruction, research or other
educational purposes of a type customarily associated with the
university.
(4) Cafeterias and snack bars owned by or operated in conjunction
with the university.
(5) Churches and chapels.
(6) Dormitories.
(7) Gymnasiums, stadiums, playing fields, courts and rinks, swimming
and diving facilities and other athletic facilities.
(8) Hospitals and medical facilities.
B. Uses permitted by special exception.
(1) Family day-care/group day-care home/day-care center, as regulated
by Article XXII.
§ 240-56 WATER § 240-58
234:609
§ 240-59. Height regulations.
§ 240-60. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or
permitted under Article XVIII.
A. Yard area setbacks for buildings. No building or structure shall be
erected or enlarged unless the minimum setback from a property line of
adjoining property or public road right-of-way is 50 feet.
B. Yard area setbacks for parking areas.
(1) No parking area shall be constructed or enlarged unless the
minimum setback is 25 feet from the property line of adjoining
residentially zoned property.
(2) Parking areas may be constructed or enlarged with a minimum
setback of 10 feet from any public road right-of-way or property
line of any nonresidentially zoned property.
A. Between 50 feet and 100 feet of a property line of an adjoining
residentially zoned property or a public road right-of-way on or abutting
on residentially zoned properties, the maximum height of any building
enlarged or erected shall not exceed 35 feet.
B. The maximum height of any building erected or enlarged more than 100
feet from any adjoining property line of a residentially zoned property
or public road right-of-way on or abutting on a residentially zoned
property shall not exceed 60 feet in height.
C. The maximum height of any building erected or enlarged more than 50
feet from any other public road right-of-way or any property line of a
nonresidentially zoned property shall not exceed 60 feet.
D. Notwithstanding these height regulations, church steeples or spires
may be constructed to a height not in excess of 75 feet.
§ 240-58 RICHLAND CODE § 240-60
234:610
ARTICLE X
C-2 General Commercial District
§ 240-61. Purpose.
The C-2 General Commercial District is intended for the conduct of general
business to which the public requires direct and frequent access, but which
is not characterized either by constant heavy trucking other than stocking
and delivery of light retail goods or by any nuisance factors other than
occasioned by incidental light and noise or congregation of people and
passenger vehicles. This includes such uses as retail stores, theaters and
other amusement enterprises, business offices, newspaper offices and
printing presses, restaurants, bars and community garages or community
parking areas subject to special regulations. Residential and industrial use
of land is prohibited as well as any other use which would substantially
interfere with the development or continuation of the commercial
structures and uses in the district.
§ 240-62. Use regulations.
A building may be erected or used and a lot used or occupied for any of the
following purposes:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Amusement establishment, including bowling alleys, dance halls
and similar places of recreation when conducted wholly within a
completely enclosed building.
(2) Animal hospital.
(3) Art, book, school supply and stationery store.
(4) Automobile repair, minor.
(5) Auto accessory store, automobile and truck sales and incidental
service.
(6) Bakery shop, including the baking and processing of food products.
(7) Bank, financial institution and savings and loan association.
(8) Barbershop, beauty shop, chiropody or similar personal service.
(9) Bicycle repair, sales and rental.
(10) Blueprinting and photostating establishment.
(11) Bus passenger terminal.
(12) Cabinet shop.
(13) Camera and photographic supply shop, retail sales and service.
§ 240-61 WATER § 240-62
234:611
(14) Candy or ice cream store.
(15) Church or similar place of worship.
(16) Club or fraternal organization.
(17) Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring or shoe repair when
conducted for retail sales on a premises only.
(18) Delicatessen.
(19) Department store.
(20) Drugstore.
(21) Dry cleaning and/or laundry and shoe repair.
(22) Dry goods store, haberdashery and wearing apparel store.
(23) Electrical appliances store, sales, service and repair, but excluding
appliance assembly or manufacture.
(24) Family day-care/group day-care homes and day-care center as
regulated by Article XXII.
(25) Florist shop and conservatory for retail trade on the premises only,
not including retail or wholesale greenhouse or outdoor planting
beds for sale or nursery.
(26) Food, fruit or vegetable store.
(27) Funeral home.
(28) Furniture store and upholstery when conducted as a secondary
operation to the sale of furniture and furnishings.
(29) Furrier, conducted as a retail operation for trade on the premises
only.
(30) Garden supplies, seed store and nursery.
(31) Gift store.
(32) Hardware store.
(33) Health club.
(34) Hobby store.
(35) Hospitals or medical facilities.
(36) Hotel, motor hotel, club, tearoom, cafe, restaurant or tavern,
including those which serve alcoholic beverages.
(37) Household appliance store, sales and service.
§ 240-62 RICHLAND CODE § 240-62
234:612
(38) Interior decorating business, including upholstering and making of
draperies, slipcovers and similar articles when conducted as a part
of the retail operations and secondary to the main use.
(39) Jewelry store.
(40) Laundry, self-service, including self-service dry-cleaning
establishment.
(41) Liquor store, including beer distributor.
(42) Meat market.
(43) Medical office.
(44) Newsstand.
(45) Nursing home.
(46) Office, business or professional, or broadcasting station.
(47) Paint and wallpaper sales.
(48) Photographer's studio and art gallery, including the developing of
film when conducted as a part of the retail business on the
premises.
(49) Plumbing, heating and similar business showroom, including shop
or repair facilities.
(50) Post office.
(51) Printing shops.
(52) Service station, public garage or other motor vehicle services,
provided that no repair work is performed outdoors; provided that
all pumps, underground storage tanks, lubricating and other
devices are located not less than 15 feet from any street right-ofway;
provided that all fuel oil or similar substances are stored
inside or underground; and provided that all automobile parts and
dismantled or disabled vehicles awaiting repair or disposition
during an insurance claim shall be stored within a building. Tank
size shall not exceed 10,000 gallons and number of tanks will not
exceed five.
(53) Shoe store.
(54) Sporting goods store.
(55) Swimming pools as regulated by Article XXI.
(56) Theater, indoor.
(57) Tobacco store.
(58) Typewriter and office equipment sales and service.
§ 240-62 WATER § 240-62
234:613
§ 240-63. Area regulations.
(59) Variety store.
(60)Watch repair.
(61) Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, and
including:
(a) Off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with
Article XVIII.
(b) Fence or ornamental wall not over eight feet in height.
(c) Sign as regulated in Article XIX.
(d) Cultivation of plants, noncommercial, where used for
landscaping or buffer areas.
(e) Exterior display of merchandise as regulated by Article XV,
§ 240-93C.
(62) Similar type retail or local service use not specifically listed herein
when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board according to the
procedure outlined in § 240-100A(9).
B. Uses by special exception.
(1) Billboards.
(2) Group home.
A. Lot area. The minimum lot area for every building hereafter erected or
altered shall contain a minimum of 20,000 square feet.
B. Building area. All buildings, including accessory buildings, shall cover
not more than 40% of the area of the lot.
C. Yard area setbacks.
(1) No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged unless the
minimum yard areas and setbacks are provided as follows:
(a) Front yard: not less than 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: not less than 50 feet where abutting a street or alley.
None required for interior lot, except where abutting upon an
R District, where there shall be provided a side yard equal to
25 feet if abutting such R District, plus a buffer area of not less
than 15 feet.
(c) Rear yard: not less than 25 feet, plus a fifteen-foot buffer when
abutting an R District.
§ 240-62 RICHLAND CODE § 240-63
234:614
§ 240-64. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings hereafter erected, altered or enlarged
shall not exceed 35 feet.
§ 240-65. Conditions of use.
(2) A one-story accessory building may be located within a required
rear yard except for the five feet adjacent and parallel to the rear
lot line or alley line, but not upon any required buffer area, for the
storage of motor vehicles, the loading or unloading of vehicles
under roof or the storage of stock and merchandise customarily
associated with the principal use. For the purposes of this section, a
trailer, van or any vehicle or structure which was transported to the
site is not such a building and shall not be permitted to remain on
the property for more than seven days in any fourteen-day period.
A. All activities, except for accessory uses and a service station shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building.
(1) All refuse, garbage and similar solid waste shall be enclosed in a
masonry or equivalent structure of sufficient height, width and
depth to prevent dispersal of the solid waste in the vicinity with a
solid gate sufficient to conceal the contents.
B. The Township Planning Commission may require an occupancy permit
or zoning approval issued for a General Commercial District or lot
therein in accordance with the provisions and procedures of this
chapter and upon an affirmative finding that the following requirements
have been met by the owner, owners, developer, developers or
petitioners for the tract or lot proposed for commercial development:
(1) Traffic study.
(a) To include a comparative analysis of present capacity of
street(s) adjacent to the proposed business with potential
capacity and volumes generated by the proposed development,
together with necessary points of access to off-street parking
and loading. Traffic data available in the Richland Township
municipal offices may be utilized, provided that such data is
deemed current by the Township Planning Commission.
(b) To include a circulation plan for all streets in the vicinity,
existing and proposed, which show the recommendations for
controlling, signalizing, channelizing, storing, warning and
directing traffic.
(2) Landscape development plan.
(a) To include a plan of landscape development which shall
include, among other considerations, an area of at least 10 feet
in width along all streets with the exception of approved
§ 240-63 WATER § 240-65
234:615
entrances, to be planted and maintained with trees, shrubbery
or other landscape material or ornamental fence or wall to
serve as a visual screen for the parking areas and loading or
servicing areas.
(b) A fifteen-foot wide buffer planting strip consisting of suitable
landscaping maintained wherever the proposed business abuts
an R District.
(c) All parking lots and landscape areas or planting strips adjacent
to parking lots or streets or highways shall be surrounded with
a raised curb.
(d) The location, arrangement, size and effect of all outdoor
advertising or other signs and lighting proposed to be erected.
(3) Architecture.
(a) Architectural plans of the buildings and structures showing
that the project has a unified design which will be in character
and proper relationship to the surrounding areas shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for recommendation
and approval.
C. Any other authority approval required, when applicable, such as
Department of Health, State Highway Department, Department of
Labor and Industry and similar organizations, shall be obtained before
applying for a zoning approval or an occupancy permit. Said
authorizations shall accompany plans at the time they are submitted to
the Township Planning Commission. If the state or similar organization
requires zoning approval prior to issuing its approval, the Planning
Commission may issue site plan approval conditioned upon the
applicant presenting the state's or similar organization's approval to
the Zoning/Codes Official prior to the township issuing the building
permit.
§ 240-65 RICHLAND CODE § 240-65
234:616
ARTICLE XI
C-3 Office Commercial District
§ 240-66. Purpose.
The C-3 Office Commercial District is intended as a primary office district
of the community for the conduct of general business. It is the objective
to provide in this district sufficient space in appropriate locations for the
transaction of all types of administrative and miscellaneous service
activities in beneficial relationship to one another and thus strengthen the
economic base of the community; to provide appropriate space, including
sufficient ground area, permissible height and bulk of buildings, including
room for off-street parking facilities to satisfy the needs of modern officecommercial
development; and to encourage the tendency of officecommercial
development to concentrate to the mutual advantage of both
consumer and merchant, thus to promote public convenience, prosperity
and welfare. Land in this district is intended for concentrated officecommercial
development, which is not properly associated with, nor
compatible with, residential and neighborhood commercial and service
establishments. Therefore, residential, industrial or manufacturing uses
(except when incidental to the business) are prohibited as well as any
other use which would substantially interfere with the development or
continuation of the office-commercial structures and uses in the district.
§ 240-67. Use regulations.
A building may be erected or used and a lot used or occupied for any of the
following purposes:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Administrative offices of industrial or commercial establishments.
(2) Animal hospital.
(3) Bank and financial institution.
(4) Business, charitable finance, professional and consulting offices.
(5) Church or similar place of worship.
(6) Clubs limited to private membership, exclusive of sexually oriented
businesses.
(7) Family day-care/group day-care homes and day-care center as
regulated by Article XXII.
(8) Funeral home.
(9) Hospital and medical facilities.
(10) Motels and hotels.
(11) Post office substations.
§ 240-66 WATER § 240-67
234:617
(12) Research laboratories which do not involve the emission of
excessive noise, smoke, odors, gases or vibrations.
(13) Restaurant.
(14) Similar type uses not specifically listed herein when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board according to the procedure outlined in
§ 240-100A(9).
B. Permitted ancillary commercial uses.
(1) Barbershop.
(2) Beauty shop.
(3) Cafeteria and snack bar, including alcoholic beverages.
(4) Confections, sales.
(5) Drugs, tobacco and sundries, sales.
(6) Duplicating or offset reproduction shop.
(7) Fence or ornamental wall not over eight feet in height.
(8) Flower shop.
(9) Gift shop.
(10) Health clubs.
(11) Indoor swimming pool.
(12) Travel agency.
(13) Valet shop, including a dry-cleaning and/or laundry pickup station
and shoe repairs.
C. Conditions which apply to ancillary commercial uses. The above uses
are permitted, subject to the following conditions
(1) Ancillary commercial uses shall be located on the ground floor and
shall occupy no more than 10% of the principal structure.
(2) The principal entrance to an ancillary commercial use shall be from
the inside of a building housing a permitted principal use except
where the place of business of the ancillary commercial use is
located at least 75 feet from the nearest public street.
(3) No display of wares for sale shall be visible outside the building
unless the place of business is at least 75 feet from the nearest
public street.
(4) Signs shall comply with § 240-114 of this chapter.
D. Permitted ancillary residential uses.
§ 240-67 RICHLAND CODE § 240-67
234:618
§ 240-68. Area regulations.
(1) Apartments located on floors above the ground floor which, ground
floor is occupied by a use permitted in Subsection A and B above.
E. Uses by special exception.
(1) Nursing homes (including assisted living/personal care facilities).
(2) Hospital.
A. Lot area and width.
(1) The minimum lot area for any use shall be 20,000 square feet with a
minimum width at the building line of 100 feet.
(2) Except for nursing homes as provided in § 240-67E, where
multistory dwelling units or living quarters are used for habitation,
there shall be a minimum of 2,700 square feet of lot per dwelling
unit.
(3) Multistory apartments as permitted under § 240-67D shall have a
minimum of 1,500 square feet of lot area per unit.
B. Building area. All buildings, including accessory uses, shall cover not
more than 40% percent of the area of the lot.
C. Yard area setbacks.
(1) No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged unless the
minimum yard area setbacks are provided as follows:
(a) Front yard: not less than 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: not less than 50 feet where abutting a street or alley.
None required for interior lot, except where abutting upon an
R District, where there shall be provided a side yard equal to
one-half the required front yard in such abutting R District,
plus a buffer area of not less than 15 feet.
(c) Rear yard: not less than 25 feet. Where abutting an R District,
there shall be provided, in addition to the rear yard
requirement, a buffer area of not less than 15 feet.
(2) A one-story accessory building may be located within a required
rear yard except for the five feet adjacent and parallel to the rear
lot line or alley line, but not upon any required buffer area, for the
storage of motor vehicles, the loading or unloading of vehicles
under roof or the storage of stock and merchandise customarily
associated with the principal use. For the purposes of this section, a
trailer, van or any vehicle or structure which was transported to the
site is not a building and shall not be permitted to remain on the
property for more than seven days in a fourteen-day period.
§ 240-67 WATER § 240-69
234:619
§ 240-69. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings hereafter erected, altered or enlarged
shall not exceed 60 feet.
§ 240-70. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or
permitted under Article XVIII.
§ 240-71. Planting areas.
§ 240-72. Conditions of use.
A. Landscape development shall be required to include an area of at least
10 feet in width along all streets, with the exception of approved
entrance(s) which border the proposed development, which shall be
planted and maintained with trees and shrubbery to serve as a suitable
screen for the parking and storage area.
B. A buffer planting strip, consisting of suitable shrubbery and trees
maintained at a minimum height of eight feet by 10 feet in width, shall
be planted wherever the district abuts a residential district.
A. All activities, except for accessory uses and a service station, shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building.
B. No C-3 District shall comprise an area of less than two acres.
C. All refuse, garbage and similar solid waste shall be enclosed in a
masonry structure of sufficient height, width and depth to prevent
dispersal of the solid waste in the vicinity with a solid gate sufficient to
conceal the contents.
D. The Township Planning Commission may require the following prior to
issuing an occupancy permit or zoning approval for a General
Commercial District or lot therein in accordance with the provisions
and procedures of this chapter and upon an affirmative finding that the
following requirements have been met by the owner, owners, developer,
developers or petitioners for the tract or lot proposed for commercial
development.
(1) Traffic study.
(a) To include a comparative analysis of present capacity of
street(s) adjacent to the proposed business with potential
capacity and volumes generated by the proposed development,
together with necessary points of access to off-street parking
and loading. Traffic data available in the Richland Township
municipal offices may be utilized, provided that such data is
deemed current by the Township Planning Commission.
§ 240-69 RICHLAND CODE § 240-72
234:620
(b) To include a circulation plan for all streets in the vicinity,
existing and proposed, which show the recommendations for
controlling, signalizing, channelizing, storing, warning and
directing traffic.
(2) Landscape development plan.
(a) To include a plan of landscape development which shall
include, among other considerations, an area of at least 10 feet
in width along all streets with the exception of approved
entrances, to be planted and maintained with trees, shrubbery
or other landscape material or ornamental fence or wall to
serve as a visual screen for the parking areas and loading or
servicing areas.
(b) A fifteen-foot wide buffer planting strip shall be maintained
wherever the proposed business abuts an R District.
(c) All landscape areas or planting strips adjacent to parking lots
or streets or highways shall be surrounded with a raised curb.
(d) The location, arrangement, size and effect of all outdoor
advertising or other signs and lighting proposed to be erected.
(3) Architecture.
(a) Architectural plans of the buildings and structures showing
that the project has a unified design which will be in character
and proper relationship to the surrounding areas shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for recommendation
and approval.
(4) Any other authority approval required, when applicable, such as
Department of Health, State Highway Department, Department of
Labor and Industry and similar organizations shall be obtained
before applying for a zoning approval or an occupancy permit. Said
authorizations shall accompany plans at the time they are
submitted to the Township Planning Commission. If the state or
similar organization requires approval prior to issuing its approval,
the Planning Commission may issue site plan approval conditioned
upon the applicant presenting the state's or similar organization's
approval to the Zoning/Codes Office prior to the township issuing
the building permit.
§ 240-72 WATER § 240-72
234:621

ARTICLE XII
L-1 Light Industrial District
§ 240-73. Purpose.
The L-1 Light Industrial District is intended to permit and encourage
industrial development that will be so located and designed as to constitute
a harmonious and appropriate part of the physical development of the
township, provide opportunities for local employment close to residential
areas, thus reducing travel to and from work, and otherwise further the
purposes set forth in the initial paragraphs of this chapter. The limitations
on use, height and lot coverage are intended to provide for modern light
industrial development in an urban environment. Uses which would
substantially interfere with the development or continuation of the
industrial uses and structures in the district are prohibited.
§ 240-74. Use regulations.
A. In this district, the land and structures may be used and structures may
be erected, altered, enlarged and maintained for light industrial uses
listed hereunder, provided that:
(1) No explosive materials or processes are involved.
(2) No smoke, fumes, odor, dust, noise, vibration or glaring light is
noticeable from outside any lot in this district.
(3) The use is not offensive by reason of emission of refuse matter or
water-carried waste.
(4) There may be retail sale of products on the premises when such
sale is clearly incidental to the permitted industrial use.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Animal hospital and kennels.
(2) Bakery.
(3) Bank, financial institutions and savings and loan association, drivein
or main offices.
(4) Bottling works.
(5) Broadcasting, radio or television station and any necessary related
facilities.
(6) Building material yards or establishments.
(7) Business, charitable, professional and consulting offices.
(8) Cabinetmaking establishments and carpenter shops.
(9) Church or similar place of worship.
§ 240-73 WATER § 240-74
234:623
(10) Clothing factory.
(11) Contractor's yard.
(12) Dairy.
(13) Dry-cleaning plant.
(14) Dying plant.
(15) Family day-care/group day-care homes and day-care center as
regulated by Article XXII.
(16) Laundry.
(17) Milk distribution station.
(18) Motor vehicle repair, major.
(19) Optical goods factory.
(20) Paper box factory.
(21) Pencil factory.
(22) Printing, publication and engraving plant.
(23) Research and development organization.
(24) Retail sales and service of trucks and automobiles.
(25) Storage firm.
(26) Trucking terminal.
(27) Wholesale business.
(28) Any other compatible type manufacturing-light industrial use not
specifically listed herein when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board according to the procedure outlined in § 240-100A(9).
(29) Accessory use, building or fence or ornamental wall not over eight
feet in height, customarily incidental to the above permitted uses
and as regulated by this chapter.
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Billboards.
(2) Sexually oriented businesses.
(3) Storage yard and building for contractors or excavating equipment.
(4) Surface mining.
(5) Telecommunications towers.
§ 240-74 RICHLAND CODE § 240-74
234:624
§ 240-75. Area regulations.
§ 240-76. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings, including accessory buildings, hereafter
erected or altered shall be 60 feet.
§ 240-77. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or
permitted under Article XVIII.
§ 240-78. Conditions of use.
(6) Outdoor recreational facilities. [Added 3-3-2008 by Ord. No.
311]
A. Lot area and width. The minimum lot size for light industrial uses shall
be one acre with a minimum width at the building line of 100 feet.
B. Yard area setbacks.
(1) No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with
such building, structure or enlargement:
(a) Front yard: not less than 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: not less than 15 feet. When abutting a street, not
less than 50 feet. When abutting an R or U District, not less
than 50 feet.
(c) Rear yard: not less than 15 feet. When abutting a street, not
less than 50 feet. When abutting an R or U District, not less
than 50 feet.
(2) For construction of a new structure adjacent to a railroad, no
setback standards are required.
C. Building area. All buildings shall not cover more than 60%percent of
the lot area.
A. Traffic study.
(1) To include a comparative analysis of present capacity of street(s)
adjacent to the proposed development, together with necessary
points of access to off-street parking and loading. Traffic data
available from the Richland Township municipal offices may be
utilized, provided that such data is deemed current by the Planning
Commission.
§ 240-74 WATER § 240-78
234:625
(2) To include a circulation plan for all streets in the vicinity, existing
and proposed, which will show the recommendation for controlling,
signalizing, channelizing, storing, warning and directing traffic.
B. Landscape and site development plan.
(1) To include a plan of landscape development which shall include,
among other considerations, an area of at least 10 feet in width
along all streets with the exception of approved entrances to be
planted and maintained with trees, shrubbery or other landscaped
material or ornamental fence or wall to serve as a visual screen for
parking areas and loading or servicing areas.
(2) A buffer planting strip consisting of suitable landscaping
maintained in a ten-foot width by an eight- foot height shall be
planted within a required buffer area wherever the proposed
business abuts any other district.
(3) All landscape areas or planting strips adjacent to parking lots or
streets or highways shall be surrounded with a raised curb.
(4) The location, arrangement, size and effect of all outdoor
advertising or other signs and lighting proposed to be erected.
C. Architecture. Architectural plans of the buildings and structures
showing that the project has a unified design which will be in character
and proper relationship to the surrounding areas shall be submitted to
the Planning Commission for recommendation and approval.
D. Trash enclosure. All refuse, garbage and similar solid waste shall be
enclosed in a masonry or equivalent structure of sufficient height, width
and depth to prevent dispersal of the solid waste in the vicinity with a
solid gate sufficient to conceal the contents.
E. Any other authority approval required, when applicable, such as
Department of Health, State Highway Department, Department of
Labor and Industry and similar organizations shall be obtained before
applying for zoning approval or an occupancy permit. Said
authorizations shall accompany plans at the time they are submitted to
the Township Planning Commission. If the state or similar organization
requires zoning approval prior to issuing its approval, the Planning
Commission may issue site plan approval conditioned upon the
application presenting the state's, or similar organization's approval to
the Zoning/Codes Official prior to the township issuing the building
permit.
§ 240-78 RICHLAND CODE § 240-78
234:626
ARTICLE XIII
M Manufacturing District
§ 240-79. Purpose.
The M Manufacturing District is established in a district in which the
principal use of land may be for heavy industrial uses, except uses or
industrial processes that may be noxious or injurious by reason of the
excessive production or emission of dust, smoke, refuse matter, odor,
explosives, gas, fumes, noise, vibration or similar conditions. This district is
intended to provide for the kinds of industrial uses suited to the physical
and geographical advantages of this region, therefore contributing to the
economic base of the township and providing opportunities for employment.
Residential and, in general, commercial uses, are prohibited as well as
any use which would substantially interfere with the development and
continuation of the uses and structures in the district.
§ 240-80. Use regulations.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Agricultural activities, including greenhouse and nursery.
(2) Animal hospital and dog kennel.
(3) Automobile repair, major.
(4) Bakery.
(5) Bottling works.
(6) Building material yards or establishment.
(7) Business, charitable, professional and consulting offices.
(8) Cabinetmaker establishments and carpenter shops.
(9) Church or similar place of worship.
(10) Clothing factory.
(11) Contractor's yard.
(12) Dairy.
(13) Dry-cleaning plant.
(14) Dying plant.
(15) Family day-care/group day-care homes and day-care center as
regulated by Article XXII.
(16) Fruit canning and packing establishment.
(17) Ice plant.
§ 240-79 WATER § 240-80
234:627
(18) Laundry.
(19) Machine shop.
(20) Milk distribution station.
(21) Optical goods factory.
(22) Paper box factory.
(23) Pencil factory.
(24) Printing, publication and engraving plant.
(25) Research and development organization.
(26) Sheet metal shop.
(27) Steel fabrication.
(28) Storage firm.
(29) Trucking terminal.
(30)Welding shop.
(31) Wholesale business.
(32) Any other compatible type manufacturing-light industrial use not
specifically listed herein when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board according to the procedure outlined in § 240-100A(9).
(33) Accessory use, building or fence or ornamental wall not over eight
feet in height customarily incidental to the above permitted uses
and as regulated by this chapter.
B. Uses permitted by special exception.
(1) Billboards.
(2) Disposal of sewage sludge.
(3) Racing or testing facility for stock cars, midget cars and other
motorized vehicles.
(4) Sanitary landfill or similar waste disposal site.
(5) Sexually oriented businesses.
(6) Storage yard and buildings for contractors and excavating
equipment.
(7) Surface mining.
(8) Telecommunications towers.
(9) Wind energy facilities. [Added 3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 311]
§ 240-80 RICHLAND CODE § 240-81
234:628
§ 240-81. Area regulations.
§ 240-82. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings, including accessory buildings, hereafter
erected or altered shall be 60 feet.
§ 240-83. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required in
Article XVIII.
§ 240-84. Signs.
Signs shall be provided as required in Article XIX.
§ 240-85. Conditions of use.
In addition to the site plan requirements, the following regulations shall
apply:
A. Lot area and width. The minimum lot size for all manufacturing
buildings hereafter erected or altered shall be one acre with a minimum
width at building line of 100 feet.
B. Yard area setbacks.
(1) No building shall be hereafter erected or altered unless the
minimum setback is met as follows:
(a) Front: 50 feet.
(b) Side: 35 feet.
(c) Rear: 15 feet.
(2) If the proposed structure is to be adjacent to a residential district,
commercial district or light industrial district, a buffer planting
strip, eight feet in height and 10 feet in width will be installed and
maintained.
(3) For construction of a new structure adjacent to a railroad, no
setback standards are required.
C. Building area. All buildings shall not cover more than 60% of the lot
area.
A. Traffic study.
(1) To include a comparative analysis of present capacity of street(s)
adjacent to the proposed development, together with necessary
points of access to off-street parking and loading. Traffic data
available from the Richland Township municipal offices may be
§ 240-81 WATER § 240-85
234:629
utilized, provided that such data is deemed current by the Planning
Commission.
(2) To include a circulation plan for all streets in the vicinity, existing
and proposed, which will show the recommendations for
controlling, signalizing, channelizing, storing, warning and
directing traffic.
B. Landscape and site development plan.
(1) To include a plan of landscape development which shall include,
among other considerations, an area of at least 10 feet in width
along all streets with the exception of approved entrances to be
planted and maintained with trees, shrubbery or other landscaped
material or ornamental fence or wall to serve as a visual screen for
parking areas and loading or servicing areas.
(2) A buffer planting strip consisting of suitable landscaping
maintained at a ten-foot width by an eight-foot height shall be
planted within a required buffer area wherever the proposed
business abuts any other district.
(3) All landscape areas or planting strips adjacent to parking lots or
streets or highways shall be surrounded with a raised curb.
(4) The location, arrangement, size and effect of all outdoor
advertising or other signs and lighting proposed to be erected.
C. Architecture. Architectural plans of the buildings and structures
showing that the project has a unified design which will be in character
and proper relationship to the surrounding areas shall be submitted to
the Planning Commission for recommendation and approval.
D. Trash enclosure. All refuse, garbage and similar solid waste shall be
enclosed in a masonry or equivalent structure of sufficient height, width
and depth to prevent dispersal of the solid waste in the vicinity with a
solid gate sufficient to conceal the contents.
E. Any other authority approval required, when applicable, such as
Department of Health, State Highway Department, Department of
Labor and Industry and similar organizations shall be obtained before
applying for zoning approval or an occupancy permit. Said
authorizations shall accompany plans at the time they are submitted to
the Township Planning Commission. If the state or similar organization
requires zoning approval prior to issuing its approval, the Planning
Commission may issue site plan approval conditioned upon the
applicant presenting the state's or similar organization's approval to
the Zoning/Codes Official prior to the township issuing the building
permit.
§ 240-85 RICHLAND CODE § 240-85
234:630
ARTICLE XIV
A Airport District
§ 240-86. Purpose.
The A Airport District is composed of aviation and airport related facilities
within Richland Township. These regulations recognize existing patterns of
airport-type development and are designed to promote and facilitate use of
airport-owned property and natural projections of airport and air terminal
growth.
§ 240-87. Use regulations.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Aircraft fire/rescue facilities.
(2) Aircraft hangars and aviation associated offices.
(3) Aircraft maintenance and painting facilities.
(4) Air parcel express operations, administration, package sorting/
handling facilities, courier truck parking and maintenance
facilities.
(5) Airport terminals and administration facilities.
(6) Air traffic control towers and air navigational aid facilities,
including but not limited to antennas, transmitters, airport lighting
standards, rotating beacon towers, runway visual range facilities,
automated weather observation facilities, transmissometers and
VORTAC facilities.
(7) Aviation fixed base operator facilities.
(8) Aviation fuel storage and pumping facilities.
(9) Car rental facilities.
(10) Civil air patrol operations, administration and meeting rooms.
(11) Military construction battalion facilities, including equipment
storage and repair areas.
(12) Military motor pool storage and repair facilities.
(13) Military reserve armories, including classrooms, administration
facilities, facilities, physical fitness and gymnasium facilities.
§ 240-86 WATER § 240-87
234:631
§ 240-88. Area regulations.
(14) Military reserve aviation operating facilities. including hangars,
classrooms, aircraft and helicopter maintenance facilities, military
reserve meeting and administration facilities.
(15) Motel/hotel.
(16) Restaurants.
(17) Runway snow removal facilities.
(18) Runways, taxiways, ramp parking areas and associated lighting
systems.
(19)Weather observation facilities.
(20) Any other compatible type airport use not specifically listed herein
and authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board according to the
procedure outlines in § 240-100A(9).
B. Permitted ancillary commercial uses.
(1) Barbershop.
(2) Beauty shop.
(3) Cafeteria and snack bar, including alcoholic beverages.
(4) Confections.
(5) Drugs, tobacco and sundries.
(6) Duplicating or offset reproduction shop.
(7) Fence or ornamental wall not over eight feet in height.
(8) Flowers.
(9) Gifts.
(10) Health club.
(11) Indoor swimming pool.
(12) Travel agency.
(13) Valet shop, including a dry-cleaning and/or laundry pickup station
and shoe repairs.
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Billboards.
§ 240-87 RICHLAND CODE § 240-88
234:632
§ 240-89. Height regulations.
The height of structures in the A Airport District shall be limited to 60
feet and shall be in compliance with the regulations of Article XX, the
Federal Aviation Administration and/or the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, whichever are more restrictive.
§ 240-90. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or
permitted under Article XVIII.
§ 240-91. Conditions of use.
A. Yard area setbacks for buildings. No building or structure shall be
erected or enlarged unless the minimum setback from a property line of
adjoining property or public road right-of-way is 50 feet.
B. Yard area setbacks for parking areas.
(1) No parking area shall be constructed or enlarged unless the
minimum setback is 70 feet from the property line of adjoining
residentially zoned property.
(2) Parking areas may be constructed or enlarged with a minimum
setback of 10 feet from any public road right-of-way or property
line of any nonresidentially zoned property.
A. Traffic study.
(1) To include a comparative analysis of present capacity of street(s)
adjacent to the proposed development, together with necessary
points of access to off-street parking and loading. Traffic data
available from the Richland Township municipal offices may be
utilized, provided that such data is deemed current by the Planning
Commission.
(2) To include a circulation plan for all streets in the vicinity, existing
and proposed, which will show the recommendation for controlling,
signalizing, channelizing, storing, warning and directing traffic.
B. Landscape and site development plan.
(1) To include a plan of landscape development which shall include,
among other considerations, an area of at least 10 feet in width
along all streets with the exception of approved entrances to be
planted and maintained with trees, shrubbery or other landscaped
material or ornamental fence or wall to serve as a visual screen for
parking areas and loading or servicing areas.
(2) A buffer planting strip consisting of suitable landscaping
maintained in a ten-foot width by an eight-foot height shall be
§ 240-88 WATER § 240-91
234:633
planted within a required buffer area wherever the proposed
business abuts any other district.
(3) All landscape areas or planting strips adjacent to parking lots or
streets or highways shall be surrounded with a raised curb.
(4) The location, arrangement, size and effect of all outdoor
advertising or other signs and lighting proposed to be erected.
C. Architecture. Architectural plans of the buildings and structures
showing that the project has a unified design which will be in character
and proper relationship to the surrounding areas shall be submitted to
the Planning Commission for recommendation and approval.
D. Trash enclosure. All refuse, garbage and similar solid waste shall be
enclosed in a masonry or equivalent structure of sufficient height, width
and depth to prevent dispersal of the solid waste in the vicinity with a
solid gate sufficient to conceal the contents.
E. Any other authority approval required, when applicable, such as
Department of Health, State Highway Department, Department of
Labor and Industry and similar organizations shall be obtained before
applying for zoning approval or an occupancy permit. Said
authorizations shall accompany plans at the time they are submitted to
the Township Planning Commission. If the state or similar organization
requires zoning approval prior to issuing its approval, the Planning
Commission may issue site plan approval conditioned upon the
application presenting the state's or similar organization's approval to
the Zoning/Codes Official prior to the township issuing the building
permit.
§ 240-91 RICHLAND CODE § 240-91
234:634
ARTICLE XV
Administration and Enforcement
§ 240-92. Zoning Officer
A. Zoning enforcement. A Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the
Richland Township Supervisors to administer and enforce this zoning
chapter.
B. Duties and powers of Zoning Officer.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to enforce literally the
provisions of this chapter, as amended, and he shall have such
duties and powers as are conferred on him by this chapter and as
are reasonably implied for that purpose. The Zoning Officer's
duties shall include but are not limited to the following:
(a) Receive applications for and issue zoning and sign approvals.
(b) Keep an official record of all business and activities, including
complaints of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
and of the action taken consequent on each such complaint. All
such records shall be open to public inspection. File copies of
all applications received, approvals issued, reports and
inspections made in connections with any structure, building,
sign and/or land shall be retained as long as they remain in
existence.
(c) Make inspections as required to fulfill his duties. He shall have
the right to enter any building or structure or enter upon any
land at any reasonable hour in the course of his duties.
(d) Issue approvals for special exception uses and for variances
only after such uses and/or buildings have been approved by
the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the regulations
of this chapter.
(e) Be responsible for keeping this chapter and the Zoning Map up
to date as to include amendments thereto.
C. Notice of violations. The Zoning Officer shall serve a notice of violation
on any person, firm, corporation or partnership responsible for
violating any of the provisions of this chapter or in violation of a
detailed statement or a plan approved thereunder by sending an
enforcement notice to the owner of record of the parcel on which the
violation occurred and to any other person who has filed a written
request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel and to any
other person requested, in writing, by the owner of record which shall
contain the following information:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the township intends to take action.
§ 240-92 WATER § 240-92
234:635
§ 240-93. Approvals required.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of the chapter.
(4) The date before the steps for compliance must be commenced and
the date before which the steps must be completed.
(5) That the recipient of a notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board within 30 days from the date set forth on the notice
in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 240-101 of this
chapter.
(6) That the failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation with the possible sanctions clearly
described.
A. Zoning approval. No building, structure or sign shall be erected,
constructed, moved, added to or structurally altered nor shall land be
put to any use without approval therefor issued by the Zoning Officer.
No such approval shall be issued except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter or upon written order from the Zoning
Hearing Board in the form of administrative review, special exception
or variance as provided by this chapter or by the court.
(1) Form of application.
(a) All applications shall be made in writing and shall be
accompanied by two sets of plans, including construction
details and specifications, drawn to scale showing at least the
following information:
[1] Actual dimensions stated and the shape of the lot to be
built upon drawn to scale.
[2] The exact size and location on the lot of buildings,
structures or signs, existing and/or proposed extensions
thereto, as staked on the ground by a registered surveyor
with seal affixed.
[3] The number of dwelling units, if any, to be provided.
[4] Methods of sewage and solid waste disposal, plus
information on quantity and quality of sewage involved
and proposed method of treatment. if required.
[5] Parking spaces provided and/or loading facilities.
[6] Statement indicating the existing or proposed use.
§ 240-92 RICHLAND CODE § 240-93
234:636
[7] Height of structure, building or sign.
[8] All other information necessary for such Zoning Officer to
determine conformance with and provide for enforcement
of this chapter.
(b) One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the
Zoning Officer after he shall have marked such copies either as
approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature
on such copy.
(c) One copy of all such plans shall be retained by the Zoning
Officer for his permanent records.
(d) Such approval shall be issued or refused in writing not more
than 30 days from date of application. In case of refusal, the
applicant shall be informed to the reasons for the refusal and of
his rights to appeal. The application for approval shall be
submitted in such form as the Zoning Officer may prescribe.
(2) Expiration of zoning approval.
(a) Zoning approval shall expire within 90 days from the date of
issuance if work described in any approval has not begun. If
work described in any approval has begun, said approval shall
expire after one year from date of issuance thereof.
(b) A written request for an extension of a zoning approval beyond
the one-year period shall be accepted but shall be granted only
in extraordinary cases where the construction delay has been
occasioned by causes solely within the control of persons or
entities other than the applicant.
B. Building permit. In addition to obtaining zoning approval as provided
for above, an applicant is hereby notified that application must be made
for a building permit on such form as the building official may prescribe
and shall be accompanied by the required fee as prescribed by
resolution set by the Township Supervisors.
C. Exterior displays. Upon submission of an application in such form as the
Zoning Officer may prescribe and payment of a monthly fee as set by
the Board of Supervisors by resolution, the Zoning Officer may approve
the exterior display of merchandise or goods in designated parking or
yard areas if, in his opinion, the display does not significantly reduce
available parking spaces and does not create a safety hazard. Any signs
must comply with Article XIX.
D. Floodplain Ordinance. If the proposed structure or use is located in a
floodplain, as defined by the Richland Township Floodplain
§ 240-93 WATER § 240-93
234:637
§ 240-94. Certificate of use and occupancy.
A Certificate of use and occupancy shall be required upon the completion
of the work contemplated. It shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any
structure, building and/or land or portions thereof in any manner until a
certificate of use and occupancy has been issued.
§ 240-95. Schedule of fees.
Ordinance,198 then, in addition to the information required herein, the
applicant must comply with said Floodplain Ordinance, as amended.
A. Form of application. The application and inspection fee for a certificate
of use and occupancy shall be submitted in such form as the Zoning
Officer may prescribe.
B. Issuance of certificate of use and occupancy.
(1) The Zoning Officer or a Zoning Officer designee shall inspect any
structure, building, sign and/or land or portions thereof and shall
determine the conformity therewith. If the Zoning Officer is
satisfied that the completed work is in conformity with this chapter
and with the work listed in the zoning approval, the Zoning Officer
shall issue a certificate of use and occupancy.
(2) A certificate of use and occupancy shall be granted or refused in
writing not more than 10 days from the date of receipt of the
application.
(3) A complete set of as-built drawings shall be submitted for review
and acceptance by the township for any construction or use
requiring a site plan review under Article IV, § 240-19, or for any
permitted activity where compliance with regulations requires
clarification as determined by the Zoning Officer.
C. Inspection fee. Each application for a certificate of use and occupancy
shall be accompanied by cash, check or money order made payable to
Richland Township in the amount set by resolution by the Township
Supervisors.
A. Each application for site plan approval or zoning approval shall be
accompanied by cash, check or money order payable to Richland
Township in accordance with the schedule of fees as set by resolution
by the Township Supervisors.
B. Payment of the approval fees does not obligate the Zoning Officer or
Richland Township to grant the approval to the applicant.
198. Editor's Note: See Ch. 138, Floodplain Management.
§ 240-93 RICHLAND CODE § 240-95
234:638
§ 240-96. Remedies.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or
land is used or any hedge, tree, shrub or other growth is maintained
in violation of this chapter or any regulations made pursuant thereto,
the proper township authorities, in addition to other remedies provided
by law, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent
such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation;
to prevent the use of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
§ 240-97. Violations and penalties.
For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter or the terms of a
building permit issued, the owner, general agent or contractor of a building
or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the
owners, general agent, contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of a building
or premises in which part such violation has been committed or shall exist,
and the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person
who knowingly commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who
maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist,
shall, upon being found liable therefor, in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced in the name of Richland Township, pay a judgment of not
more than $1,000, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by Richland Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of the violation by a District Justice. If the defendant neither
pays nor timely appeals the judgment, Richland Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation unless the District
Justice determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation
violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in
which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation
until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation
by the District Justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees collected for the violation of this zoning chapter shall be paid
over to Richland Township.
§ 240-98. Power of amendment.
C. All approvals issued must be in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter and, in the event that approval is not issued, the approval fee(s)
shall not be refundable.
§ 240-95 WATER § 240-98
234:639
A. The Board of Township Supervisors may, from time to time amend,
supplement, change, modify or repeal this chapter, including the
Zoning Map, by proceeding in the following manner:
(1) The Planning Commission may initiate action by filing a written
report to the Township Supervisors.
(2) The Board of Township Supervisors may initiate action on their
own.
(3) The owner or owners of 50% percent or more of frontage of the
properties and 50% percent or more of the number of properties
between two intersecting streets may submit a notarized petition to
the Township Supervisors.
B. Petition for amendment.
(1) Form and content. Petitions for amendment, supplement, change
modification or repeal of the regulations prescribed for or of the
Zoning Map, including the district or any part thereof, shall be on
forms supplied by the Township Planning Commission. A narrative
description which defines the limits of the requested change by
street name or recognizable physical feature, states the specific
reason for the requested amendment and states the specific use,
type of development and type of structure to be erected under the
proposed amendment shall be submitted. A map and/or preliminary
site plan of the area to be affected by the petition shall also be
submitted to the Township Planning Commission for reference and
review by that Commission and copies forwarded to the Cambria
County Planning Commission for its review.
(2) Preliminary review by Planning Commission. After the facts
presented and the data and information from the petition are
reviewed and studied by the Planning Commission, the Commission
shall, within 15 days after the regularly scheduled meeting, submit
the petition with its preliminary recommendations to the Township
Supervisors. The preliminary report by the Planning Commission is
not intended to establish final approval by the Commission but
rather to serve as a means of providing a format of action and
review by the Township Supervisors.
C. Action by Township Supervisors.
(1) Subsequent to the introduction of the petition for zoning change
and preliminary report by the Planning Commission to the
Township Supervisors, the Supervisors shall fix a time for a public
hearing.
(2) Notice of the time and place of the public hearing for consideration
of the proposed amendment, stating when and where a copy of the
proposal will be available for public inspection and briefly
§ 240-98 RICHLAND CODE § 240-98
234:640
describing the change proposed, shall be given by the following
method:
(a) By publishing a notice once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the
hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days or less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
(b) By mailing a notice thereof to every resident or association of
residents in the township who have registered their names and
addresses for this purpose with the Zoning Hearing Board.
(c) Posting of a similar notice at the township offices.
(d) If the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change,
notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by
the Zoning Officer at points deemed sufficient along the
perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens at
least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
D. Conduct of public hearings. The Township Supervisors or an examining
officer appointed by the Township Supervisors shall be responsible for
the conduct of the public hearing.
(1) The purpose of the public hearing is to receive relevant facts, data
and other material desirable and necessary for a decision on the
petition for change.
(2) The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing
officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses
and documents requested by the parties.
(3) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross- examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(4) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(5) The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
record of the proceedings, either stenographically or by sound
recording, and a transcript of the proceedings and copies of
graphic or written material received in evidence shall be made
available to any party at cost.
E. Final report by Planning Commission.
§ 240-98 WATER § 240-98
234:641
(1) Within 30 days following the public hearing, the Planning
Commission shall review all material, data, testimony and facts
submitted for consideration in the petition for change. The
Commission shall make a final report on each bill setting forth in
detail reasons wherein public necessity, convenience and general
welfare do or do not justify the proposed change and determining
that the change is or is not in accord with the general objectives of
the Comprehensive Plan and good zoning practices and shall
forward its findings and recommendations to the Township
Supervisors.
(2) If the Planning Commission fails to file such a report within the
specified time in the specified manner, it shall be presumed that the
Planning Commission has approved the proposed amendment,
supplement or change. In any event, the recommendation of the
Planning Commission shall be regarded as advisory in nature and
shall not be binding on the Township Supervisors or other parties
to the issue.
F. Final action by the Township Supervisors.
(1) The passage of an ordinance amending, supplementing or changing
the regulations, district boundaries or classification of property,
now or hereafter established by this chapter, shall require the
affirmative vote of three members of the Board of Township
Supervisors.
(2) Any ordinance amending, supplementing or changing the
regulations, district boundaries or classifications of property
hereinafter established by this chapter, if not passed by the
Supervisors within 90 days after the required public hearing, shall
require a new public hearing as prescribed under Subsection D of
this section.
G. Curative amendments.
(1) A landowners who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this chapter or Zoning Map or any provision thereof
which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which
he has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the
Township Supervisors with a written request that his challenge and
proposed amendment be heard and decided as provided in
Subsection D hereof. The Township Supervisors shall commence a
hearing thereon within 60 days of the request. The curative
amendment shall be referred to the Planning Commission and the
Cambria County Planning Commission. In considering the curative
amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
petitioner, the Board of Supervisors shall also consider the factors
outlined in Section 609.1(c) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.199
§ 240-98 RICHLAND CODE § 240-98
234:642
(2) Notice of the curative amendment application shall be given in
accordance with Subsection C hereof.
H. Fees. Any person other than the Township Supervisors or Planning
Commission requesting an amendment of this zoning chapter (including
a curative amendment) shall pay a fee as set by resolution by the
Township Supervisors at the time the request is filed by the Township
Secretary. The fee shall defray the costs of advertising of the aforesaid
notice, the cost of stenographic service and any other expenses
incurred in connection therewith, as provided by law; provided,
however, that the aforesaid costs and expenses do not exceed the
amount provided; any difference shall be refunded to the applicant. In
the event that the aforesaid costs and expenses exceed the amount set,
the applicant shall reimburse the Secretary of the township for such
excess.
199. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 240-98 WATER § 240-98
234:643

ARTICLE XVI
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 240-99. Creation, appointment and organization
A. Creation and membership. There is hereby established a Zoning
Hearing Board. The membership of the Board shall consist of five
residents of the township appointed by the Board of Supervisors. The
members of the Board shall be appointed for a five-year term, however,
the terms of the first Board members appointed shall be for a term of
one, two, three, four and five years so that each year a Board member's
term expires. The Board shall promptly notify the Board of Supervisors
of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be
only for the unexpired portion of the term. The Board of Supervisors
may appoint one, two or three residents of the township to serve as
alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board. If, by reason of
absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not reached, the
Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate members of
the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a quorum.
Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on the Board
in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate
was initially appointed until the Board has made a final determination
of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate pursuant to this
section shall be made on a case by case basis and rotation according to
the declining seniority among all alternates. Members of the Board and
alternates shall hold no other office in the township.
B. Removal of members. Any Board member may be removed for
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in the office or for other just
cause by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such
a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the
member shall request it in writing.
C. Organization. The Board shall elect from its own membership its
officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed
themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action,
a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all the members of the
Board, but the Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own
membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf and the parties may
waive further action by the Board. The Board may make, alter and
rescind rules and forms for its procedure consistent with ordinances of
the township and laws of the commonwealth. The Board shall keep full
public records of its business and shall submit a report of its activities
to the Board of Supervisors once a year.
D. Expenses. Within the limits of funds appropriated by the township, the
Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services. Members of the
Board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties as
may be fixed by the township.
§ 240-99 WATER § 240-100
234:645
§ 240-100. Powers and duties.
A. General statement of powers. The Zoning Hearing Board shall function
in strict accordance with and pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,200 as amended, and shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications in the following
matters:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the Board of Supervisors pursuant to
Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.201
(2) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment of adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said
ordinance.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including,
but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit or failure to
act on the application therefor or the issuance of any cease and
desist order;
(4) Appeals from a determination by the Municipal Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of the Township
Floodplain Ordinance.202
(5) Applications for variances from the terms of this zoning chapter
and the Floodplain Ordinance.
(6) Applications for special exceptions under this zoning chapter or the
Floodplain Ordinance.
(7) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section
916.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.203
(8) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Municipal
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
development not involving Article V or VII applications of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(9) To hear and decide requests for uses as authorized by
§§ 240-32A(10), 240-38A(3), 240-62A(62), 240-67A(14),
200. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
201. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
202. Editor's Note: See Ch. 138, Floodplain Management.
203. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 240-100 RICHLAND CODE § 240-100
234:646
240-74B(28), 240-80A(32) and 240-87A(20). The applicant shall
first appear at a hearing held in accordance with § 240-101 before
the Zoning Hearing Board to establish that the proposed use is
compatible with the inherent purposes and uses described in the
applicable use district. If the Zoning Hearing Board determines
that the proposed use is permitted within the applicable use
district, and subject to any conditions imposed upon the applicant
by the Zoning Hearing Board, the applicant shall, except for
§§ 240-32A(10) and 240-38A(3) uses, submit to the Planning
Commission a site plan containing the information required in
§ 240-19 and the district in which the property is located. The
Planning Commission shall thereafter act upon the site plan in
accordance with § 240-19 and its rules and procedures and shall, in
addition, require that the site plan shows an intent to comply with
the conditions, if any, imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. The standards for review of proposed variance, special exception or
§§ 240-32A(10), 240-38A(3), 240-62A(62), 240-67A(14), 240-74B(28),
240-80A(32) and 240-87A(20) uses.
(1) In any instance where the Zoning Hearing Board is required to
consider a request for variance, special exception or use grant as
authorized in §§ 240-32A(10), 240-38A(3), 240-62A(62),
240-67A(14), 240-74B(28), 240-80A(32) and 240-87A(20), the
Zoning Hearing Board should determine that the following
guidelines are met before granting the request:
(a) The size, scope, extent and character of the special exception,
variance or use requested is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan of the township and promotes the
harmonious and orderly development of the zoning district
involved.
(b) The proposed change or modification constitutes an
appropriate use consistent with the character and type of
development in the area surrounding the location for which the
request is made and will not substantially impair, alter or
detract from the use of surrounding property or the character
of the neighborhood in light of the zoning classification of the
area affected; the effect on other properties in the area; the
number, extent and scope of nonconforming uses in the area;
and the presence or the absence in the neighborhood of
conditions or uses which are the same or similar in character
to the condition of use for which applicant seeks approval.
(c) The proposed use is suitable with respect to traffic and
highways in the area and provides for adequate access and offstreet
parking arrangements in order to protect major streets
and highways from undue congestion and hazard.
§ 240-100 WATER § 240-100
234:647
(d) Major street and highway frontage will be developed so as to
limit the total number of access points and encourage the
frontage of buildings on parallel marginal roads or on roads
perpendicular to the major street or highway.
(e) The proposed change is reasonable in terms of the logical,
efficient and economical extension of public services and
facilities, such as public water, sewers, police, fire protection
and public schools, and assure adequate arrangements for
sanitation in specific instances.
(f) All commercial or industrial parking, loading, access or service
areas will be adequately illuminated at night while in use and
arranged so as to comply the requirements of Article XVIII
dealing with special regulations and relating to access and
highway frontage.
(g) Conditions are being imposed on the grant of the request
necessary to ensure that the general purpose and intent of this
zoning chapter is complied with and that the use of the
property adjacent to the area included in the proposed change
or modification is adequately safeguarded with respect to
harmonious design of buildings, aesthetics, planting and its
maintenance as a sight or sound screen, landscaping, hours of
operation, lighting, numbers of persons involved, allied
activities, ventilation, noise, sanitation, safety, smoke and fume
control and the minimizing of noxious, offensive or hazardous
elements.
(h) The proposed change protects and promotes the safety, health,
morals and general welfare of the township.
(i) For further provisions relating to special exceptions, see
Article XVII hereof.
(2) In addition, to approve a proposed variance the Board must also
find, where relevant to given causes:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this zoning chapter in the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this zoning chapter and
that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to
enable the reasonable use of the property.
§ 240-100 RICHLAND CODE § 240-100
234:648
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the last
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
C. Powers relative to items not included in zoning chapter. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall have the power to make a ruling on all land use
items not specifically detailed in this chapter.
D. Exercise of powers. In exercising the above powers, the Board may
reverse or affirm. wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and such order,
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and, to
that end, shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is
taken. Every change granted or denied by the Board shall be
accompanied by a written finding of fact based on sworn testimony and
evidence, specifying the reason for granting or denying the variation.
The decision of the Board shall be made a part of any building permit in
which variation is allowed.
E. Required action. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of
the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or to decide in
favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass
under this chapter or to allow any variation of this chapter.
F. Appeal from action of the Board. Any party before the Board or any
office or officer of the township or the Supervisors may appeal to the
Court of Common Pleas. All zoning appeals shall be filed with the
prothonotary not later than 30 days after issuance of the notice of the
decision or report of the Board. Appellant's procedure shall follow the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act
247.204
G. Fees.
(1) Any person other than the Township Supervisors or Planning
Commission requesting a hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board
shall pay the following fees which shall defray the costs of the
Zoning Hearing Board proceedings. including compensation of the
Secretary and members of the Board, costs of notice and
advertising and necessary administrative overhead expenses. The
appearance fee for the stenographer shall be paid equally by the
applicant and the Board. Transcription costs are to be paid by the
party requesting a transcript, whether original or a copy; however,
in a case of an appeal, the cost of the transcript shall be paid by the
party appealing the decision.
204. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 240-100 WATER § 240-100
234:649
§ 240-101. Procedure.
(a) Basic fee. Applicants for variances, special exceptions and all
other appeals shall pay a fee as set by resolution by the
Township Supervisors, except as challenges filed pursuant to
Section 909.1(a)(1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended,205 in which event the fee shall also
be as set by resolution by the Township Supervisors.
(b) Additional fee. If actual costs exceed the fee charged, the
applicant shall promptly pay the difference upon billing by the
township. No permit/approval shall be given until payment of
any outstanding fee is received by the township.
A. Rules. The Zoning Hearing Board may make, alter and rescind rules
and forms for its procedure, including, but not limited to, exceptions
and variances.
B. Appeals and requests to the Zoning Hearing Board.
(1) Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board may be filed by the
landowner affected, any officer or agency of the township or any
person aggrieved. Such appeal shall be taken within the time
required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code or as
provided by the rules of the Zoning Hearing Board by filing with the
Zoning Officer and with the Zoning Hearing Board a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Hearing
Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken. Requests for a variance or special
exception may be filed by any landowner or any tenant with
permission of the landowner. The appropriate fee, established by
the township, shall be paid in advance for each appeal or
application for a special exception or variance to cover advertising
costs, mailing notices and charges of the stenographer for taking
the notes of testimony; provided that, if more than ten pages of
testimony are taken in any case, the appellant or applicant shall
reimburse the township for the cost of such additional testimony.
C. Hearings and notices. Upon the filing with the Zoning Hearing Board of
an appeal or an application for a special exception or variance from the
terms of this chapter, the Zoning Hearing Board shall fix a reasonable
time and place for a public hearing thereon and shall give public notice
thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and shall decide
the same in writing within 45 days after the hearing. Each written
decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon, together with the reasons thereupon in accordance with
Section 908(9) of the Municipalities Planning Code.206 If the Zoning
205. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 240-100 RICHLAND CODE § 240-101
234:650
§ 240-102. Expiration of special exceptions and variances.
Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Hearing Board, a special
exception, variance or use approved pursuant to § 240-100A which has been
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board shall expire automatically, without
further notice by the township to the applicant, if the applicant fails to
obtain the zoning approval or use certificate issued by the Zoning Officer
and/or the building permit issued by the Codes Enforcement Officer within
six months from the date of authorization thereof.
Hearing Board does not make a written decision within 45 days after
the hearing or continued hearing. it shall be deemed that the Zoning
Hearing Board has decided in favor of the applicant. Any party may
appear at a public hearing in person or by agent or attorney. The notice
of public hearing shall state the location of the building or lot and the
general nature of the question involved and shall be given as follows:
(1) By publishing a notice thereof once a week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the township and
not more than 30 days nor less than seven days prior to the
hearing.
(2) By mailing a notice thereof to the applicant, the Zoning Officer,
Township Manager and any person who has made timely request
for same.
(3) By mailing a notice thereof to every resident or association of
residents in the township who shall have registered their names
and addresses for this purpose with the Zoning Hearing Board.
(4) By mailing notice thereof to the owner, every lot on the same street
within 500 feet of the lot in question and of every lot not on the
same street within 150 feet of said lot; provided that failure to mail
the notice required by this section shall not invalidate any action
taken by the Zoning Hearing Board. All hearings shall be conducted
in accordance with Section 908 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (53 P.S. 10908) as amended.
(5) Notice of the hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected
tract of land.
(6) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him not later than the day following its date. To all other persons
who have filed their name and address with the Board not later
than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or
otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement
of the place where the full decision or findings may be examined.
206. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 240-101 WATER § 240-102
234:651

ARTICLE XVII
Special Exceptions
§ 240-103. General provisions.
The following special exceptions are permitted in specific district
classifications. They are subject to the general criteria against which all
requests for special exceptions are evaluated which are located in Article
XVI, § 240-100. In addition, approval of such special exceptions is subject to
the following conditions:
§ 240-104. Special exception conditions,
The following conditions shall apply to special exceptions that are permitted
in certain specified districts.
A. Such use shall be one which is specifically authorized as a special
exception use in the district in which it is to be located.
B. Such permits shall only be granted subject to any applicable conditions
and safeguards required by this chapter.
C. Such permit may be granted subject to any additional conditions and
safeguards as may be deemed by the Board to be advisable and
appropriate.
D. Such use shall be found by the Board to be in harmony with the general
purposes and intent of this chapter.
E. Such use shall not adversely affect the character of the district nor the
conservation of property values nor the health and safety of residents or
workers on adjacent properties and in the general neighborhood.
F. Such use shall be such appropriate size and so located and laid out in
relation to its access streets that vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and
from such use will not create undue congestion or hazards prejudicial
to the general neighborhood.
G. Such use shall not conflict with the direction of buildings development
in accordance with any Comprehensive Plan or portion thereof which
has been adopted by the Planning Commission.
H. Within 10 days after an application for a special exception is filed, the
application and accompanying plans shall be submitted to the Township
Supervisors for their review and recommendations. If the Township
Supervisors fail to file their recommendations within 10 days of receipt
of the application by them, it shall be presumed that they have no
recommendation. In any event, the recommendation of the Township
Supervisors shall be regarded as advisory only to the Zoning Hearing
Board and shall not be binding under any circumstances.
A. Planned residential development. A planned residential development
may be permitted as a special exception in an R-2, R-3 and R-4
§ 240-103 WATER § 240-104
234:653
Residential District to encourage renovations in residential
development so that the growing demand for housing may be met by
greater variety in type, design and layout of single-family dwellings
and multifamily dwellings and by conservation and more efficient use
of open space ancillary to said dwellings and uses; so that greater
opportunities of better housing and recreation may extend to all
citizens; and in order to encourage a more efficient use of the land
and of public services and to reflect changes in the technology of land
development so that economies secured may endure to the benefit
of those who need homes. In aid of these purposes, and to ensure
that the increased flexibility of regulations authorized herein and the
requirements set forth within this chapter and by Article VII of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended, are
carried out, the following standards for planned residential
development is herewith ratified:
(1) Submission procedure.
(a) The proposed planned residential development shall have a
three-phase approval procedure in order to provide a
expeditious method for processing the development plan.
(b) An application for the planned residential development,
complete with approvals from all utilities, a statement
outlining the development objectives setting forth the reasons
why, in his/her opinion, a planned residential development
would be in the public interest and consistent with the
standards herewith set forth and an initial draft of the
proposed development, shall be filed on behalf of the
landowner to the Planning Commission for an initial review at
their regular meeting. The Planning Commission shall review
the submission for compliance with the procedures set
forthwith in this section, Article VII of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, the Richland Township
Subdivision Ordinance207 and all applicable ordinances of
Richland Township. Within 10 days of the review, the Planning
Commission shall give a written report to the developer and
the Zoning Hearing Board.
(c) Within 60 days after tentative approval from the Planning
Commission, the developer shall file application for a special
exception to the Zoning Hearing Board. A public hearing
pursuant to public notice on said application shall be held by
the Zoning Hearing Board in the manner prescribed within
Article XVI of this chapter and Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
review the development plans for compliance with the
standards, conditions and regulations set forth within the
provisions of this article. The Zoning Hearing Board shall make
207. Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:654
a written decision to the developer and the Planning
Commission within 45 days after the hearing.
(d) Within 60 days after the approval from the Zoning Hearing
Board, the preliminary plans, along with all supporting
documents, shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for
their review in accordance with the applicable procedures of
the Richland Township Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations then in effect. Final approval shall be in
accordance with the applicable procedures of the Richland
Township Subdivision and Land Development regulations then
in effect.
(2) Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size for any planned residential
development shall be 20 acres.
(3) Maximum lot size. The maximum lot size for any planned
residential development shall be 60 acres.
(4) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Two-family detached dwellings.
(c) Multiple row dwellings, townhouses and garden apartments
with a maximum of eight units per building.
(d) Multistory apartments not to exceed six stories or 60 feet
above ground in height.
(e) Community buildings which are for the social, cultural or
recreational use of the residents of the development to be
located in an area to be consistent with the intent of this
article.
(f) Open space and recreation facilities developed and maintained
principally for use of residents of the development within
Subsection A(6).
(g) Certain nonresidential uses such as buildings for convenience
shopping and personal services, provided that such uses along
with required parking occupy not more than 5% of the total
land area of the development.
(5) In the event that development of the entire project is proposed to
be divided into several phases, the Supervisors may require the
construction of all or part of the open space-recreation facilities,
community buildings or nonresidential uses in the initial phase of
development.
(6) Dwelling standards.
(a) Single-family dwellings.
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:655
[1] Minimum 700 square feet living area.
[2] Maximum two stories and 35 feet maximum height.
[3] Lot width: 60 feet minimum at the building line
(b) Two-family dwellings.
[1] Maximum of eight duplexes for every one hundred singlefamily
lots.
[2] Minimum of 700 square feet living area per unit.
[3] Maximum two stories with 35 feet maximum height.
[4] Lot width: 75 feet minimum at the building line.
[5] Lot area: 10,000 square feet minimum
(c) Apartment buildings.
[1] Maximum of eight units per building.
[2] Maximum of three stories or 45 feet in height.
[3] Maximum 16 units per acre
(d) Condominiums/townhouses.
[1] Maximum of eight units per building
[2] Maximum three stories or 45 feet in height.
[3] Maximum 16 units per acre
(7) Development standards and conditions. No multifamily,
condominiums, townhouses or accessory buildings other than a
sales office used for the activities within the development shall be
constructed until the minimum size lots are sold or built upon.
(a) Four multifamily dwelling units may be constructed after the
construction to 10 single-family dwellings or the sale of 10
single-family lots.
(b) The combination of eight dwelling units of multifamily,
townhouses or condominiums may be constructed after the
construction of 25 single-family homes or the sale of 25 single
lots.
(c) The development must have a minimum of 33% of the dwelling
units complete before the construction of any nonresidential
building other than a sales office used for the activities within
the development.
(d) The dwelling unit density shall conform to the following:
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:656
[1] Single family: five units per acre.
[2] Two-family: 10 units per acre.
[3] Row dwelling: 16 units per acre.
[4] Multistory dwellings: 16 units per acre.
[5] For mixed types of structures, the overall density may not
exceed 12 units per acre.
(8) Setback requirements and minimum distance between buildings
and density requirements. More than one multifamily building,
townhouse or condominium building may be placed on a single
parcel of land with the position as detailed below:
(a) A minimum building setback of 70 feet shall be observed
around the entire perimeter of the tract or lot used for
multifamily, townhouse or condominium. No main or accessory
building may be erected within the setback area. The property
abutting the planned residential development area used for
multifamily dwellings must be properly safeguarded with a
maintained buffer planting strip of 10 feet.
(b) A front yard setback of 35 feet shall be observed for all
buildings erected adjacent to streets.
(c) When more than one multifamily dwelling building is erected
on a single site, lot or tract, the minimum distances between
buildings shall be as follows:
[1] Front to front: 70 feet; front to rear: 60 feet.
[2] Side to side: not less than 25 feet.
[3] Front to side or rear to side: not less than 25 feet.
[4] Rear to rear: not less than 50 feet.
[5] All parking lots associated with multifamily, townhouse,
row dwelling or recreational facilities and buildings shall
be a minimum of 40 feet from lot or property lines.
[6] All buildings, including accessory buildings, shall cover
not more than 35% of the area of the lot.
(d) Single- and two-family.
[1] Front yard of 35 feet.
[2] Rear yard of 35 feet.
[3] Side yard of 10 feet.
[4] Side yard of corner lot: 35 feet.
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:657
(9) Roads and utilities. All improvements, stormwater systems,
sanitary sewers, water lines, signs and utilities must be installed as
per the standards of the appropriate authority and the Subdivision
Ordinance of Richland Township208 for the acceptance by the
township and the appropriate authority. The road right-of-way shall
be 50 feet minimum in width, with a paved cartway between
concrete curbs of 22 feet.
(10) Public open space required. At least 250 square feet per family unit
shall be set aside and maintained for an outdoor recreation area by
the owner of the development, his successors and assigns and shall
be developed with recreation equipment and playground area,
including a six-foot high fence around the entire perimeter with
appropriate gates. In lieu of maintenance by the developer, an
association of homeowners in the development may provide such
maintenance, but documents creating such an association shall be
approved by the Township Solicitor before final approval is given
for the planned residential development. Should neither the
developer nor an approved homeowners' association maintain the
public open space required in this subsection, then the township
shall have the option to maintain the public open space and, if it
chooses to do so, impose a lien on the individual properties in the
development to collect the costs of such maintenance.
(11) Site improvement standards. The developer or owner of any
planned residential development shall be responsible for the
engineering, construction, installation and maintenance of site
improvements as follows:
(a) Engineering site plan required. An engineering site plan shall
be prepared by a registered surveyor or registered
professional engineer and filed with the Township Supervisors
prior to the start of any construction of an approved Planned
residential development. The site plan shall be drawn at a
minimum scale of one inch equals one hundred feet and shall
indicate the exact location and dimensions of all buildings,
streets, sidewalks, roads, parking areas, water lines, sanitary
sewer lines, telephone lines, recreation areas, landscaping,
walls, fences, right-of-way lines, property lines and any other
features to be constructed or installed on the site. A
topographic map shall be prepared at a minimum scale of one
inch equals one hundred feet with a contour interval of five feet
and shall indicate all existing and final grades for the site; spot
elevations shall be indicated for streets, storm and sanitary
sewers and other elevation features as deemed appropriate
and necessary by the Zoning Officer.
(b) Perimeter survey. A perimeter survey of the parcel to be
developed as a planned residential development shall be
208. Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:658
prepared by a registered surveyor. Permanent concrete
markers, with a minimum standard of six inches by six inches
by thirty inches with a copper rod, shall be installed on all
corners around the perimeter of the site. The survey shall tie
directly into adjoining property.
(c) Street paving. The engineering, construction, installation and
maintenance of all streets within the planned residential
development shall be the sole responsibility of the developers
and shall be in accord with minimum township standards as set
forth in the Richland Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance209 then in effect.
(d) Street signs and street lights. Street signs and street lights
shall be installed and maintained by the developer as required
by the Richland Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance then in effect.
(e) Water lines and fire hydrants. The installation of all water lines,
including fire hydrants, shall be in accord with requirements
and specification of the Sewer and Water Authority having
jurisdiction and Richland Township. Detailed engineering plans
and specifications shall be filed with both the township and the
Sewer and Water Authority having jurisdiction.
(f) Sanitary sewers. The installation of all sanitary sewers shall be
in accord with plans and specifications submitted to and
approved by the Sewer and Water Authority having
jurisdiction.
(g) Storm sewers. The installation of a storm sewer system shall be
in accord with plans and specification filed with and approved
by Richland Township.
(h) Curbing. All curbing shall be as per township specifications
and approved by Richland Township.
(i) Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as
required or permitted under § 240-105 herein.
(12) Final plat. A final plat as described in the Richland Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance then in effect shall
be completed and submitted to Richland Township for revision and
approval. Said final plat shall be recorded as required by the
Richland Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
then in effect.
B. Hospital and nursing home. A hospital or nursing home may be
permitted as a special exception in an R-3 or an R-4 Residential District
and a nursing home may be permitted as a special exception in a C-3
209. Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:659
Office Commercial District with the minimum requirements as
hereinafter set forth.
(1) Height: as permitted in each district.
(2) Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be two acres.
(3) Yard areas: as required in each district.
(4) Percentage of lot coverage: as permitted in each district.
(5) Site plan: as required under Article IV,§ 240-19 herein.
(6) Off-street parking facilities: as required under Article XVIII herein.
C. Rooming house. A rooming house may be permitted as a, special
exception in an R-2 or an R-3 Residential District provided that it does
not accommodate more than four boarders and meets the requirements
of a single dwelling in the district.
D. Mobile home park. A mobile home park may be permitted as a special
exception in the R-3 Residential District with the minimum
requirements as hereinafter set forth. Mobile homes may be permitted
as a special exception in any district for the use of a watchman or
security guard. No mobile home park shall be located or constructed in
a manner or at a location inconsistent with the Richland Township
Floodplain Ordinance.210
(1) Lot area. The minimum area for every mobile home park hereafter
developed shall be 10 acres.
(2) Plot plan. Each application shall be accompanied by three copies of
a plot plan drawn at a scale of one inch equals twenty feet,
prepared by a licensed surveyor or engineer, showing limits and
square footage of the proposed mobile home park and location and
size of driveways, parking areas, drying areas, playgrounds,
service buildings, other buildings and mobile home lots, together
with required setbacks from rights-of-way and property lines. All
mobile home lots shall be numbered in sequence on the plot plan.
(3) Minimum lot area for each mobile home. The minimum unit area
for each lot used or occupied by and under each mobile home shall
be as follows:
(a) Seventy-five percent of the lots in one mobile home park shall
be not less than 2,600 square feet in area.
(b) Twenty-five percent of the lots in any one mobile home park
shall be not less than 2,100 square feet in area.
(c) Density in any mobile home park shall not exceed 10 units per
gross acre.
210. Editor's Note: See Ch. 138, Floodplain Management.
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:660
(4) Minimum width of mobile home lots. The minimum width of each
mobile home lot shall be 35 feet.
(5) Minimum distance between mobile homes. No mobile homes shall
be placed within 20 feet another; provided that, with respect to
mobile homes parked end-to-end, the distance between mobile
homes so parked shall be not less than 25 feet.
(6) Setbacks. The distance between mobile homes and the mobile
home park boundary shall be not less than the yard setback
required in the zoning district which abuts each boundary line. In
no case shall a mobile home be parked less than 25 feet from the
mobile home park boundary.
(7) Mobile home stands. The area of the mobile home stand shall be
improved to provide adequate support for the placement and tiedown
of the mobile home, thereby securing the superstructure
against uplift, rotation and overturning.
(8) Permanent markers. Every mobile home lot shall be clearly defined
on the ground by permanent markers. There shall be posted and
maintained in a conspicuous place on each lot a number
corresponding to the number of each lot as shown on the plot plan.
(9) Streets and driveways.
(a) The lane or driveway on which an individual mobile home lot
fronts shall be not less than 28 feet in width. In cases where
driveways dead-end, there shall be constructed at each
deadend a cul-de-sac with a minimum turning radius of 40 feet.
(b) All streets and driveways shall be paved in accordance with
standards and specifications required for local streets in the
Richland Township Subdivision Regulations then in effect. All
construction material for such roads shall meet established
township requirements. Where any mobile home park has an
entrance from a state highway, approval of said entrance from
the State Department of Transportation must be secured
before said development is approved.
(10)Water and sewer facilities. An adequate supply of water approved
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection shall
be furnished from a public water supply system or from a private
water system conforming to all applicable laws, regulations,
resolutions and ordinances, with supply faucets located on each
mobile home lot. In each mobile home park, all waste water from a
faucet, toilet, tub, shower, sink, drain, washing machine, garbage
disposal unit or laundry shall empty into an approved sewer system
installed in accordance with state and township regulations.
(11) Service buildings. Each mobile home park shall provide service
buildings to house the following facilities:
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:661
(a) All service buildings shall be permanent structures complying
with ordinances regulating the construction of buildings.
(b) All service buildings shall be adequately lighted at all times of
the day and night, shall be well ventilated, shall be constructed
of such moistureproof material, including painted woodwork,
as shall permit repeated cleaning and washing and shall be
maintained at a temperature of not less than 68º F. during the
period from October first to May first.
(c) All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be
maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any
condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the
public or constitute a nuisance or fire hazard.
(12) Storage tanks. Gasoline, liquefied petroleum, gas or oil storage
tanks shall be so installed as to comply with all county, state and
national fire prevention code regulations.
(13) Playgrounds. The purpose of this subsection is to provide for areas
and facilities for recreational purposes appropriate to the needs of
the occupants. At least 250 square feet of playground space shall
be developed and maintained for each mobile home lot. Each
mobile home park must provide not less than one playground, and
no playground shall be less than 2,500 square feet in area. Such
areas shall be used exclusively for playground purposes.
(14) Additions to mobile homes. No permanent or semipermanent
structures shall be affixed to any mobile home as an addition to
such mobile home, nor shall any accessory structure be permitted
on any mobile home lot except one accessory building per mobile
home not to exceed 120 square feet in area, and further excepting
those accessory structures required by these regulations and an
office structure. The prohibition herein against any addition or
accessory building to a mobile home or mobile home lot shall not
apply to a canopy or awning designed for use with a mobile home.
The mobile home and any accessory building shall not exceed 40%
of the total mobile home lot.
(15) Parking shall be provided as follows:
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of two spaces
for each mobile home lot.
(b) All parking areas shall be paved in accordance with paving
standards established by the township.
(16) General conditions. All procedures for development of a mobile
home park shall be the same as required for a use by special
exception as specified in these zoning regulations.
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:662
E. Sanitary landfill or similar waste disposal site. A sanitary landfill or
similar waste disposal site may be permitted in the M Manufacturing
District, provided that the operator meets all regulations and
requirements of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act,211 the
Cambria County Solid Waste Management Study and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
F. Storage yard and buildings for contractor or excavating equipment. A
storage yard and buildings for contractor or excavating equipment may
be permitted as a special exception in L, M and C-2 Districts on a tract
of land greater than two acres as follows:
(1) Storage yard for trucks, tractors, earth moving equipment and
similar types of equipment, provided that the equipment or storage
yard is set back a minimum distance of 25 feet from the nearest
property line and the area is properly screened from adjacent
properties.
(2) Storage of materials and supplies customarily incidental to the
operation of a contractor's business, provided that all materials are
stored within an enclosed building or structure.
G. Billboards. Billboards not to exceed 300 square feet may be permitted
by the grant of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board,
provided that it shall:
(1) Not be located closer than 50 feet to a public right-of-way.
(2) No billboards shall be attached to any building. [Amended
12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 327]
(3) If freestanding, not to exceed 20 feet in height, measured from the
ground to the top of the sign.
(4) Be on a parcel or lot not abutting or opposite a frontage in an R
District unless the advertising face is not visible from the R District.
(5) Be no nearer than 300 feet to any R District if illuminated unless
the advertising face is not visible from the R District.
(6) Be no nearer than 300 feet to any church, school, park, playground
or recreational area owned and operated by a public body.
(7) Be no nearer than 400 feet to the center line of any restricted or
limited access highway or the access ramps thereto if the face of
the sign is visible therefrom.
H. Surface mining.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
211. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:663
MINERALS — Includes, but is not limited to, bituminous coal,
lignite, limestone and dolomite, sand, gravel, rock, stone, earth,
slag, ore, vermiculite, clay and other mineral resources.
SURFACE MINING — Any extraction of any mineral which involves
removal of the surface of the earth or exposure of the mineral
or substance of the earth, wind, rain or sun or other elements of
nature for sale or commercial purposes.
(2) Regulations of surface mining by special use permit in order to
protect public health, safety and welfare by controlling the location
of surface mining in relation to other land activities. Use and
occupancy of land for surface mining in R-2 (as modified in
§ 240-38B), L-1 and M Districts shall be permitted as a special
exception, provided that the applicant can show by sufficient
substantial evidence that the mining operation:
(a) Will not occur within 100 feet of a public road.
(b) Will not occur within 300 feet of an incompatible use district.
(c) Will not disturb the natural vegetation within 100 feet of a
watercourse.
(d) Will not occur within 300 feet of any public park, public
building or other public institution, places having unique
historic or patriotic interest or value (unless the owner of the
site or the governmental body having jurisdiction over the site
has consented to the mining operation).
(e) Will not substantially injure or detract from the lawful existing
or permitted uses of neighboring properties.
(f) Will not injure any public, private residential or agricultural
water supply source, and a copy of the surface and ground
water monitoring plan must be submitted in the application for
special exception.
(g) Will not adversely affect any public land or land used for a
public purpose.
(h) Will not adversely affect the logical, efficient and economical
extension of public services and facilities throughout the
municipality.
(i) Will serve the best interest of the municipality, the convenience
of the community and the public welfare.
(j) Will result in the land area subject to the application being
placed in a condition which will allow the use of that land for
economically and ecologically productive uses of the type
permitted in the zoning district or districts in which that land is
located upon completion of the mining operation.
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:664
(k) Will meet such reasonable conditions and safeguards as the
Zoning Hearing Board may require to protect the public
health, safety and welfare in accordance with the spirit and
purpose of this zoning chapter, including, but not limited to,
setback requirements, buffer zones, provisions for adequate
access to the mine site and the routing and hours of operation
of trucks and other vehicles serving the mine operation
through the municipality and the minimizing of noxious,
offensive and hazardous conditions resulting from the
existence and operation of the mine and to provide for the
posting of a bond to provide for the reconstruction of any
township roads adversely affected by the mining operation.
(l) Will not occur within 300 feet from any occupied dwelling
unless the consent of the owner of the dwelling has been
obtained in advance of the filing of the application for special
use permit.
(m) Will not occur within 100 feet of a cemetery.
(n) Will not represent a danger of flooding in areas downstream.
(3) Application for use permit. Acquisition of a special use permit shall
be subject to an application petition. The application petition must
be accompanied by the fee set by resolution which will be used to
defray the cost of the initial application process. The applicant shall
bear all costs of the initial application process should those costs
exceed the fee set by resolution. Contemporaneous with the
applicant's petition for a hearing for the granting of a special use
permit, the applicant must submit with his petition the following
information in writing:
(a) The location of the proposed surface mining operation.
(b) The anticipated depth of any excavation.
(c) The depth of the existing water table.
(d) The probable effect of the mining operation on the existing
water table or confined aquifer.
(e) The relationship of the mine site to surface watercourses and
bodies of water (in excess of 10 acres).
(f) The established water quality of surface waters which may be
affected by the mining operation.
(g) The probable effect of the mining operation on the quality of
those surface waters. (The Board may require the applicant to
prepare studies of the present water quality of surface or
underground waters which may be affected by the proposed
mining operation and receive other qualified evidence on water
quality.).
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:665
(h) The nature and content of the overburden to be removed in the
course of mining.
(i) The underlying strata in which the minerals to be mined are
located.
(j) The probable effect of blasting and other excavation methods
upon lawful existing and permitted uses in the area
surrounding the proposed mine site.
(k) The applicant shall attach to his application a copy of his own
mine drainage application filed with the state and/or federal
authorities.
(4) Preliminary hearing. The application shall be subject to a two-step
hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board. The preliminary hearing
shall be to establish the prerequisites to the granting of the special
exception. The preliminary hearing shall be held within 45 days of
the submission of the application, the application fee and the
information required by Subsection H(3) above. The applicant must
show by substantial evidence on the record as a whole that the
mining operations comply with the requirements set out in
Subsection H(2) above. The hearing shall be open to the public, and
all interested parties shall be permitted to present testimony unless
such testimony is merely cumulative.
(5) Application to be reviewed by the Planning Commission.
(a) The Zoning Hearing Board shall forward one copy of all
applications for a special use permit for surface mining and a
copy of the record of the hearing to the Planning Commission
immediately upon receipt for review and comment by that
agency on all aspects of the application as they relate to the
purposes and requirements of this chapter. The Planning
Commission shall prepare a report on the application within 45
days of the original hearing. The report shall be presented to
the Zoning Hearing Board by an authorized representative of
the Planning Commission. The report shall contain
recommendations and any conditions the Planning Commission
feels are necessary for accomplishment of the purposes of this
chapter.
(b) Such conditions may include but shall not be limited to:
[1] Tarps over all coal trucks using township roads.
[2] Limiting truck routes.
[3] Limiting level of noise as measured at any occupied
building.
[4] Limiting levels of dust and other pollutants as measured at
any occupied building.
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:666
[5] Requiring blasting notices to owners and occupiers of
dwellings up to one-half mile from the site.
[6] Times of the day and days of the week during which
surface mining may occur.
[7] Public liability insurance to protect against claims for
bodily injury and property damage.
(6) Final order of the Zoning Hearing Board. Within 20 days of receipt
of the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall make a final order either denying the
application or granting the application subject to those
recommendations of the Planning Commission which the Board
believes are required to effectuate the policies and purposes of this
chapter.
(7) Regulation of the maximum acreage available for active surface
mining. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have no power to grant
special use permits covering more than 100 acres of ground in
Richland Township at any one time nor shall there be more than a
combined total of 100 acres of ground in Richland Township being
surface mined at any given point in time, regardless of the number
of surface mining operations. For the purposes of this provision,
strip mines which were abandoned according to the definition in 52
Pa.C.S. § 1396.3 of Act No. 147 of November 20,1971,upon which
an applicant wishes to engage in surface mining, shall not be
counted towards the one-hundred- acre limit, provided that the
applicant meets all other conditions of the Act.
(8) State and federal regulations. No mining operations shall be
conducted under a special use permit issued pursuant to this
chapter unless the mine operator shall have a currently valid
permit to conduct surface mining operations issued by the
appropriate state or federal agency having regulatory authority
over the conduct of the surface mining operations. The applicant
must also comply with all state and federal regulations of surface
mining operations.
(9) Time limit of special use permits. Special use permits for surface
mining granted by the Zoning Hearing Board shall remain in effect
for two years; at the end of this time, the holder of a special use
permit must reapply for an extension of two years for the permit
from the Zoning Officer. The holder shall pay a renewal fee of
$1,000. If the Zoning Officer is not satisfied that the permit holder
has complied with all conditions of the permit and all applicable
regulations, he may refuse the renewal. The decision to grant or
refuse the extension of the permit shall be made in not less than
three nor more than 10 days from the date of receipt of the
application for the extension. The permit holder shall have 10 days
from the denial of renewal to appeal the decision of the Zoning
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:667
Officer to the Zoning Hearing Board and shall pay the sum of $500
to defray the cost of the appeal proceedings. Should the cost of the
appeal proceedings exceed the five-hundred-dollar fee, the permit
holder shall pay those costs in excess of the five-hundred-dollar fee.
(10) Enforcement of requirements of this chapter.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall, on his own motion or upon receipt of
any information concerning the violation of the permit
conditions or this chapter or of any applicable state or federal
regulation, conduct an investigation. If the Zoning Officer
determines there is a violation, he may order a revocation of
the permit and a termination of surface mining activities. The
order shall be sent to the permit holder's principal place of
business.
(b) The permit holder may appeal an adverse order of the Zoning
Officer to the Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days and shall
pay the sum of $500 to defray the cost of the appeal
proceedings. Should the cost of the appeal proceedings exceed
the five-hundred-dollar fee, the permit holder shall pay those
costs in excess of the five-hundred-dollar fee.
(11) Zoning Hearing Board appeals. When a permit holder appeals an
adverse order of the Zoning Officer under Subsection H(9) and (10)
of this chapter, he must be granted a hearing within 30 days of the
filing of this appeal. At that hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall take testimony from all interested parties unless the
testimony is cumulative. The Zoning Hearing Board shall reverse,
modify or affirm the order of the Zoning Officer within 30 days after
the hearing.
I. Home occupations. A home occupation shall be permitted as a special
exception in R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residential Districts where the
following criteria are satisfied.
(1) The proposed use shall be consistent with the definition of a home
occupation set forth in § 240-9 of this chapter.
(2) Off-street parking relating to the home occupation shall be limited
to not more than three spaces for motor vehicles in excess of the
number of motor vehicles registered to the occupants residing at
the residence in which the home occupation is conducted.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board may impose such other reasonable
conditions upon the home occupation as may be necessary or as
may be reasonably related to the guidelines set forth in § 240-101B
of this chapter.
J. Sewage sludge.
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:668
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
DISPOSAL — The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of any sewage sludge from a municipal or private
treatment plant into or on any land in the township, provided
that the spreading of poultry and livestock manure generated from
conventional agricultural activities on crop land or farm land for
agricultural purposes shall not be included within this term and
such activity shall not be regulated by this chapter.
SEWAGE SLUDGE — As defined in Chapter 75, Page 3, of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Solid Waste
Management Rules and Regulations, i.e., the coarse screenings,
grit and dewatered or air dried sludges, septic tanks and holdings
tank pumping and other residues from sewage collection and
treatment systems which require disposal.
(2) Regulations of sewage sludge disposal by special use permit in
order to protect public health, safety and welfare by controlling the
location of sewage sludge disposal in relation to other land
activities. Use and occupancy of land for sewage sludge disposal in
the M Manufacturing District shall be permitted as a special
exception, provided that the applicant can show by sufficient
substantial evidence that the disposal operation:
(a) Will not substantially injure or detract from the lawful existing
or permitted uses of neighboring properties.
(b) Will not injure any public, private residential or agricultural
water supply source.
(c) Will not adversely affect any public land or land used for a
public purpose.
(d) Will not adversely affect the logical, efficient and economical
extension of public services and facilities throughout the
municipality.
(e) Will serve the best interest of the municipality, the convenience
of the community and the public welfare.
(f) Will result in the land area subject to the application being
placed in a condition which will allow the use of that land for
economically and ecologically productive uses of the type
permitted in the zoning district or districts in which the land is
located upon completion of the disposal operation.
(3) Applications for special use permit. Acquisition of a special use
permit shall be subject to an application petition. The applicant
must submit with its petition the following information in writing:
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:669
(a) A copy of its application to the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) or a permit.
(b) Copies of any and all materials, documents or drawings
submitted with said application to DEP.
(c) A description of the proposed application program, including
the sources of the sludge and how it is to be transported to the
site, a timetable for application, a description of any storage
operations, the proposed utilization rate, the total acreage
involved and the useful life of the proposed site.
(d) A topographical drawing, prepared by a registered engineer, to
a scale no greater than one inch to 200 feet showing:
[1] Location of the site relative to public roads.
[2] Identity of owners of adjacent properties.
[3] Boundaries of the area to be used for land application.
[4] Location of public and private water supplies, wells,
springs, streams, swamps or other bodies of water within
one-fourth of one mile of the boundaries of the proposed
land application site.
[5] Soil classifications of the land application area.
[6] Vegetation.
(e) A soils and geologic report indicating the physical
characteristics of the site with respect to its suitability for
application of sludge. The report shall be based on available
soil survey and geologic data and accompanied by field test
analysis. Field tests shall include soil borings by a soil scientist
to confirm that soil profile characteristics are consistent with
published soil survey data.
(f) A chemical analysis of the sludge from each proposed source.
The analysis shall involve a minimum of 10 samples. The
analysis shall include the following items:
[1] Total moisture content.
[2] Percentage of total nitrogen (wet and dry weight).
[3] Percentage of ammonia nitrogen (wet and dry weight).
[4] Percentage of organic nitrogen (wet and dry weight).
[5] Biochemical oxygen demand.
[6] pH.
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:670
[7] Percentage on a dry weight basis of cyanide, sodium,
cadmium, zinc, copper, nickel, lead, chromium, mercury,
molybdenum, potassium, phosphorus, calcium,
manganese, iron, aluminum, magnesium and cobalt and
other toxic substances and enteric pathogens as may be
required by the Zoning Hearing Board.
[8] Total solids.
(g) For all applications, there shall be an application fee
accompanying an application in the minimum nonrefundable
amount as set by resolution. Said application fee shall be used
to offset all township costs, including township engineering
fees. As and when said costs exceed the fee set by resolution,
the applicant shall pay as an additional application fee the
additional costs incurred upon presentation of statements by
the township to the applicant.
(h) A copy of the agreement between the generator of the sludge
or the hauler and applicator and the land owner showing
provisions as to the term of the agreement, the operation to be
carried out in spreading sludge and the keeping of records.
(i) Where the proposed applications of sludge involves a leasehold
arrangement between the owner of the property and the party
applying the sludge, a land development plan shall be prepared
and filed in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code212 and the Richland Township
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations.213
(j) All monitoring reports required by the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP).
(k) Information sufficient to show that the disposal site complies
with the standards set forth in Subsection J(4) below.
(4) Standards for issuance of special use permits.
(a) Application of sludge to the land shall be in accordance with
the currently adopted standards of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection as set forth in
Chapter 75, Title 25, Rules and Regulations, Department of
Environmental Protection.
(b) Area. No site shall be approved which contains less than 10
contiguous acres.
(c) Setback requirements.
212. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
213. Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:671
[1] Sludge shall not be applied within 500 feet of a stream or
water supply.
[2] Sludge shall not be applied within 50 feet of adjoining
property lines.
[3] Sludge shall not be applied within 300 feet of occupied
dwellings.
(d) Slope concentrations. Sludge applications shall not take place
on slopes exceeding 20% percent.
(e) Soil coverage. Sludge applied to land shall be injected under
the surface of the soil or, if spread on the surface, shall be
plowed under within 24 hours.
(f) Weather conditions. Sludge shall not be applied when the
ground is saturated, snow covered, frozen or during periods of
rain.
(g) Waste material storage. Waste materials shall be applied to the
land immediately upon delivery to the site and shall not under
any circumstances be stored upon the site for any purpose or
for any period of time in excess of five days.
(h) Sources of sewage sludge. No sewage sludge shall be
permitted to be applied anywhere within the township unless
its source is from a municipal or private treatment facility
located within Cambria County, Pennsylvania.
(5) Preliminary hearing. The application shall be subject to a two-step
hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board. The preliminary hearing
shall be to establish the prerequisites to the granting of the special
exception. The preliminary hearing shall be held within 45 days of
the submission of the application, the application fee and the
information required by Subsection J(3) above. The applicant must
show by substantial evidence on the record as a whole that the
disposal operations comply with the requirements set out in
Subsection J(2), (3) and (4) above. The hearing shall be open to the
public, and all interested parties shall be permitted to present
testimony, unless such testimony is merely cumulative.
(6) Application to be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(a) The Zoning Hearing Board shall forward one copy of all
applications for a special use permit for sewage sludge and a
copy of the record of the hearing to the Planning Commission
immediately upon receipt for review and comment by that
agency on all aspects of the application as they relate to the
purposes and requirements of this chapter. The Planning
Commission shall prepare a report on the application within 45
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:672
days of the original hearing. The report shall be presented
to the Zoning Hearing Board by an authorized representative
of the Planning Commission. The report shall contain
recommendations and any conditions which the Planning
Commission feel are necessary for accomplishment of the
purposes of this chapter.
(b) Such conditions may include but shall not be limited to:
[1] Establishment of a monitoring well to test water quality
prior to, during and after the application program along
with subsequent quarterly monitoring during the
application program. The location of the monitoring well
shall be approved by the Zoning Officer prior to the
drilling. In the event that groundwater is found to flow in
several directions, a monitor well for each direction may
be required.
[2] As part of the monitoring program, a quarterly chemical
analysis and laboratory testing of the sludge to be paid for
at the applicant's expense to ensure that the sludge
content remains within the limits established by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and
this chapter, which results shall be furnished to the
township.
[3] As part of the monitoring program, semiannual soil
analysis to be paid for at the applicant's expense to ensure
that the sludge content pH remains above 6.0.
[4] Keeping and maintaining of records of the quantity, dates,
sources and location of the sludge application, which
records are to be supplied to the township upon request.
[5] Posting of a performance bond in order to assure that the
various tests and duties imposed upon the applicant are
fully performed. The applicant shall assure the township
by means of a corporate bond or the deposit of funds or
securities in escrow sufficient to cover the cost, as
estimated by the Zoning Officer. of performing the various
tests and duties imposed upon him by this chapter over the
expected useful life of the site plus five years. The bond
shall be furnished under such conditions and form and
with surety as be approved by the Township Solicitor to
guarantee and secure that all such tests and duties are
fully and adequately performed and are paid for by the
applicant and that the township shall, in no event, be held
liable for the cost of any such duties or tests. In lieu of a
bond, the applicant may deposit cash or securities with the
township or a bank or trust company to guarantee and
secure the same requirements as set forth above. In the
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:673
event that such cash or securities are deposited, said
deposit must be made pursuant to an escrow agreement
prepared and approved by the Township Solicitor. The
escrow agent for the deposit of such cash or security
shall be located in Cambria County and shall be subject to
approval by the Township Solicitor.
[6] Deliver to the township a liability indemnification with
bond good for the useful life of the proposed site plus five
years on a form to be prepared by or approved by the
Township Solicitor, pursuant to the terms of which the
applicant, individually and with surety, specifically agrees
to fully indemnify and hold harmless the township and all
of its officers, agents and employees from any and all
liability, expense or damages whatsoever and litigation
defense costs accruing to any of the same as a result of any
use or any land in the township pursuant to the provisions
hereof. The amount of the indemnification bond shall be
equal to the costs of removal and/or cleanup of any site
and any engineering or legal fees pertaining thereto as
estimated by the Zoning Officer and Township Solicitor at
the time of issuance of any permit plus 15% percent per
year thereof for the useful life of the site plus five years.
[7] Submit to the township an insurance policy covering
liability for any harm to persons and/or damage to
properties resulting from the aforesaid activities. Said
insurance policy shall be in full force and effect for the
entire duration of the above operations and for at least two
years following the termination of said operations. The
amount of said insurance coverage shall be specified by
the Board of Supervisors based upon their judgment as to
the potential for harm or damage.
(7) Final order of the Zoning Hearing Board. Within 20 days of receipt
of the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall make a final order either denying the
application or granting the application subject to those
recommendations of the Planning Commission which the Board
believes are required to effectuate the policies and purposes of this
chapter.
(8) State and federal regulations. No operation shall be conducted
under a special use permit issued pursuant to this chapter unless
the applicant shall have a currently valid permit to dispose of
sewage sludge issued by the appropriate state or federal agency
having regulatory authority over the disposal of sewage sludge.
The applicant must also comply with all state and federal
regulations concerning the disposal of sewage sludge.
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:674
(9) Time limit of special use permits. Special use permits for disposal
of sewage sludge granted by the Zoning Hearing Board shall
remain in effect for two years; at the end of this time, the holder of
a special use permit must reapply for an extension of two years for
the permit from the Zoning Officer. The holder shall pay a renewal
fee of $1,000. If the Zoning Officer is not satisfied that the permit
holder has complied with all conditions of the permit and all
applicable regulations, he may refuse the renewal. The decision to
grant or refuse the extension of the permit shall be made in not less
than three nor more than 30 days from the date of receipt of the
application for the extension. The permit holder shall have 10 days
from the denial of renewal to appeal the decision of the Zoning
Officer to the Zoning Hearing Board and shall pay the sum of $500
to defray the cost of the appeal proceedings. Should the cost of the
appeal proceedings exceed the five-hundred-dollar fee, the permit
holder shall pay those costs in excess of the five-hundred-dollar fee.
(10) Enforcement of requirements of this chapter
(a) The Zoning Officer shall, on his own motion or upon receipt of
any information concerning the violation of the permit
conditions or this chapter or of any applicable state or federal
regulation, conduct an investigation. If the Zoning Officer
determines there is a violation, he may order a revocation of
the permit and a termination of disposal activities. The order
shall be sent to the permit holder's principal place of business.
(b) The permit holder may appeal an adverse order of the Zoning
Officer to the Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days and shall
pay the sum of $500 to defray the cost of the appeal
proceedings. Should the cost of the appeal proceedings exceed
the five-hundred-dollar fee, the permit holder shall pay those
costs in excess of the five-hundred-dollar fee.
(11) Zoning Hearing Board appeal. When a permit holder appeals an
adverse order of the Zoning Officer under Subsection J(9) and (10)
of this chapter, he must be granted a hearing within 30 days of the
filing of his appeal. At that hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
take testimony from all interested parties unless the testimony is
cumulative. The Zoning Hearing Board shall reverse, modify or
affirm the order of the Zoning Officer within 30 days after the
hearing.
K. Telecommunications towers.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — An elevated radio, television
or microwave transmission or receiving tower which is used to
transmit, receive, retransmit or otherwise convey radio, television
or microwave signals.
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:675
(2) Tower regulations.
(a) Permitted by special exception. Cooling towers, fire towers,
stacks, water towers, radio towers, television towers and
telecommunications towers may be erected in the L Light
Industrial and M Manufacturing Districts so long as they do not
exceed 90 feet, including antenna, and so long as such towers
and stacks:
[1] Shall be located not less than 25 feet from any lot line, and
the required setback shall be increased by one foot for
each vertical foot of structure that exceeds the allowable
height for the district in which it is to be erected.
[2] Accessory appurtenant structures, support cables and
other structures associated with any tower shall be located
not less than 15 feet from any lot line or any setback in
that district.
[3] All towers, support cables and appurtenant structures
shall be within a protective fence with locking gates. Such
fences shall be six feet in height with two feet of barbed
wire over that six feet.
[4] All safety lighting shall be installed and maintained and all
operations shall be conducted in accordance with Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) or other applicable regulations.
[5] All proposed towers and stacks must be certified in writing
by a registered professional engineer, at the expense of the
owner, to be structurally sound, as proposed, before
construction may begin and, as constructed, within 30
days of its completion.
[6] All towers and stacks exceeding 40 feet in height must be
certified as structurally sound by a registered professional
engineer, every second year, at the expense of the owner,
beginning on the first business day in June in the second
year following their construction.
[7] All towers and stacks exceeding 25 feet in height must be
made structurally sound or removed at the property
owner's expense within 60 days of a written finding by
Richland Township or its designate that they are not
structurally sound.
[8] All towers and stacks must be removed and the site
returned to a natural state, with all towers and
appurtenances removed, at the owner's expense, and the
use by special exception terminated within six calendar
months of the discontinuance of their use as a tower or
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:676
stack. The township must be notified of the abandonment
of the use.
L. Group home facilities.
(1) Group home facilities are permitted in all residential districts by
special exception.
(2) Group home facilities are hereby deemed as a type of residential
use and not as an institutional use. The following regulations are
adopted in the interest of protecting the residents of such facilities,
to ensure the residential character of the structure and of the
surrounding neighborhood and to prevent other types of facilities
(specifically nonvoluntary and penal living arrangements) which
are likely to be disruptive to the residential character of the
neighborhood from being classified as group home.
(3) All group homes shall hold a valid license, specifically as a group
home, from the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare or other
governmental agency and shall meet all current department
regulations, including those standards governing indoor space and
applicable state and local building and fire safety codes.
(4) The residential exterior appearance of the structure shall be
maintained. No external alterations, additions or changes to the
exterior of the structure are permitted except as may be required
by the Pennsylvania Department of Welfare or other governmental
agency or whereas needed for safety reasons or to accommodate
the physically handicapped.
(5) There shall be no more than one kitchen or cooking facility, and the
group home facility shall consist of living space of a minimum of
250 square feet per occupant for any one facility. Meals shall be
served to occupants and visitors only. No separate cooking facility
is permitted for any occupant.
(6) No group home shall be located within 1,000 feet of another group
home and, additionally, not more than one home shall be located on
any street or roadway within Richland Township.
(7) Facilities which house persons who are likely to pose a physical
threat to the community may not be deemed group homes under
provisions of the chapter. Such persons include, but are not
necessarily limited to, individuals who have a potentially violent
behavioral disorder or disorders or who have been convicted of a
violent crime or crimes or who have pleaded guilty or who have
been found not guilty or culpable due to insanity or lack of mental
capacity.
M. Two-family dwellings - subdivided for individual ownership. This special
exception use will permit the construction of two-family dwelling
structures intended and designed to be subdivided for separate
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:677
ownership at the common party wall of the structure, with or without
a community landowner association. [Added 12-23-2005 by Ord. No.
302]
(1) Covenants. Covenants shall be established that run with any
change in ownership of the land.
(a) Said covenants shall establish requirements for the overall
structure to maintain each dwelling unit to have the same color
and type of exterior finish, roof and other visible aspects of the
exterior of the structure.
(b) Said covenants shall be enforceable by a community landowner
association and/or by the Township.
(c) Said covenants shall provide that each subdivided lot shall be
used exclusively as a lot for the existing subdivided family
residence and for no other purpose. This provision shall not
prevent merger of said lots for purposes permitted within the
R-2 Zone. [Added 3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 311]
(2) Setback required. A zero setback shall be required at the party
wall. All other setback requirements from front, rear and side
property boundaries shall be in accordance with the R-2 or R-3
Zoning District regulations, as applicable.
(3) Minimum lot area and width. The minimum overall lot area for twofamily
dwellings intended for separate ownership of each dwelling
unit shall be in accordance with the R-2 or R-3 Zoning District
regulations, as applicable.
(4) Dwelling standards. The minimum dwelling unit building area shall
be in accordance with the R-2 or R-3 Zoning District regulations, as
applicable.
(5) Multi-lot approval. Approval may be requested for some or all of the
lots in a proposed land development as per the special exception
application; provided, however, that actual subdivision of the lot
cannot occur until a building permit has been issued; the footers,
block and/or foundation are constructed; and all underground
utilities are installed. [Amended 3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 311]
N. Wind energy facilities. [Added 3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 311]
(1) Definitions. As used in Subsection N, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — The person or entity filing an application under this
Subsection N.
FACILITY OWNER — The entity or entities having an equity
interest in the wind energy facility, including their respective
successors and assigns.
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:678
HUB HEIGHT — The height of the wind turbine hub, to which the
blade is attached.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — A residence, school, hospital, church,
public library or other building used for public gathering occupied
or in use when the permit application is submitted.
OPERATOR — The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation
and maintenance of the wind energy facility.
PARTICIPATING LANDOWNER — A landowner on whose property
turbines are located pursuant to a lease agreement with the facility
owner or operator.
TURBINE HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of
the tower foundation to the highest point of the turbine rotor plane.
WIND ENERGY FACILITY — An electric generating facility, whose
main purpose is to supply electricity, consisting of one or more
wind turbines and other accessory structures and buildings,
including substations, meteorological towers, electrical
infrastructure, transmission lines and other appurtenant structures
and facilities.
WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts
wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine
generator, and includes the nacelle, rotor, tower and pad
transformer, if any.
(2) Permit applications. Along with the application for special
exception, the applicant shall submit a permit application which
shall contain the following:
(a) A narrative describing the proposed wind energy facility,
including an overview of the project; the project location; the
generating capacity of the wind energy facility; the number,
representative types and height or range of heights of wind
turbines to be constructed, including their generating capacity,
dimensions and respective manufacturers, and a description of
ancillary facilities.
(b) An affidavit or similar evidence of agreement between the
property owner and the facility owner or operator
demonstrating that the facility owner or operator has the
permission of the property owner to apply for necessary
permits for construction and operation of the wind energy
facility.
(c) Identification of the properties on which the proposed wind
energy facility will be located and the properties adjacent to
where the wind energy facility will by located.
(d) A site plan showing the planned location of each wind turbine,
property lines, setback lines, access road and turnout
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:679
locations, substations(s), electrical cabling from the wind
energy facility to the substation(s), ancillary equipment,
buildings, and structures, including permanent meteorological
towers, associated transmission lines, and layout of all
structures within the geographical boundaries of any
applicable setback.
(e) Documents related to decommissioning.
(f) Other relevant studies, reports, certifications and approvals as
may be reasonably requested by the municipality to ensure
compliance with this Subsection N.
(3) Design and installation. All proposed wind energy facilities shall
comply with the following design and installation criteria:
(a) Design safety certification. The design of the wind energy
facility shall conform to applicable industry standards,
including those of the American National Standards Institute.
The applicant shall submit certificates of design compliance
obtained by the equipment manufacturers from Underwriters
Laboratories, Det Norske Veritas, Germanishcer Lloyd Wind
Energies, or other similar certifying organizations.
(b) Uniform Construction Code. To the extent applicable, the wind
energy facility shall comply with the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code, 34 Pa. Code § 403.1 et seq.
(c) Controls and brakes. All wind energy facilities shall be
equipped with a redundant braking system. This includes both
aerodynamic overspeed controls (including variable pitch, tip
and other similar systems) and mechanical brakes. Mechanical
brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall regulation
shall not be considered a sufficient braking system for
overspeed protection.
(d) Electrical components. All electrical components of the wind
energy facility shall conform to relevant and applicable local,
state and national codes and relevant and applicable
international standards.
(e) Visual appearance; power lines.
[1] Wind turbines shall be a nonobtrusive color such as white,
off-white or gray.
[2] Wind energy facilities shall not be artificially lighted,
except to the extent required by the Federal Aviation
Administrator or other applicable authority that regulates
air safety.
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:680
[3] Wind turbines shall not display advertising, except for
reasonable identification of the turbine manufacturer,
facility owner and operator.
[4] On-site transmission and power lines between wind
turbines shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be
placed underground.
(f) Warnings.
[1] A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage must be
placed at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and
substations.
[2] Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags,
reflectors, or tape shall be placed on the anchor points of
guy wires and along the guy wires up to a height of 10 feet
from the ground.
(g) Climb prevention; locks.
[1] Wind turbines shall not be climbable up to 15 feet above
ground surface.
[2] All access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment
shall be locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry
by nonauthorized persons.
(4) Setbacks. In addition to the setback requirement for a
manufacturing district, the following setbacks shall apply:
(a) Occupied buildings.
[1] Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest occupied
building a distance not less than the normal setback
requirements for that zoning classification or 1.1 times the
turbine height, whichever is greater. The setback distance
shall be measured from the center of the wind turbine base
to the nearest point on the foundation of the occupied
building.
[2] Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest occupied
building located on a nonparticipating landowner's
property a distance of not less than five times the hub
height, as measured from the center of the wind turbine
base to the nearest point on the foundation of the occupied
building.
(b) Property lines. All wind turbines shall be set back from the
nearest property line a distance of not less than the normal
setback requirements for that zoning classification or 1.1 times
the turbine height, whichever is greater. The setback distance
shall be measured to the center of the wind turbine base.
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:681
(c) Public roads. All wind turbines shall be set back from the
nearest public road a distance of not less than 1.1 times the
turbine height, as measured from the right-of-way line of the
nearest public road to the center of the wind turbine base.
(5) Waiver of setbacks.
(a) Property owners may waive the setback requirements in
Subsection N(4)(a)[2] (occupied buildings on a
nonparticipating landowner's property) and Subsection
N(4)(b) (property lines) by signing a waiver that sets forth the
applicable setback provision(s) and the proposed changes;
provided, however, that such waiver shall not affect the
setback requirements for a Manufacturing District.
(b) The written waiver shall notify the property owner(s) of the
setback required by this Subsection N, describe how the
proposed wind energy facility is not in compliance, and state
that consent is granted for the wind energy facility to not be set
back as required by this Subsection N.
(c) Any such waiver shall be recorded in the Recorder of Deeds
Office for the county where the property is located. The waiver
shall describe the properties benefited and burdened and
advise all subsequent purchasers of the burdened property
that the waiver of setback shall run with the land and may
forever burden the subject property.
(d) Upon application, Richland Township may waive the setback
requirement for public roads for good cause.
(6) Use of public roads.
(a) The applicant shall identify all state and local public roads to
be used within Richland Township to transport equipment and
parts for construction, operation or maintenance of the wind
energy facility.
(b) Richland Township's Engineer or a qualified third-party
engineer hired by Richland Township and paid for by the
applicant shall document road conditions prior to construction.
The engineer shall document road conditions again 30 days
after construction is complete or as weather permits.
(c) Richland Township may bond the road in compliance with state
regulations.
(7) Local emergency services.
(a) The applicant shall provide a copy of the project summary and
site plan to local emergency services, including paid or
volunteer fire department(s).
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:682
(b) Upon request, the applicant shall cooperate with emergency
services to develop and coordinate implementation of an
emergency response plan for the wind energy facility.
(8) Noise and shadow flicker.
(a) Audible sound from a wind energy facility shall not exceed 50
dBa as measured at the exterior of any nonparticipating
occupied residence, school, hospital, church, public library or
other building used for public gathering that existed on the
date of issuance of a permit under this Subsection N. Methods
for measuring and reporting acoustic emissions from wind
turbines and the wind energy facility shall be equal to or
exceed the minimum standards for precision described in
AWEA Standard 2.1 - 1989, titled "Procedures for the
Measurement and Reporting of Acoustic Emissions from Wind
Turbine Generation Systems Volume I: First Tier."
(b) The facility owner and operator shall make reasonable efforts
to minimize shadow flicker to any nonparticipating occupied
residence, school, hospital, church, public library or other
building used for public gathering that existed on the date of
issuance of a permit under this Subsection N.
(9) Waiver of noise and shadow flicker provisions.
(a) Property owners may waive the noise and shadow flicker
provisions of this Subsection N by signing a knowing waiver of
their rights.
(b) The written waiver shall notify the property owner(s) of the
sound or flicker limits in this Subsection N, describe the impact
on the property owner(s), and state that the consent is granted
for the wind energy facility to not comply with the sound or
flicker limit in this Subsection N.
(c) Any such waiver shall be recorded in the Recorder of Deed
Office of the county where the property is located. The waiver
shall describe the properties benefited and burdened and
advise all subsequent purchasers of the burdened property
that the waiver of sound or flicker limit shall run with the land
and may forever burden the subject property.
(10) Signal interference. The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to
avoid any disruption or loss of radio, telephone, television or
similar signals and shall mitigate any harm caused by the wind
energy facility.
(11) Liability insurance. There shall be maintained a current general
liability policy covering bodily injury and property damage with
limits of at least $1 million per occurrence and $1 million in the
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:683
aggregate. Certificates shall be made available to Richland
Township upon request.
(12) Decommissioning.
(a) The facility owner and operator shall, at its expense, complete
decommissioning of the wind energy facility, or individual wind
turbines, within 12 months after the end of the useful life of the
facility or individual wind turbines. The wind energy facility or
individual wind turbines will presume to be at the end of their
useful life if no electricity is generated for a continuous period
of 12 months.
(b) Decommissioning shall include removal of wind turbines,
buildings, cabling, electrical components, roads, foundations
to a depth of 36 inches, and any other associated facilities.
(c) Disturbed earth shall be graded and reseeded, unless the
landowner requests, in writing, that the access roads or other
land surface areas not be restored.
(d) An independent and certified professional engineer shall be
retained to estimate the total cost of decommissioning
("decommissioning costs"), without regard to salvage value of
the equipment, and the cost of decommissioning with the net
salvage value of the equipment ("net decommissioning costs").
Said estimates shall be submitted to Richland Township after
the first year of operation and every fifth year thereafter.
(e) The facility owner or operator shall post and maintain
decommissioning funds in an amount equal to net
decommissioning costs, provided that at no point shall
decommissioning funds be less than 25% of decommissioning
costs. The decommissioning funds shall be posted and
maintained with a bonding company or federal or
commonwealth-chartered lending institution chosen by the
facility owner or operator and participating landowner posting
the financial security, provided that the bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business
within the commonwealth and is approved by Richland
Township.
(f) Decommissioning funds may be in the form of a performance
bond, surety bond, letter of credit, corporate guarantee or
other form of financial assurance as may be acceptable to
Richland Township.
(g) If the facility owner or operator fails to complete
decommissioning within the period prescribed by Subsection
N(12)(a), then the landowner shall have six months to complete
decommissioning.
§ 240-104 RICHLAND CODE § 240-104
234:684
(h) If neither the facility owner or operator nor the landowner
complete decommissioning within the periods prescribed by
Subsection N(12)(a) and (g), Richland Township may take such
measures as necessary to complete decommissioning. The
entry into and submission of evidence of a participating
landowner agreement to Richland Township shall constitute
agreement and consent of the parties to the agreement, their
respective heirs, successors and assigns, that Richland
Township may take such action as necessary to implement the
decommissioning plan.
(i) The escrow agent shall release the decommissioning funds
when the facility owner or Operation has demonstrated and the
municipality concurs that decommissioning has been
satisfactorily completed or upon written approval of the
municipality in order to implement the decommissioning plan.
(13) Public inquiries and complaints.
(a) The facility owner and operator shall maintain a phone number
and identify a responsible person for the public to contact with
inquiries and complaints throughout the life of the project.
(b) The facility owner and operator shall make reasonable efforts
to respond to the public's inquiries and complaints.
(14) Remedies. Each violation of this Subsection N shall be punishable
as set forth in Article XV of this chapter.
§ 240-104 WATER § 240-104
234:685

ARTICLE XVIII
Parking
§ 240-105. General provisions.
A. Requirement, As a general requirement, each use in the township shall
provide sufficient off-street parking area to serve its users.
B. Procedure. An application for a building permit for a new or enlarged
building, structure or use shall include therewith a plot plan, drawn to
scale and fully dimensioned, showing any off-street parking or loading
facilities to be provided in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
C. Extent of control. The off-street parking and loading requirements of
this chapter apply as follows:
(1) All buildings and structures erected and all land uses initiated after
the effective date of this chapter shall provide accessory off-street
parking or loading facilities as required hereinafter for the use
thereof.
(2) When a building or structure erected, altered or enlarged prior to
or after the effective date of this chapter shall undergo a decrease
in number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity,
number of employees or other unit of measurement specified
hereinafter for required off-street parking or loading facilities and,
further, when said decrease would result in a requirement for fewer
total off-street parking or loading spaces through application of the
provisions of this chapter thereto, off-street parking and loading
facilities are so decreased only when the facilities remaining would
least equal or exceed the off-street parking or loading requirements
resulting from application of the provisions of this chapter to the
entire building or structure as modified.
(3) When a building or structure undergoes any increase in number of
dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other unit of
measurement specified hereinafter for required off-street parking
or loading facilities and, further, when said increase would result in
a requirement for additional total off-street parking or loading
spaces through application of the provision of this chapter, parking
and loading facilities shall be increased so that the facilities will at
least equal or exceed the off-street parking or loading requirements
resulting from application of the provisions of this chapter to the
entire building or structure as modified.
D. Existing off-street parking and loading spaces. Accessory off-street
parking and loading spaces in existence on the effective date of this
chapter may not be reduced in number unless already exceeding the
requirements of this article for equivalent new construction; in which
§ 240-105 WATER § 240-105
234:687
§ 240-106. Design and maintenance.
event, said spaces shall not be reduced below the number required
herein for such equivalent new construction.
A. Parking space description. Required off-street parking spaces and
aisles shall be laid out as shown on Figures 1101-1a and 1101-1b
attached hereto.214
B. Fractional spaces. When determination of the number of required offstreet
parking spaces results in a requirement of a fractional space, any
fraction up to and including one-half may be disregarded, and fractions
over one-half shall be interpreted as one parking space.
C. Access. Parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street or alley in such manner as will least
interfere with the movement of traffic. No driveway or curb cut in any
district shall exceed 25 feet in width for one-way movement or 35 feet in
width for two-way movement unless otherwise deemed necessary by
the Richland Township Planning Commission for uses requiring a site
plan approval.
D. Signs. No signs shall be displayed in any parking area within any
residential district except such as may be necessary for the orderly use
of the parking facilities. All signs in other parking areas shall conform
to Article XIX herein.
E. Striping. All parking spaces shall be properly marked and maintained
by durable paint in stripes a minimum of four-inches wide and
extending the length of the parking space.
F. Required setbacks. No parking area shall occupy the first 10 feet of the
front yard or side yard nearest the street or alley, which shall be
landscaped and maintained as a buffer area.
G. Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas, except those accessory to
single-family and-two family dwellings, shall be surrounded by a raised
concrete curb and improved with a bituminous or concrete material of
adequate thickness to support the weight of fully loaded vehicles which
customarily park or travel on it.
H. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall
be so arranged as to reflect the light away from all adjoining properties
and streets.
I. Stormwater. Adequate stormwater drainage facilities shall be installed
in order to ensure that stormwater does not flow onto abutting property
or abutting sidewalks in such a way or quantity that pedestrians using
the sidewalk would be detrimentally affected or inconvenienced. (See
§ 240-26.)
214. Editor's Note: Said Figures 1101-1a and 1101-1b are on file in the township offices.
§ 240-105 RICHLAND CODE § 240-106
234:688
§ 240-107. Minimum standards.
Subject to the general requirement for off-street parking, off-street parking
spaces, with proper access from a street, alley or driveway, shall be
provided in all districts in the amounts indicated below. Such parking space
shall be provided on any lot on which a dwelling is hereafter erected or
converted or, in the case of any other use, on or near the lot on which
any main building is hereafter erected or converted. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to prevent the collective provision of off-street parking
facilities for two or more buildings or uses, provided that the total of
such off-street parking facilities provided collectively shall be not less than
the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses computed
separately. In no case shall the number of parking spaces provided, or the
area devoted to parking, be less than the minimum requirements of this
section.
J. Walls or planting strip. Whenever a parking lot abuts onto a public
street, sidewalk or alley, a structurally sound wall or planting strip, with
raised curb, approved by the Zoning Officer, shall be installed and
maintained. Adequate retaining walls and other walls shall also be
constructed and maintained along abutting property to provide proper
solid retention and screening from abutting properties, subject to the
approval of the Zoning Officer.
K. Maintenance. Parking spaces shall be kept clean of debris, refuse and
garbage and maintained so as to be free of potholes and other defects
which might constitute danger to persons or property.
A. One- and two-family dwellings: off street parking spaces for all
vehicles.
B. Three-or-more-family dwellings: two parking spaces for each family
dwelling unit, plus one visitor's parking space for every two (or fraction
thereof) dwelling units.
C. Clubhouses and meeting places of veterans, business, civic, fraternal,
labor and similar organizations: one parking space for every 50 square
feet of aggregate floor area in the auditorium, assembly hall and dining
room of such building, plus one additional space for every two persons
regularly employed on the premises during peak shift.
D. Bowling alley: one parking space for every two customers computed on
the basis of maximum servicing capacity at any one time, plus one
additional space for every two persons regularly employed on the
premises during peak shift.
E. Dormitories, fraternity houses and sorority houses: one parking space
for every three beds occupied at maximum capacity. This requirement is
in addition to the parking space requirements for educational
establishments set forth elsewhere herein.
§ 240-106 WATER § 240-107
234:689
F. Drive-in facilities: five parking spaces per 100 square feet of floor
space.
G. Financial institutions: one space for each employee during peak shift
and three spaces for each teller station in addition to the requirements
for office areas.
H. Funeral homes and undertaking establishments: parking or storage
space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of such business, plus
one parking space for every two persons regularly employed on the
premises during peak shift and 30 parking spaces for each designated
viewing room at full capacity.
I. Hospital: one parking space for every four beds intended for patients,
excluding bassinets, plus one per doctor, one per two persons regularly
employed on the premises during peak shift and one per hospital
vehicle.
J. Indoor retail businesses: parking or storage space for all vehicles used
directly in the conduct of such business, plus one parking space for
every 250 square feet of total floor area.
K. Industrial plants and facilities: parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of such industrial use, plus one parking
space for every three persons regularly employed on the premises
during peak shift.
L. Junior and senior high school: one parking space for every six seats
available in the assembly hall, auditorium, stadium or gymnasium
during maximum capacity on the high school grounds or campus. If the
school has no assembly hall, auditorium, stadium or gymnasium, one
parking space shall be provided for each person regularly employed at
such school, plus two additional spaces for each classroom.
M. Libraries, museums, post offices and similar establishments: parking or
storage space for all vehicles used directly in the operation of such
establishment, plus one parking space for every 250 square feet of total
floor area.
N. Medical and dental clinics or facilities: three parking spaces for each
doctor, plus one additional space for each assistant, one additional
space for each employee, two additional spaces for each examination
room and one additional space for every 100 feet of waiting room.
O. Motels and hotels: one parking space for each sleeping room offered for
tourist accommodation, plus one space for each dwelling unit on the
premises and one additional space for every two persons regularly
employed on the premises during peak shift.
P. Nursing homes: one parking space for every two beds occupied at
maximum capacity. This requirement is in addition to the parking space
requirements for hospitals set forth herein.
§ 240-107 RICHLAND CODE § 240-107
234:690
Q. Offices: one parking space for every 200 square feet of office space.
R. Public and private elementary schools: one parking space for each
person regularly employed at such school, plus one additional space for
each classroom.
S. Public garages: indoor or outdoor parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of such business, plus three
parking spaces for each person regularly employed on the premises.
T. Recreation centers, swimming pools, skating rinks, outdoor commercial
recreation enterprises and other recreation and amusement facilities:
one parking space for every 4 customers computed on the basis of
maximum servicing capacity at any one time, plus one additional space
for every two persons regularly employed on the premises during peak
shift.
U. Repair shops, plumbing shops, electrical shops, roofing shops and other
service establishments: parking or storage space for all vehicles used
directly in the conduct of such business, plus two parking spaces for
each person regularly employed on the premises.
V. Restaurants, indoor and other eating and drinking establishments: one
parking space for each table or booth, plus one parking space for every
two stools at bar or counter and one parking space for every two
persons regularly employed on the premises during peak shift.
W. Service stations: parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly
in the conduct of such business, plus one parking space for each gas
pump, three spaces for each grease rack or similar facility and one
space for every two persons regularly employed on the premises during
peak shift.
X. Theaters, auditoriums, churches, stadiums and other places of public
assembly: one parking space for every six seats available at maximum
capacity.
Y. Transportation terminals: one parking space for every 100 square feet
of waiting room space, plus one additional space for every two persons
regularly employed on the premises during peak shift.
Z. Universities, colleges, academies and similar institutions of higher
learning: one parking space for every six seats occupied in the assembly
hall, auditorium, stadium or gymnasium during maximum capacity on
the campus.
(1) Parking space shall be provided for each person regularly
employed at such institution, plus five additional spaces for each
classroom
AA. Warehouses, freight terminals and trucking terminals: parking or
storage space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of such
§ 240-107 WATER § 240-107
234:691
§ 240-108. Location of parking areas.
Off-street automobile parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter
specified. Where distance is specified, such distance shall be walking
distance measured from the nearest point of the parking area to the nearest
entrance of the building that said parking area is required to serve.
§ 240-109. Special regulations relating to access and highway
frontage.
In order to minimize traffic congestion and hazard, control street access in
the interest of public safety and encourage the appropriate development of
street or highway frontage, the following shall apply:
business, plus two parking spaces for each person regularly employed
on the premises during peak shift.
A. One- and two-family dwellings: on the same lot with the building they
are required to serve.
B. Three- and four-family dwellings not over two stories in height and row
dwellings not over one and one-half stories in height: on the same lot or
parcel of land as the building they are required to serve. For the
purpose of this requirement, a group of such uses constructed and
maintained under a single ownership or management shall be assumed
to be on a single lot or parcel of land.
C. Clubs, hospitals, sanitariums, orphanages, homes for the aged,
convalescent homes and other similar uses: on the same lot or parcel of
land as the main building or buildings being served or upon properties
contiguous to the zoning lot upon which is located the building or
buildings they are intended to serve.
D. Multiple-family dwellings containing more than four dwelling units and
all other uses: on the same lot or parcel of land as the building they are
required to service or on a separate lot or parcel of land not more than
300 feet from the nearest entrance to the main use being served,
provided that the lot or parcel of land selected for the parking facilities
is located in an R-4, C, or L-1 District.
E. Notwithstanding Subsections A through D above, no parking area
accessory to a C or L-1 use shall be located in an R District except as
permitted in Article XVI herein.
A. No parking lot or area for off-street parking or for the storage or
movement of motor vehicles shall abut directly a public street or
highway unless separated from the street or highway at least 10 feet by
a raised curb, barrier planting strip, wall or other effective barrier
against traffic, except for necessary accessways, and each parking lot
shall have not more than two accessways to any one public street or
highway for each 500 feet of frontage. Where practicable, access to
parking areas shall be provided by a common service driveway or minor
§ 240-107 RICHLAND CODE § 240-109
234:692
§ 240-110. Additional regulations for parking.
street in order to avoid direct access on a major street or highway. No
such accessway shall be more than 35 feet in width.
(1) All parking, loading or service areas used by motor vehicles shall
be located entirely within the lot lines of the property.
(2) All buildings shall front upon a marginal street, service road,
common parking lot or similar area and not directly upon a public
street or highway.
(3) For all multifamily, commercial, industrial or institutional uses,
driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way line within 100
feet of the street right-of-way of an intersecting street located on
the same side of the roadway.
(4) All streets and accessways shall be designed in a manner conducive
to safe exit and entrance and shall conform to the highway
specifications and subdivision requirements of the township.
(5) No two of said driveways serving single- or two-family residences
shall be closer to each other than three feet, and no driveway shall
be closer to an internal side or rear property line than three feet.
Residential driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way line
within 40 feet of the street right-of-way line of an intersecting
street.
(6) Each driveway shall be properly established and shall be not more
than 35 feet in width, measured at right angles to the center line of
driveway, except as increased by permissible curb return radii. The
entire flare of any return radius shall fall within the right-of-way.
B. All driveways, aisles, maneuvering spaces, vehicular service areas or
spaces between or about buildings, other than those relating to a
dwelling, shall be adequately illuminated.
C. All outside lighting, including sign lighting, shall be directed in such a
way as not to create a nuisance in an agricultural, institutional or
residential district, and in every district all such lighting shall be
arranged so as to protect the street or highway and adjoining property
from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind. Any luminary
shall be equipped with some type of glare-shielding device approved by
the Zoning Officer. The height of any luminary shall not exceed 25 feet.
A. Use of off-street facilities. Except for vehicles used in the operation of a
working farm, off-street parking facilities accessory to residential use
and developed in any residential district, in accordance with the
requirements of this article, shall not be used for the parking of
commercial and service vehicles of more than three tons gross vehicle
weight (GVW). Commercial and/or service vehicles exceeding three
tons that are owned or operated by occupants of dwelling structures or
§ 240-109 WATER § 240-110
234:693
by guests of said occupants may be parked within a completely
enclosed garage or other building.
B. Joint parking facilities.
(1) Off-street parking facilities for different buildings, structures or
uses or for mixed uses may be provided collectively in any zoning
district in which separate off-street parking facilities for each
constituent use are permitted, provided that the total number of
spaces so located together are not less than the sum of the separate
requirements for each use of which normal hours of operation
coincide and not more than 300 feet from and contiguous to the lot
on which the main building is located.
(2) In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on
the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces
are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement
thereto, assuring their retention for such purposes, shall be
properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved
as to form and execution by the Solicitor and filed with the
application for a building permit.
(3) Not more than 50% of the parking spaces required for (a) theaters
and places of amusement and up to 100% of the parking spaces
required for a church or school, may be provided and used jointly
by (b) banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service
establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or
operated during the same hours as those listed in (a), provided that
written agreement assuring the retention for such purposes is
approved as to form and execution by the Township Solicitor and
filed with the application for a building permit.
C. Control of off-site facilities When required accessory off-street parking
facilities are provided other than on the lot on which the principal use is
located, they shall be in the same possession, either by deed or longterm
lease, as the property occupied by such principal use, and the
owner shall be bound by covenants of record filed in the office of the
Township Secretary requiring the owner and his or her heirs and
assigns to maintain the required number of off-street parking spaces
during the existence of said principal use. Use of such off-site facilities
is subject to approval by Richland Township.
D. Nonresidential parking in residential districts. Accessory off-street
parking facilities serving nonresidential uses of property may be
permitted in any R District when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board after review and study by the Planning Commission, subject to
the following requirements in addition to all other relevant
requirements of this article:
(1) The parking lot shall be accessory to and for use in connection with
one or more nonresidential establishments located in adjoining
districts or in connection with one or more existing professional or
§ 240-110 RICHLAND CODE § 240-110
234:694
§ 240-111. Design, maintenance and schedule of off-street loading
space.
institutional office buildings or institutions and within 300 feet of
the nonresidential use which it is to serve.
(2) Said parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of passenger
automobiles.
(3) No commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be
conducted on said parking lot.
(4) No sign of any kind other than signs designating entrances, exits
and conditions of use shall be maintained on said parking lot and
shall not exceed eight square feet in area.
(5) The parking lot may be open from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and shall
be closed at all other times; however, when supervised by one or
more full-time attendants, the parking lot may be kept open until
12:00 midnight.
(6) Each entrance to and from said parking lot shall be a distance of at
least 35 feet from any adjacent property located in any residential
district except where ingress or egress to the parking lot is
provided from a public alley or public way separating the
residential areas from the proposed parking lot. A buffer area of 15
feet minimum width shall be provided and maintained along all lot
lines, which are not street lines, abutting residential uses.
(7) In addition to the foregoing requirements, such parking lots shall
conform to any further requirements and conditions as may be
prescribed by the Township Supervisors for the protection of
properties adjacent to and in the vicinity of the proposed parking
lot.
A. Design.
(1) Loading space description. An off-street space shall be a hardsurfaced
area of land, open or enclosed, other than a street or
public way, used principally for the standing, loading or unloading
of motor trucks, tractors and trailers so as to avoid undue
interference with the public use of streets and alleys. A required
loading space shall be not less than 10 feet in width, 14 feet in
height and of adequate length to suit the specific use exclusive of
access aisles and maneuvering space except as otherwise
specifically dimensioned herein.
(2) Location. No permitted or required loading space shall be closer
than 50 feet to any property in a residential district unless
completely enclosed by building walls or an ornamental fence or
wall, or any combination thereof, not less than six feet in height. No
permitted or required loading space shall be located within 25 feet
§ 240-110 WATER § 240-111
234:695
of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets. Loading
space open to the sky may be located in any required yards.
(3) Measurement of spaces. When determination of the number of
required off-street loading spaces results in a requirement of a
fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half may be
disregarded, and any fraction over one-half shall be interpreted as
one loading space.
(4) Surfacing. All open off-street loading spaces shall be improved with
a compacted base and surfaced with a bituminous or concrete
material of adequate thickness to support the weight of fully loaded
vehicles which customarily use said spaces.
B. Schedule of required loading and unloading space. Every building or
structure used for business trade or industry shall provide space as
herein indicated for the loading a unloading of vehicles off the street or
public alley. Such space shall have access to a public alley or, if there is
no alley, to a street. Off-street loading and unloading space shall be in
addition to the requirements for off-street parking space listed herein.
Off-street loading and unloading space shall not be designed, intended,
constructed or used in a manner such as to obstruct or interfere with
the free use of any street, alley or adjoining property. The specific use
requirements for off-street loading and unloading spaces are provided
for as follows:
(1) Multistory multiple-family dwellings: one off-street loading and
unloading space at least 10 feet wide for every 5,000 square feet of
total floor area.
(2) Industrial plants: one off-street loading and unloading space at
least 12 feet by 50 feet for every 10,000 square feet of total area.
(3) Warehouses and wholesale storage facilities: one off-street loading
and unloading space at least 12 feet by 50 feet for every 7,500
square feet of total floor area.
(4) Freight terminals and trucking terminals: one off-street loading
and unloading space at lease 12 feet by 50 feet for every 5,000
square feet of total floor area.
(5) Commercial uses: one off-street loading and unloading space for
each commercial occupancy or as otherwise determined and
approved by the Richland Township Planning Commission during
the site plan review process.
§ 240-111 RICHLAND CODE § 240-111
234:696
ARTICLE XIX
Signs
§ 240-112. General provisions.
§ 240-113. Signs permitted in residential districts and university
district.
The following types of signs and no other shall be permitted in residential
districts and the University District except as otherwise provided in the
district regulations.
A. Any sign hereafter erected or maintained shall conform with the
provisions of this article and any other ordinance or regulations of the
township relating hereto.
B. Zoning approval shall be required for all signs and billboards.
C. All signs shall be erected and maintained in safe orderly condition. The
Zoning Officer may order the repair or removal of any sign which he has
declared unsafe. In the event that the owner fails to remove or repair an
unsafe sign within 10 days following such notification by the Zoning
Officer, it may be removed by the township at the owner's expense.
D. All signs shall be erected in a manner which will not obstruct vision or
in any way impede the safe movement of vehicular and/or pedestrian
traffic.
E. Each face of a double-faced sign may have a surface area not exceeding
50 square feet. When a sign has more than two faces, the total area of
all faces combined shall not exceed 100 square feet.
F. No sign mounted on a building shall project above the ridge line of a
sloping roof nor above the eaves line of a flat roof.
A. Traffic control signs installed and maintained by the township, Cambria
County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other governmental
authority.
B. Professional, accessory use or name signs indicating the name,
profession or activity of the occupant of the dwelling provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 144 square inches.
(2) Not more than one such sign shall be erected for each permitted
use or dwelling.
(3) No such sign shall be illuminated.
(4) No such sign shall stand more than 10 feet from ground level to the
top of the sign.
§ 240-112 WATER § 240-113
234:697
C. Identification signs for farms or estates, university uses, schools,
churches, hospitals and similar permitted uses other than dwellings,
provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet.
(2) Except in a university district, not more than one sign shall be
placed on premises held in single and separate ownership unless
such premises front on more than one street, in which case, one
such sign may be erected on each street frontage.
(3) No such sign shall be illuminated except by concealed or indirect
light attached to the sign itself.
(4) No such sign shall stand more than 10 feet from the ground level to
the top of the sign.
D. One no trespassing sign or sign indicating the private nature of a
driveway or premises, provided that the size of any such sign shall not
exceed two square feet.
E. Temporary signs of mechanics and artisans, provided that:
(1) Such signs shall be erected only on the premises where such work
is being performed.
(2) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(3) Such signs shall not be illuminated except attached to the sign
itself.
(4) Such signs shall be removed promptly upon completion of active
work.
F. One directional sign not exceeding 1 1/2 square feet.
G. In connection with a parking facility, directional signs not to exceed
eight square feet.
H. Any use other than specified in Subsections A through G herein, which
use is a permitted use in a university or residential district and signs for
uses which are preexisting nonconforming uses, provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet.
(2) Except any university district, not more than one sign shall be
placed on premises held in single and separate ownership unless
such premises front on more than one street, in which case, one
such sign may be erected on each street frontage.
(3) No such sign shall be illuminated except by concealed or indirect
light attached to the sign itself.
I. Any signs in any residential or university district shall be nonflashing
and nonanimated; those not attached to a building shall be set back at
§ 240-113 RICHLAND CODE § 240-113
234:698
§ 240-114. Signs permitted in all nonresidential Districts A, C-2,
C-3, L and M.
The following types of signs shall be permitted in the A, C-2, C-3, L-1, and
M Districts:
least 15 feet from a lot or right-of-way line, and no signs shall project
above the roof or mounted on a building above the eaves line of a roof.
J. Nonconforming use signs, provided that:
(1) The total area of such signs relating to a single use at the effective
date of this chapter or at the effective date of any amendment of
this chapter by which any sign shall be made nonconforming shall
not be increased.
(2) No such signs shall be changed or replaced except when such
change or replacement results in a new sign being in conformity
with the sign regulations in a residential or university district
unless the change or replacement is authorized as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. Any sign permitted in a residential district which relates to a use
permitted in the district.
B. Freestanding business or related signs as follows:
(1) Any sign permitted in a residential district.
(2) One freestanding business sign or identification sign not to exceed
50 square feet for any one business except as provided in
§ 240-114B(3).
(3) Where a group of three or more businesses are Located on one
parcel or tract, one freestanding business or identification sign
shall be permitted per street, and no such sign shall exceed 100
square feet per street.
(4) Signs not attached to a building shall be set back at least five feet
from a lot or street right-of-way line or any required buffer area.
Signs located on a corner lot shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet
from the front and side street lines. A freestanding sign shall not
exceed 40 feet in height as measured from the ground to the top of
the sign. No sign mounted on a building shall project above the
ridge line of a sloping roof nor above the eaves line of a flat roof.
(5) Except as provided in Subsection B(6) hereafter, all signs in any A,
C-2, C-3, L or M District shall be stationary, nonrevolving,
nonflashing and nonanimated. If illuminated, they shall utilize
reflected or refracted light in such manner as shall not
detrimentally affect any property in another zoning district.
[Amended 3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 311]
§ 240-113 WATER § 240-114
234:699
(6) Billboards (see § 240-115) and signs permissible under
§ 240-114B(2) through (4) may include changeable-message signs
(changeable-message signs change the message on the sign by
electronic or mechanical process); provided, however, that such
signage has a static display lasting no less than eight seconds,
achieves a message change with all moving parts or illumination
moving or changing simultaneously over a period of three seconds
or less, and does not display any illumination that moves, appears
to move or changes in intensity during the static display period.
Only one changeable message sign or billboard shall be permitted
per lot. The brightness of the changeable message signs and
billboards described in this section shall be limited as set forth in
§ 240-114B(7). [Added 3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 311; amended
12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 327]
(7) Digital billboard and signage lighting requirements: [Added
12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 327]
(a) The regulated average luminance for digital billboards and
signage after sunset (time of sunset to be determined by the
NOAA solar calculator) shall not exceed 7% of the total
intensity of the sign, assuming that 100% is equal to 10,000
nits.
(b) All readings shall be taken with a luminance meter to the face
of the sign at a distance of 25 feet from the sign. Readings
should be taken for each sign at both 7% and 100% to establish
a baseline intensity for the specific sign.
(c) A background reading should be taken to establish the level of
extraneous light affecting the sign.
(d) Definition. As used in this subsection, the following term shall
have the meaning indicated:
LUMINANCE METER — Luminance, measured in candelas/
square meter (cd/m2), represents the quantity of light leaving
a surface in a particular direction relative to the size of the
area of the surface from which it is leaving. As such, it is
related to the perceived brightness of the surface. A luminance
meter is an instrument for measuring this quantity by aiming it
along the line of sight to the surface. Note that the size of the
surface measured is a function of the measurement distance
due to the fixed size of the measurement area within the meter.
Also note that this unit of measure is sometimes called the
"nit." However, this is a term that is deprecated (ANSI/IES
RP-16-10). Measures in cd/m2 and nits are equivalent.
C. The total area on one side of all signs attached to a building and facing
any one street frontage on any one premises shall not exceed eight
percent of the area of the wall surface, including window and door
§ 240-114 RICHLAND CODE § 240-114
234:700
§ 240-115. Billboards. [Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 327]
Billboards shall be allowed on undeveloped property only by special
exception in A, C-2, L and M Districts. All billboards along streets shall
areas on which they are displayed, or two square feet for each lineal
foot of building frontage, whichever is the greater; provided, further,
that in the case of a lot which is vacant or on which any building is
clearly an incidental or accessory to the use of the lot, the total area
of all signs attached to the building and facing any one street frontage
of any one premises shall not exceed one square foot for each two
additional lineal feet of building frontage.
D. Temporary commercial signs. No stringing of light bulbs, no animated
sign nor signs that revolve, swing or have movable parts or have
flashing lights or reflectors shall be permitted after the effective date of
this chapter except when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board, and no advertising signs, banner, pennant
balance, spinners or display constructed of cloth, canvas, wallboard or
other like materials shall be erected, suspended or hung on any
property except as follows. The Zoning Officer may permit the use of
any such advertising signs, banners or displays constructed of cloth,
light fabric or other like materials for a period of not more than 30
consecutive days and not more than three such periods in any one
calendar year, provided that:
(1) No such sign or display shall exceed in size the area permitted for
permanent signs as provided for each zoning district.
(2) No sign shall be placed in such a position that it will cause danger
to traffic on a street by obscuring the view.
(3) No such sign or display shall be permitted within the lines of any
public street or public sidewalk or shall be closer to a curb than 10
feet unless specifically authorized by other ordinances and
regulations of Richland Township.
(4) No sign or display shall be permitted to be placed across a public
street or highway.
(5) Signs not attached to a building shall be set back at least five feet
from a lot or street right-of-way line or any required buffer area.
Signs located on a corner lot shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet
from the front and side street lines. A freestanding sign shall not
exceed 40 feet in height as measured from the ground to the top of
the sign. No sign mounted on a building shall project above the
ridge line of a sloping roof nor above the eaves line of a flat roof.
(6) All signs in any A, C-2, C-3, L or M District shall be stationary
nonrevolving,nonflashing and nonanimated. If illuminated, they
shall utilize reflected or refracted light in such manner as shall not
detrimentally affect any property in another zoning district.
§ 240-114 WATER § 240-115
234:701
be spaced with a radius of 1,500 feet apart. For purposes of this section,
"undeveloped land" shall be defined as property having no structure erected
thereon. Any property leased for construction of a billboard shall be deemed
to be part of the parcel owned by the lessor.
§ 240-116. General sign regulations.
The following restrictions shall apply to all permitted sign uses:
A. No sign shall be placed in such a position that it will cause danger to
traffic on a street by obscuring view.
B. No sign other than signs authorized by § 240-113A shall be erected
within the lines of any public street or public sidewalk or shall be closer
to a curb than 10 feet unless specifically authorized by other ordinances
and regulations of Richland Township.
C. No sign shall project over a public sidewalk unless authorized as a
special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. Wall signs shall not project over 12 inches from the face of the building.
E. Each sign must be maintained in good condition and repair.
F. No commercial building, including multiple dwellings or apartments in
any residential district, shall be illuminated on the exterior by
floodlighting or spotlighting or similar type lighting.
G. All signs shall be made a part of the architectural design of a new
commercial construction or major alterations of existing buildings.
Drawings submitted for sign permits shall show size, location and
illumination in detail.
H. All nonconforming signs and billboards at the effective date of this
chapter shall not be altered, expanded or enlarged without approval of
the Zoning Hearing Board.
I. A sign advertising a profession, use, activity or business no longer
conducted shall not be permitted and must be removed.
J. Signs painted or affixed to any outdoor bench, chair or the like article
shall not be permitted unless specifically authorized by the governing
body.
K. Signs advertising a profession, use, activity or business shall be located
on the premises where the said profession, use, activity or business is
located.
L. No sign shall be affixed by tacking, pasting or otherwise mounting upon
utility poles, light standards, trees, rocks or other natural features or
any part of official traffic signs required by law.
M. All sign lighting shall be arranged, designed and shielded or directed to
protect the adjoining properties and streets from glare. Reflectors and
§ 240-115 RICHLAND CODE § 240-116
234:702
§ 240-117. Special event sign provisions.
The following special event signs are exempt from the requirement of
obtaining a permit from the Zoning Officer. However, no special event sign
shall be placed within any public right-of-way or placed in such a manner or
at a location which creates a traffic hazard by impairing visibility from or of
a public highway:
lights permitted in conjunction with signs shall be equipped with
restraining hoods or shields to concentrate the illumination upon the
area of the sign.
A. Temporary signs advertising home garage sales, yard sales and the like,
as differentiated from signs advertising established commercial
enterprise, may be erected in any zoning district subject to the
following provisions:
(1) The area of one side of any such sign shall not exceed eight square
feet.
(2) Only one such sign may be erected on any single property, unless
such property fronts on two streets, in which case, one sign is
authorized on each street frontage.
(3) The sign shall be installed no earlier than two days prior to the sale
and shall be removed within one day after the activity.
B. Holiday decorations displayed for recognized holidays shall be
exempted from the provisions of this chapter except as they may cause
glare, interfere with traffic safety or in any other way become a public
safety hazard.
C. Temporary signs advertising exhibits, shows or events of public, civic or
charitable organizations occurring in the township may be erected in
any district, subject to the following:
(1) The area of any one side of such sign shall not exceed 12 square
feet.
(2) The sign must advertise an event taking place within the township.
(3) Such signs may be erected no earlier than one month prior to the
date of the event and shall be removed no later than two days after
the completion of the event.
D. Signs used for directing patrons or members to churches, civic clubs or
other public, quasi-public or charitable facilities or functions are
permitted in any district, provided that the area of any one side of such
sign shall not exceed six square feet.
E. Real estate signs.
§ 240-116 WATER § 240-117
234:703
(1) Signs advertising the sale or rental of residential premises,
provided that:
(a) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(b) Not more than two such signs shall be erected for any property
held in single and separate ownership.
(c) No such signs shall be illuminated.
(d) No such sign shall stand more than 10 feet from the ground
level to the top of the sign.
(2) Signs indicating the location and direction of premises in the
process of development, provided that:
(a) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(b) Not more than two such signs shall be erected on each 500 feet
of street frontage.
(c) No such sign shall be illuminated.
(d) All such signs shall be removed on completion or when active
work on the development ceases.
(3) Signs advertising the sale or rental of commercial, industrial or
manufacturing premises, provided that:
(a) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 24 square feet.
(b) Not more than two such signs shall be erected for any property
held in single and separate ownership.
§ 240-117 RICHLAND CODE § 240-117
234:704
ARTICLE XX
Special Provisions: Limitation of Height of Objects Around
Johnstown Cambria County Airport
§ 240-118. Scope.
All uses, structures or vegetation pursued, built, modified or planted within
the zones surrounding the Johnstown Cambria County Airport, as those
zones are further defined herein, are subject to the height limitations and
use restrictions contained in this Article XX. The requirements of this article
are in addition to those contained in any other zone in which the existing or
proposed use, property, structure or vegetation is located.
§ 240-119. Definitions.
As used in this Article XX, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless the context otherwise requires:
AIRPORT — The Johnstown Cambria County Airport.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point of an airport's usable landing
area measured in feet from sea level. For purposes of this article, airport
elevation shall be 2,284 feet above sea level.
AIRPORT ZONES — All the land lying beneath the approach surfaces,
transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical surfaces as they apply
to the Johnstown Cambria County Airport. Such zones are shown on the
Richland Township Zoning Map consisting of one sheet, prepared by CPS
Surveys, Inc., and dated April, 1986, which is attached to this article and
made a part hereof.215 An area located in more than one of the following
zones and/or in another zone established by this chapter is considered to
be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various
zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
UTILITY RUNWAY VISUAL APPROACH ZONE — The inner edge of this
approach zone coincides with the primary surface and is 250 feet wide.
The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet
at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
A.
RUNWAY LARGER THAN UTILITY WITH A VISIBILITY MINIMUM AS
LOW AS THREE-FOURTHS MILE NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT
APPROACH ZONE — The inner edge of this approach zone coincides
with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The
approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a
horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center
line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
B.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY APPROACH ZONE — The inner
edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary
C.
215. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the township offices.
§ 240-118 WATER § 240-119
234:705
APPROACH SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway center line, extending outward and upward from the end of the
primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height
limitation slope set forth in § 240-120 of this article. The perimeter of the
approach surface shall coincide with the perimeter of the approach zone.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL HORIZONTAL and CONICAL ZONES — These
zones are set forth in § 240-120 of this article.
CONICAL SURFACE — A surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet.
HAZARD to AIR NAVIGATION — An obstruction determined to have a
substantial adverse affect on the safe and efficient utilization of the
navigable air space.
HEIGHT — For the purposes of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in the article and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall mean sea
level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plan 150 feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which plan coincides with the perimeter
of the horizontal zone.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds the limiting height set forth in § 240-120 of this
article.
surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward
uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet to a horizontal distance of 50,000
feet from the primary surface. Its center line is a continuation of the
center line of the runway.
RUNWAY LARGER THAN UTILITY WITH A VISIBILITY MINIMUM
GREATER THAN THREE-FOURTHS MILE NONPRECISION
INSTRUMENT APPROACH ZONE — The inner edge of this approach
zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet
wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500
feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
D.
TRANSITIONAL ZONES — The transitional zones are the areas beneath
the transitional surfaces.
E.
HORIZONTAL ZONE — The horizontal zone is established by swinging
arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing
lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the
approach and transitional zones.
F.
CONICAL ZONE — The conical zone is established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends
outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
G.
§ 240-119 RICHLAND CODE § 240-119
234:706
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association or governmental entities; includes a
trustee, a receiver, an assignee or a similar representative of any of them.
PRIMARY SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or
when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard
surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of
this primary surface is set forth in § 240-120 of this article. The elevation of
any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest
point on the runway center line.
RUNWAY — A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff
of aircraft along its length. Types of runways are more specifically defined
as follows:
STRUCTURE — An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes,
smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES — These surfaces extend outward at 90º angles
to the runway center line and the runway center line extended at a slope of
7 feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and
approach surfaces where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces.
Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces,
which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend
the distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from angles to the
extended runway center line.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for
and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than
12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
A.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an
existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation
facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation
equipment, for which a straight in nonprecision instrument approach
procedure has been approved or planned.
B.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to
be used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross
weight and less.
C.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of
aircraft using visual approach procedures.
D.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system
(ILS). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is
planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any
other planning document.
E.
§ 240-119 WATER § 240-119
234:707
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Richland Township Zoning Hearing
Board.
§ 240-120. Airport zone height limitations.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be erected,
altered or maintained and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone
created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height limit
herein established for such zone. The height limitations for each of the
zones are as follows:
A. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone. The height limitation
slopes 50 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and
at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway center
line; then the limitation slopes upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot
vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the
extended runway center line.
B. Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum Greater Than
Three-Fourths Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone. The
height limitation slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning
at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and
extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended
runway center line.
C. Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each
foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet
along the extended runway center line.
D. Runway Larger Than Utility With A Visibility Minimum As Low As
Three-Fourths Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone. Slopes 34
feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the
same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal
distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
E. Transitional Zones. The height limitation slopes seven feet outward for
each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as
the primary surface and the approach surface and extending to a height
of 150 feet above the airport elevation. In addition to the foregoing,
there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each
foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
approach surface and extending to where they intersect the conical
surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach projects
beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping
seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and
at the same elevation as the approach surface and extending a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90º angles to the
extended runway center line.
§ 240-119 RICHLAND CODE § 240-120
234:708
§ 240-121. Use restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made
of land or water within any zone established by this article in such a
manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or
radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for
pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in
the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the
airport, create hazards or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with
the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
§ 240-122. Nonconforming uses.
§ 240-123. Zoning approval related to airport zones.
F. Horizontal Zone. The height limitation is established at 150 feet above
the airport elevation.
G. Conical Zone. The height limitation slopes 20 feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and to 150
feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet
above the airport elevation.
H. Accepted height limitations. Nothing in this article shall be construed
as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure or
growth of any tree to a height up to 50 feet above the surface of the
land.
A. Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this article
should not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other
change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the
regulations as of the effective date of this article or otherwise interfere
with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein
shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use
of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun
prior to the effective date of this article and is diligently prosecuted.
B. Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this
section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is
hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance
thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the
Township Supervisors to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the
vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such
markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the
expense of Johnstown Cambria County Airport Authority or any
successor organization or corporation.
A. Future uses.
(1) Except as specifically provided in Subsection A(1)(a), (b) and (c)
hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no
§ 240-120 WATER § 240-123
234:709
structure shall be erected or otherwise established and no trees
shall be planted in any zone hereby created unless zoning approval
therefore shall have been applied for and granted. Each application
for zoning approval shall meet the requirements of this article
in addition to the requirements set forth in Article XV and shall
indicate the purpose for which the zoning approval is desired, with
sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the
resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations
herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the
zoning approval shall be granted. No zoning approval for use
inconsistent with the provisions of this Article XX shall be granted
unless a variance has been approved by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(a) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree less than
75 feet of vertical height above the ground except when,
because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, such
tree would extend above the height limits prescribed for such
zones.
(b) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of
the runway, no zoning approval shall be required for any tree
less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground except
when such tree would extend above the height limit prescribed
for such approach zones.
(c) In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones
beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be
required for any tree less than 75 feet of vertical height above
the ground except when such tree, because of terrain, land
contour or topographic features, would extend above the
height limit prescribed for such transition zones.
(2) Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction or
alteration of any structure or growth of any tree in excess of any
height limits established by this article.
B. Existing uses. No zoning approval shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming
use, structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than
it was on the effective date of this article or any amendments thereto or
than it is when the application for a zoning approval is made. Except as
indicated, all applications for such zoning approval shall be granted.
C. Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure or permit the growth of any tree or use property not in
accordance with the regulations prescribed by this article may apply to
the Zoning Hearing Board for a variance from such regulations. Such
variances shall be heard in accordance with the standards and
§ 240-123 RICHLAND CODE § 240-123
234:710
§ 240-124. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to administer and enforce the
regulations prescribed herein. Application for permits and variances shall
be made to the Zoning Officer in accordance with Article XV of this chapter.
§ 240-125. Violations and penalties.
Each violation of this article shall be punishable as set forth in Article XV of
this chapter.
§ 240-126. Conflicting regulations.
Where any of the regulations or limitation prescribed in this article are
inconsistent or conflict with any other zoning regulations applicable to the
same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures
or trees, the use of land or any other matter, the more stringent limitation
or requirement shall govern and prevail.
procedures set forth in Article XVI of this chapter and may be allowed
where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of
the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and that the relief
granted will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create
a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice and will be in
accordance with the spirit of this article. Additionally, an application
for variance from the requirements of this article may be referred by
the Zoning Hearing Board to the Johnstown Cambria County Airport
Authority or the Johnstown Cambria County Airport Manager for advice
as to the aeronautical affects of the variance.
D. Obstruction, marking and lighting. When such action is deemed
advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and to be reasonable
in the circumstances, a granted zoning approval or variance may be
conditioned to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to
install, operate and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings
and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the Zoning
Hearing Board, this condition may be modified to require the owner to
permit the Johnstown Cambria County Airport Authority, at its own
expense, to install, operate and maintain the necessary markings and
lights.
§ 240-123 WATER § 240-126
234:711

ARTICLE XXI
Swimming Pools
§ 240-127. Private swimming pools.
A. "Private swimming pool" shall be defined as a pool in the ground or
prefabricated installation above the ground, lake or open tank not
located within a completely enclosed building and containing or
normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater
than one and one-half feet and having an inside diameter or dimension
of greater than 10 feet.
B. No such swimming pool shall be allowed in an R or a C District except
as an accessory use and unless it complies with the following conditions
and requirements:
(1) The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of
the occupants of the principal use of the property on which it is
located and their guests and no fee shall be charged.
(2) The pool structure, including perimeter walkway, paved areas or
accessory structures, except the required fence, shall not be
located closer than 15 feet from any side or rear property line nor
closer to any street than the minimum building setback line
permitted for the district in which it is located.
(3) All swimming pools now existing or hereafter constructed,
installed, established or maintained shall be enclosed by a
permanent fence of durable material at least six feet in height
above the finished grade and shall be so constructed as not to have
openings, mesh or gaps constructed to prohibit the passage of a
sphere larger than four inches. All gates used in conjunction with
the fence shall meet the same specifications as to the fence itself
and shall be equipped with approved locking devices and shall be
locked at all times when the swimming pool is not in use.
(4) Pools shall conform to the Pennsylvania Department of Health
standards. Existing pools shall conform in 90 days to the
requirements set forth in this section as a public safety measure.
(5) All materials used in the construction of private pools shall be
waterproof and so designed and constructed as to facilitate
emptying and cleaning and shall be maintained and operated in
such a manner as to be clean and sanitary at all times. At no time
shall the drains be directed onto adjoining properties.
(6) Fences attached to pools shall meet the same requirements as in
§ 240-126B(3).
§ 240-127 WATER § 240-128
234:713
§ 240-128. Community or club swimming pools.
A "community or club swimming pool" shall be any pool constructed by
an association of property owners or by a private club solely for use and
enjoyment by members of the association or club and their families and
guests or members. Community and club swimming pools shall comply with
the following conditions and requirements:
A. The pool and accessory structures thereto, including the areas used by
the bathers, shall not be closer than 100 feet to any property line from
the property on which it is located.
B. The swimming pool and all of the area used by the bathers shall be so
walled or fenced as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the
street or adjacent properties. Said fence or wall shall be six feet in
height and maintained in good condition. The area surrounding the
enclosure, except for the parking spaces, shall be suitably landscaped
with grass, hardy shrubs and trees and maintained in good condition.
§ 240-128 RICHLAND CODE § 240-128
234:714
ARTICLE XXII
Day-Care Centers, Family Day-Care Homes and Group Day-Care
Homes
§ 240-129. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHILD — For purposes of this Article XXII, a child is a person under 16
years of age.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility in which care is provided for seven or more
children at any one time where the child-care areas are not being used as a
family residence.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any premises other than the child's own home,
operated for profit or not for profit, in which child day care is provided
at any one time to four, five or six children who are not relatives of the
caregiver.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A facility in which care is provided for more
than six but less than 12 children at any one time where the child-care areas
are being used as a family residence.
§ 240-130. Department of Public Welfare certification.
The day-care facilities defined in § 240-129 must hold an approved
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare (DPW) registration certificate
or license, as appropriate, and meet all current DPW regulations, including
those standards governing adequate indoor space, accessible outdoor play
space and any applicable state or local building and fire safety codes.
§ 240-131. Smoke detectors.
All day-care homes and facilities shall be fully protected by smoke detectors
and fire extinguishers.
§ 240-132. Standards for family day-care and group day-care
homes.
Family day-care homes and group day-care homes may be located in any
residential or university district by special exception and in any other
district by right subject to the following safeguards:
A. Parking. The following standards shall govern parking:
(1) The general provisions of §§ 240-105 and 240-106 shall apply to all
family day-care homes and group day-care homes.
(2) In all districts, in addition to any other parking spaces required in
relation to other uses of a building, there shall be one off-street
parking space for each nonresident employee or nonresident/full-
§ 240-129 WATER § 240-132
234:715
§ 240-133. Standards for day-care centers.
Day-care centers may located in any residential or university district by
special exception and in any other district by right after review by the
Planning Commission, subject to the regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located and the following additional standards, whichever is
more restrictive.
time volunteer and one safe passenger unloading space measuring
at least nine feet by 20 feet.
(3) In all districts where a nonresidential structure is used, the
standards of § 240-107 shall apply.
B. Fencing. The required outdoor play area shall be surrounded by a safety
fence or natural barrier, provided that any fence shall conform to the
height limitations relating to fences in the zoning district in which it is
located.
C. Hours. Outside play shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m.
D. Signs. Any sign shall comply with standards governing signs as below:
(1) In residential districts, the standards of § 240-113B shall apply.
(2) In all other areas, the sign shall not exceed 24 square feet and shall
comply with § 240-114D(5) and (6).
E. When day care is provided in a home, the amount of floor area devoted
to such purposes shall not exceed 30% of the total floor area of the
dwelling, and there shall be no change to the exterior of the building for
the purpose of accommodating the day-care use.
F. Lot size. The lot size of any family day-care home shall not be less than
7,500 square feet, and the lot size of any group day-care home shall not
be less than 15,000 square feet. Any such home shall conform to the
setback, height and building area requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located.
A. Parking. The general provisions of §§ 240-105 and 240-106 shall apply
to all day-care centers. In addition, there shall be one off-street parking
space provided for each employee or full-time volunteer and one safe
passenger unloading space measuring nine feet by 20 feet for each ten
children that the facility is licensed to accommodate.
B. Fence. The outdoor play area required by state licensing shall be
surrounded by a safety fence or natural barrier, provided that any fence
shall conform to the height limitations for fences in the zoning district
in which it is located.
C. Play area setback. No portion of the outside play area shall be less than
30 feet from an existing occupied dwelling.
§ 240-132 RICHLAND CODE § 240-133
234:716
D. Hours. Outside play shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m.
E. Signs. Any sign shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) In residential districts, the requirements of § 240-113B shall apply.
(2) In all other districts, the sign shall not exceed 24 square feet and
shall comply with § 240-114D(5) and (6).
F. Concentration. No day-care center shall be established within 500 feet
from another day-care center in any residential districts.
G. Lot size. The minimum site or lot area shall be determined by the
following table when centralized water and sewage service is provided.:
License Capacity
(number of children)
Minimum Lot Size
(square feet)
7 to 11 20,000
12 and above 20,000, plus 500 square feet for
additional child (e.g., 50 children equals
45,000 square feet)
§ 240-133 WATER § 240-133
234:717

ARTICLE XXIII
Severability, Repealer and Intent
§ 240-134. Severability.
If any sentence, clause or section of this chapter is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses or sections of this chapter. It is hereby declared as
the intent of the Board of Supervisors of Richland Township that this
chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid sentences, clauses or sections thereof not be included herein.
§ 240-135. Repealer.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
of this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 240-136. Intent.
It is the intention of this chapter, or any amendments or supplements
hereto, to furnish a complete and exclusive system of zoning and
regulations for zoning in Richland Township, Cambria County, Pennsylvania.
§ 240-134 WATER § 240-136
234:719
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
272 1-4-2000 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
273 7-17-2000 Street vacation NCM
274 9-25-2000 Sewers: City of Johnstown
wastewater collection
amendment
Ch. 198, Part 5
275 12-18-2000 Street excavations Ch. 212, Part 2
276 4-20-2001 Zoning Ch. 240
277 7-30-2001 Police pension plan
amendment
See Ch. 38, Art. II
278 7-30-2001 Board of Supervisors pension
plan amendment
NCM
279 3-11-2002 Street acceptance NCM
280 6-17-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
281 7-29-2002 Alley vacation NCM
282 1-13-2003 Highland Sewer and Water
Authority extension of
existence
NCM
283 12-16-2002 Board of Supervisors pension
plan amendment
NCM
284 12-16-2002 Police pension plan
amendment
See Ch. 38, Art. II
285 8-11-2003 Intermunicipal liquor license
transfers
Ch. 78, Art. II
286 2-9-2004 Increasing Township's
indebtedness
NCM
287 4-20-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
288 5-17-2004 Earned income tax Ch. 220, Art. VII
289 6-14-2004 Uniform construction codes Ch. 112
290 6-14-2004 Administrative Board of
Appeals amendment
Ch. 6
§ 240-136 RICHLAND CODE § DL-1
234:720
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
291 1-10-2005 Emergency and municipal
services tax
Ch. 220, Art. III
292 2-7-2005 Emergency response user
fees
Ch. 131, Art. I
293 2-7-2005 Police pension plan
amendment
See Ch. 38, Art. II
294 4-4-2005 PennVest guaranty agreement NCM
295 5-27-2005 Stormwater management Superseded by
Ord. No. 325
296 5-27-2005 Sewers: grease separation
facilities amendment
Ch. 198, Part 4
297 7-25-2005 Acquisition of land by
eminent domain
NCM
298 11-28-2005 Fees: emergency response
amendment
Ch. 131, Art. I
299 11-28-2005 Board of Supervisors pension
plan amendment
See Ch. 38, Art. I
300 11-28-2005 Police pension plan
amendment
See Ch. 38, Art. II
301 12-23-2005 Vacating abandoned portion
of right-of-way
NCM
302 12-23-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
303 1-3-2006 Emergency and municipal
services tax amendment
Ch. 220, Art. III
304 5-26-2006 Streets and sidewalks:
curbing assessment
Ch. 212, Part 3
305 5-26-2006 Street acceptance NCM
306 Street vacation NCM
307 Street vacation NCM
308 Street acceptance NCM
309 3-5-2007 Realty transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 220, Art. VI
310 11-26-2007 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 220, Art. III
311 3-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
312 4-28-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
234:721
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
313 6-22-2009 Sewers: use of City of
Johnstown regional sewage
collection or treatment
systems
Ch. 198, Part 6
314 6-22-2009 Street acceptance NCM
315 12-21-2009 Police pension plan
amendment
See Ch. 38, Art. II
316 12-21-2009 Fire services agreement with
Geistown Borough
NCM
317 12-21-2009 Fire and emergency
protection management and
services agreement with
Shade Township
NCM
318 6-7-2010 Sewers: connection to
Pegasus system
Ch. 198, Part 1,
Art. VIA
319 Pension plan NCM
320 Pension plan NCM
321 10-10-2011 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 220, Art. VII
322 Pension plan NCM
323 Pension plan NCM
324 1-20-2012 Street acceptance NCM
325 5-21-2012 Stormwater management Ch. 210
326 5-21-2012 Floodplain management Ch. 138
327 12-16-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
328 7-14-2014 General obligation note NCM
329 11-3-2014 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 186
330 2-9-2015 Pennsylvania Townships
Health Insurance Cooperative
Trust
Ch. 37
331 3-23-2015 PSATS Unemployment
Compensation Group Trust
Ch. 48
332 6-15-2015 Noise Ch. 168
§ DL-1 RICHLAND CODE § DL-1
234:722