Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1502, Clause I, II (53 P.S. § 56502) of the First Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Rostraver, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 195, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Rostraver,
which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the
Township of Rostraver," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Rostraver, and
it is the intention of said Board of Commissioners that each such provision
contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears
in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted
from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions
of § 1-3 below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6
below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code,
as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature,
adopted by the Township of Rostraver and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code, and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 7-7-1999.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township.
S. All resolutions included in the 1989 Code and not included in the 1999
Code. Further, said resolutions may from this time forward be amended
by resolution.
T. Ordinance No. 399 regarding collection fees and procedures for
municipal claims.
U. Ordinance No. 44-1963 establishing the Rostraver Township Sewage
Authority, and any amendments thereto.
V. Ordinance No. 104-1969 establishing the Rostraver Township Water
Authority, and any amendments thereto.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances of the Township for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board
of Commissioners that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended
to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances included in the Code.
These changes are enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the
desired policies of the Board of Commissioners, and it is the intent of
the Board of Commissioners that all such changes be adopted as part of
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
the Code as if the legislation so changed have been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.1
C. Nomenclature changes. The following changes have been made
throughout the Code:
(1) "Justice of the Peace" and "District Magistrate" are hereby
amended to read "District Justice."
(2) "Department of Environmental Resources" is hereby amended to
read "Department of Environmental Protection" or "Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources," whichever is appropriate.
(3) "Department of Community Affairs" is hereby amended to read
"Department of Community and Economic Development."
(4) "Building Inspector" and "Building Permit Officer" are hereby
amended to read "Code Enforcement Officer" except where
"Sewage Enforcement Officer" or "Zoning Officer" are appropriate.
D. Fees. All specific fee amounts are hereby removed from the text of the
chapters and replaced by the phrase "as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments or additions will be replaced with the
following wording: "amended (added) 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421." A complete description
of all changes is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 1-8
1:6
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Commissioners to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Commissioners subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Commissioners shall
adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are
printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements
shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Commissioners that
this ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after February 23, 2000.
§ 1-13 ROSTRAVER CODE § 1-15
1:8
ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 1, Ch. 1, Section 1-1008, of the 1989
Code]
§ 1-16. General penalty. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
Unless otherwise specified, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the
Township any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, where
no specific penalty is provided for that act, the violator of any such provision
of this Code or ordinance shall, upon conviction, for every such violation,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 or more than $600 and
costs of prosecution or, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day's violation of any such
provision of this Code or that ordinance shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
Chapter 5
AUDITOR
§ 5-1. Audits by independent auditor.
From and after the effective date of Ordinance No. 49,2 the accounts of
Rostraver Township shall be audited by an independent auditor who shall be
a certified public accountant, registered in Pennsylvania, a firm of certified
public accountants so registered, or a competent public accountant or a
competent firm of public accountants.
§ 5-2. Appointment made and compensation fixed annually by
resolution.
The independent auditor shall be appointed annually, by resolution, at
least 30 days prior to the close of the fiscal year to make an independent
examination of all the accounts and accounting records of the Township for
the year then closing. The compensation of the independent auditor shall be
fixed in that resolution.
§ 5-3. Office of elected auditor abolished.
The office of elected auditor shall be abolished from and after the adoption
of the resolution appointing the first independent auditor for the Township.
Chapter 12
COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
2. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 49-1975 was adopted 10-6-1975.
§ 1-16 ROSTRAVER CODE § 5-3
1:10
ARTICLE I
Twin Rivers Council of Governments
[Adopted 11-5-1997 by Ord. No. 363]
§ 12-1. Cooperation authorized.
The Township of Rostraver hereby authorizes cooperation with other
municipalities in the Mon-Yough Region and delegation of certain functions,
powers or responsibilities of the Township of Rostraver to the Twin Rivers
Council of Governments on the terms and conditions stated below.
§ 12-2. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose and objectives of this article are to foster intergovernmental
cooperation, to reduce costs and to accomplish through joint action
activities which could not be accomplished individually. The Twin Rivers
Council of Governments is hereby authorized to perform any functions,
powers or responsibilities which the Township of Rostraver requests it to
perform by ordinance, resolution, motion or other action of the Township of
Rostraver.
§ 12-3. Duration.
The authority granted under this article shall continue until the article is
amended or repealed.
§ 12-4. Authorized activities.
The Township of Rostraver hereby authorizes the Twin Rivers Council of
Governments (hereafter "TRCOG") to engage in the following activities:
A. To create or change whatever organizational structure is necessary to
implement the functions, powers or responsibilities of TRCOG through
enactment or amendment of bylaws.
B. To levy and collect dues or other charges as necessary to implement the
functions, powers or responsibilities of TRCOG.
C. To acquire, manage, license or dispose of real or personal property as
TRCOG finds necessary.
D. To employ, discharge or discipline employees as TRCOG finds
necessary.
E. To contract with any person, entity or body as TRCOG finds necessary.
F. To enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee
benefits, including social security, for its employees.
G. To engage in all other activities legally permitted by Act 180 of 1972,
Act 137 of 19863 and all other statutes and court decisions of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The enumeration of certain activities
§ 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4
1:11
§ 12-5. Action by officials.
The proper officials of the Township of Rostraver are hereby authorized to
take whatever action is necessary to order to implement this article.
above shall not be interpreted to limit in any way the extent of activities
that TRCOG may engage in.
3. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 12-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 12-5
1:12
Chapter 16
DRUG TASK FORCE
§ 16-1. Participation authorized; agreement.
The Township of Rostraver shall participate in the Municipal Drug Task
Force Program established by the Office of the Attorney General of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the Chairman and Secretary/Manager
are hereby authorized to enter into a Municipal Drug Task Force Agreement
with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Office of Attorney General, the
Bureau of Narcotics Investigation and Drug Control and any other
municipalities on behalf of the Township of Rostraver and are hereby
authorized to execute and deliver said agreement.4
Chapter 21
FIRE DEPARTMENTS AND AMBULANCE ASSOCIATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 53. Fire prevention — See Ch. 93.
§ 21-1. Duties of volunteer fire departments and ambulance
association.
The Township of Rostraver Volunteer Fire Departments and the Rostraver
Emergency Medical Service Ambulance Association and their membership
are authorized by the Board of Commissioners to perform the following
duties in addition to the normal fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical
duties:
A. Participation in drills, practices, training sessions and pre-fire planning
activities authorized by the Fire Chief and supervised by a qualified
instructor.
B. Participation in community celebrations, ceremonial observances and
funerals for deceased firefighters or other public figures where such
attendance is deemed appropriate and authorized in writing by the Fire
Chief.
C. While performing duties necessary to prepare the fire station for use as
a polling place for the primary and general elections. This is extended
to include like services performed at other municipal or school district
buildings for said elections.
4. Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 12-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-1
1:13
§ 21-2. Recognition of firemen's relief associations.
The Municipal Treasurer is directed to pay all moneys received from the
Fire Insurance Tax Fund as a result of Resolution No. 185-1069:
D. Preparation for and responsible participation in parades, provided that
attendance has the prior written approval of the Fire Department and/
or ambulance association and written notice is provided to the
municipality prior to the event.
E. Any public service functions performed for the welfare of the
community as long as these activities are responsibly supervised and
are sanctioned by the Fire Department or ambulance association and
written notice is provided to the municipality prior to the function.
F. Any and all public safety activities undertaken by Fire Department or
ambulance association members to render care to the injured, prevent
loss of life, provide comfort and security to victims and limit or prevent
damage to or loss of property as circumstances may dictate.
G. While rendering assistance to police officers where such aid is
specifically requested or is done without request to protect our citizens
from imminent danger.
H. Participation in fire prevention inspections, post-fire investigations,
bomb searches and evacuation drills.
I. While participating in public programs to promote health and safety, to
enlist new members, solicit community support or conduct fund-raising
activities so long as the activity is specifically sanctioned by the Fire
Department or the ambulance association with written notice to the
municipality prior to the activity or event.
J. While safely and responsibly performing maintenance and remodeling
work on the Fire Department or ambulance association vehicles,
buildings, grounds or equipment.
K. While performing such other duties necessary for the efficient
operation of the volunteer services as may, from time to time, be
assigned by the Board of Commissioners, the officers of the Fire
Departments and the officers of the ambulance association.
A. To the Treasurer of Rostraver Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association:
33 1/3%;
B. To the Treasurer of Rostraver Central Firemen's Relief Association:
33 1/3%; and
C. To the Treasurer of Collinsburg Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association:
33 1/3%.
§ 21-1 ROSTRAVER CODE § 21-3
1:14
§ 21-3. Entire Township constitutes fire district.
The entire Township shall constitute a fire district, and those persons who
are benefited shall be taxed in accordance with the formula set out in § 21-4.
§ 21-4. Levy of fire protection tax. [Amended 4-4-2018 by Ord. No.
696]
§ 21-5. Register of hydrants required.
The Township Engineer shall identify and locate for the taxing authority
such hydrants so that there can be established an appropriate register for
taxing purposes.
Chapter 25
LIBRARY BOARD
§ 25-1. Public Library Board created.
The Rostraver Public Library Board is hereby created.
§ 25-2. Authority of Public Library Board.
It shall have the authority to supervise, maintain and regulate library
activities and functions and to advise the Board of Commissioners of the
Township on all Township matters pertaining to the Rostraver Public
Library.
§ 25-3. Funding.
The Township of Rostraver agrees further to assist in the maintenance of
the Rostraver Public Library in accord with the provisions of 24 P.S. § 4401
by making appropriations as nearly adequate as its finances will permit.
§ 25-4. Board of Directors; appointment; membership. [Amended
4-4-2018 by Ord. No. 697]
In accord with 24 P.S. § 4411 of the Library Code, the Township
Commissioners will appoint nine persons to serve as representatives on the
Board of Directors of the Rostraver Public Library, each representative to
A. A tax is levied on all improved properties which are located within the
area of protection of fire hydrants, to wit: Those properties which are
within a radius of 600 feet shall be subject to the payment of said tax in
the amount of $5 per annum.
B. (Reserved)5
5. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding the levy of a tax on certain properties
within 600 feet of a fire hydrant, was repealed 4-4-2018 by Ord. No. 696.
§ 21-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4
1:15
serve three years, the terms expiring as provided by 24 P.S. § 4411 of the
Library Code.
§ 25-5. Bond.
In accord with 24 P.S. § 4412 of the Library Code, the Treasurer of the
Board of Directors of the Library shall give bond to the municipality with
satisfactory surety in such amount as the Board of Directors may determine.
§ 25-6. Budget.
The Board of Directors shall prepare and present to the Township
Commissioners by November 1 of each year a budget for the following year
and such reports as are required by 24 P.S. §§ 4413 and 4414 of the Library
Code and shall give free library service to the residents and taxpayers, as
provided in 24 P.S. § 4415 of the Library Code.
Chapter 28
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST
§ 28-1. Township becomes settlor in Pennsylvania Local
Government Investment Trust.
The Township of Rostraver shall join with other local governmental units
in accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act6 by becoming a
settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (the "trust")
and entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference
with the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section, and
a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this
chapter was adopted.
§ 28-2. Authority to purchase and redeem shares in trust.
The Township of Rostraver is authorized to purchase shares in the trust
from time to time with available funds and to redeem some or all of those
shares from time to time as funds are needed for other purposes. These
actions are to be taken by the President and Secretary/Manager, officers
designated for this purpose, pursuant to general or specific instructions by
the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Rostraver.
§ 28-3. Custody of Township's invested funds.
The trustees of the trust are designated as having official custody of the
Township of Rostraver's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares
in the trust.
6. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 25-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 28-4
1:16
§ 28-4. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,7 the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
Chapter 34
MANAGER
§ 34-1. Creation of office of Manager.
There is hereby created the office of Township Manager.
§ 34-2. Appointment; term; removal.
The Manager shall be appointed for a term of five years and may be
reappointed from time to time. He can be removed from office during his
term only according to the terms of the Local Agency Law.8
§ 34-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of his office as
outlined in this chapter.
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 28-1.
B. The Township of Rostraver's participation in the trust shall be
terminable at any time by resolution.
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing the Township of Rostraver's funds in obligations
which are otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled arrangement
with other local governmental units, thereby achieving economic and
other advantages of pooled investments.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of the Township of Rostraver except through the purchase of
shares in the trust.
E. The trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
F. Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as the
Township of Rostraver may determine to be necessary or appropriate to
meet its cash investment requirements.
7. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
8. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105.
§ 28-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-4
1:17
§ 34-4. Bond.
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
Township with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the Board of
Commissioners, in a sum to be determined by the Board of Commissioners,
but not less than $100,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his
duties, the premium for the bond to be paid by the Township.
§ 34-5. Manager's compensation.
The salary of the Manager shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners.
§ 34-6. Powers and duties.
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township
and he shall be responsible to the Board of Commissioners as a whole
for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the
Township. The powers and duties of administration of all Township
business shall be vested in the Manager, unless expressly imposed or
conferred by statute upon other Township officers.
B. Subject to revision by the Board of Commissioners, the powers and
duties of the Manager shall include the following:
(1) He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all
municipal departments.
(2) He shall hire and, when necessary for the good of the service, shall
suspend or discharge any employee under his supervision,
provided that persons covered by the tenure provisions of the
Township Code shall be hired, suspended or discharged in
accordance with such provisions, and provided further that the
Manager shall report immediately to the Board of Commissioners
any action taken by authority of this subsection.
(3) He shall have the power to fix wages and salaries of all personnel
under his supervision, with a range previously determined by the
Board of Commissioners.
(4) He shall prepare and submit to the Board of Commissioners, before
the close of each fiscal year, a budget for the next fiscal year and an
explanatory budget message. In preparing the budget, the
Manager, or an officer designated by him, shall obtain from the
head of each department, agency or board, or any qualified officer
thereof, estimates of revenues and expenditures and such other
supporting data as he requires. The Manager shall review such
estimates with the Board of Commissioners and may revise them
before formally submitting the budget to the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 34-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 34-6
1:18
(5) He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after
its adoption by the Board of Commissioners.
(6) He shall, in conjunction with the preparation of the yearly budget,
develop long-range fiscal plans for the municipality, such plans to
be presented annually to the Board of Commissioners for its review
and adoption. As a power vested in the Township Manager, he shall
be permitted to invest and reinvest Township funds according to
the Township Code and to the Municipal Investment Law.
(7) He shall head such other municipal offices and head such municipal
departments as the Board of Commissioners may from time to time
direct, at such additional compensation as may be agreed upon by
the parties.
(8) He shall attend all meetings of the Board of Commissioners with
the right to take part in the discussions, and he shall receive notice
of all special meetings of the Board of Commissioners.
(9) He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board of
Commissioners and supply facts pertinent thereto.
(10)He shall keep the Board of Commissioners informed as to the
conduct of Township affairs; submit periodic reports on the
condition of the Township finances and such other reports as the
Board of Commissioners requests; and make such
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners as he deems
advisable.
(11)He shall submit to the Board of Commissioners, as soon as possible
after the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances
and the administrative activities of the Township for the preceding
year.
(12)He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits
and privileges granted by the Township are observed.
(13)He may employ, by and with the approval of the Board of
Commissioners, experts and consultants to perform work and to
advise in connection with any of the functions of the Township.
(14)He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed by statute upon
other Township officer.
(15)He shall be the purchasing officer of the Township and he shall
purchase in accordance with the provisions of the Township Code
all supplies and equipment for the agencies, boards, departments
and other offices of the Township. He shall keep an account of all
purchases and shall, monthly, or when directed by the Board of
Commissioners, make a full written report thereof. He shall also
§ 34-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-6
1:19
§ 34-7. Gender.
All references to the masculine gender, as hereinabove contained, shall also
be construed to include the feminine gender.
Chapter 39
MEETINGS
§ 39-1. Meeting place designated.
The regular meeting place of the Board of Commissioners of Rostraver
Township, a Township of the First Class, shall be the Rostraver Township
Municipal Building, 201 Municipal Drive, Belle Vernon, Pennsylvania 15012.
§ 39-2. Day and time of regular meetings.
Regular meetings shall be held on the first Wednesday of each month at
6:00 p.m.; except, however, when the first Wednesday of the month shall be
a legal holiday, then the meeting shall be held on the following day or such
other time as determined by the Board of Commissioners, at the same time
and place.
Chapter 45
PENSIONS
Chapter 50
(RESERVED)
Chapter 51
PLANNING AGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 97.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
issue rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the Board
of Commissioners, governing the procurement of all municipal
supplies and equipment.
(16) All complaints regarding Township services shall be referred to the
office of the Manager. He, or an officer designated by him, shall
investigate and dispose of such complaints, and the Manager shall
report thereon to the Board of Commissioners.
§ 34-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 39-2
1:20
§ 51-1. Creation.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Rostraver of Westmoreland
County hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize a Planning
Agency under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 247 of July 31, 1968, reenacted and amended.9
§ 51-2. Powers and duties.
A. The governing body of the Township of Rostraver shall have the power
to create or abolish by ordinance a Planning Commission or Planning
Department, or both. The ordinance shall specify the powers and duties
conferred on planning agencies by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. In lieu of a Planning Commission or Planning
Department, the governing body may elect to assign the powers and
duties conferred by the Planning Code to a Planning Committee of
members appointed from the governing body. The Engineer for the
Township of Rostraver or an engineer appointed by the governing body
shall serve the Planning Agency as engineering advisor.
B. The Planning Agency shall consist of a Planning Department.
A. The Planning Agency shall, at the request of the governing body:
(1) Prepare the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
municipality as set forth in the MPC and present it for the
consideration of the governing body.
(2) Maintain and keep on file records of its actions. All records and files
of the Planning Agency shall be in the possession of the governing
body.
B. The Planning Agency, at the request of the governing body, may:
(1) Make recommendations to the governing body concerning the
adoption or amendment of an official map.
(2) Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality a
Zoning Ordinance,10 and make recommendations to the governing
body on proposed amendments to it.
(3) Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land
development and planned residential development regulations.
(4) Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality a
building code and a housing code and make recommendations
concerning proposed amendments there to.
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 39-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-2
1:21
§ 51-3. Acceptance of assistance.
The Planning Agency may, with the consent of the governing body, accept
and utilize any funds, personnel or other assistance made available by
the county, the commonwealth, or the federal government, or any of their
agencies, or from private sources. The governing body may enter into
agreements or contracts regarding the acceptance or utilization of the
(5) Do such other acts or make studies as may be necessary to fulfill
the duties and obligations imposed by the MPC.
(6) Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality an
environmental study.
(7) Submit to the governing body of a municipality a recommended
capital improvements program.
(8) Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality a
water survey, which shall be consistent with the State Water Plan
and any applicable water resources plan adopted by a river basin
commission. The water survey shall be conducted in consultation
with any public water supplier in the area to be surveyed.
(9) Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the
Comprehensive Plan and planning.
(10) Make recommendations to governmental, civic, and private
agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of
such agencies and individuals.
(11) Hold public hearing and meetings.
(12) Present testimony before any board.
(13) Require from other departments and agencies of the municipality
such available information as relates to the work of the Planning
Agency.
(14) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations and land surveys with the consent.
(15) Prepare and present to the governing body a study regarding the
feasibility and practicability of using renewable energy sources in
specific areas within the municipality.
(16) Review the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,11 Official Map, provision for planned residential
development and such other ordinances and regulations governing
the development of land no less frequently that it reviews the
Comprehensive Plan.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning, and Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 51-2 ROSTRAVER CODE § 51-3
1:22
funds or assistance in accordance with the governmental procedures of the
municipality.
Chapter 53
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 85.
Nuisances — See Ch. 124.
Parades and assemblies — See Ch. 133.
§ 53-1. Establishment and organization of Police Department.
[Amended 4-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
A Police Department is established in the Township. The Chief of Police
shall be the chief executive of the Police Department and shall, under
the direction of the Township Manager or, if that position is vacant, the
Chairman of the Public Safety Committee of the Board of Commissioners,
be in charge of the police force and shall have supervision of its members in
the exercise of their powers, duties and authority. The Chief of Police shall
be subject to twenty-four-hour call.
§ 53-2. Authority of Board of Commissioners.
The Board of Commissioners shall determine the following:
§ 53-3. Decisions of Board of Commissioners.
§ 53-4. Restrictions on outside employment by police officers.
A. The person to serve as Chief of Police.
B. The subordinate classifications of the police officers.
C. The number of persons to serve in each classification.
D. The hours and compensation of the members of the Police Department.
A. The positions in the Police Department in the organizational structure
shall be the Chief of Police and patrolman.
B. The President of the Board of Commissioners is authorized and directed
to name a committee to update and amend the Township of Rostraver
Department of Police Manual of Rules and Regulations for
consideration by the Board of Commissioners, which shall specifically
amend the duties and responsibilities of the Chief of Police and
patrolmen.
A. Restrictions.
§ 51-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-4
1:23
§ 53-5. Authority to employ part-time police officers.
§ 53-6. Warrantless arrests. [Added 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 521]
(1) No person employed full-time as a police officer for the Township of
Rostraver shall have/maintain other employment during his offduty
time that conflicts with his duties as a policeman.
(2) No full-time police officer shall have/maintain any outside
employment that requires him to work an excessive amount of time
in addition to his eight-hour shift for the Township of Rostraver.
(3) No police officer shall be permitted to have any outside
employment without the written approval of the Board of
Commissioners.
(4) If written approval by the Board of Commissioners is secured for a
police officer to maintain part-time outside employment, such
officer shall provide written notice to the Chief of Police and the
Township of Rostraver Secretary/Manager informing these persons
of the name of the part-time employer, its address and telephone
number, the nature of the employment and where and when said
police officer can be reached when on the job.
(5) Under no circumstances shall a policeman work for an outside
employer in the uniform furnished him by the Township of
Rostraver nor shall he be permitted to use any equipment furnished
him by the Township of Rostraver.
B. Furthermore, the above-mentioned Township of Rostraver officials shall
be immediately notified if the police officer is injured while working for
an outside employer.
A. The hiring of part-time police officers is hereby authorized and
approved.
B. The Township shall maintain a list of six part-time officers.
C. The part-time officers are to be utilized as determined by the Board of
Commissioners.
A. Pursuant to 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902, a police officer shall, upon view, have
the right of arrest without a warrant for certain summary offenses,
upon probable cause, when there is ongoing conduct that imperils the
personal security of any person or endangers public or private property,
provided such arrests are authorized by rules promulgated by the
governmental body employing the police officer.
B. If a police officer of the Township of Rostraver has probable cause to
believe that there is a violation of one or more of the four offenses listed
below; that the defendant’s conduct is ongoing; that the conduct
constituting the crime is based upon the police officer’s view of the
§ 53-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 53-6
1:24
conduct; and if the conduct imperils the personal security of any person
or endangers public or private property, the officer shall have the right
to arrest a defendant without a warrant.
C. These guidelines shall only apply to the following summary offenses,
pursuant to Title 18 Pa.C.S.A.:
(1) Section 5503, Disorderly conduct.
(2) Section 5505, Public drunkenness.
(3) Section 5507, Obstructing highways and other public passages.
(4) Section 6308, Purchase, consumption, possession or transportation
of liquor or malt or brewed beverages.
D. Any officer making an arrest under these guidelines shall also follow
those procedures set forth in the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure and in particular Rule 71, said rule currently providing as
follows:
a. When a defendant has been arrested without a warrant, the
defendant shall be either released from custody pursuant to
paragraph b. or taken before the proper issuing authority under
paragraph c.
b. When a defendant has been arrested without a warrant, the
arresting officer may, when the officer deems it appropriate,
promptly release the defendant from custody when the following
conditions have been met:
1) the defendant is a resident of the Commonwealth;
2) the defendant poses no threat of immediate physical harm to
any other person or to himself or herself;
3) the arresting officer has reasonable grounds to believe that
the defendant will appear as required; and
4) the defendant does not demand to be taken before an issuing
authority.
A citation shall be issued to the defendant at the time of
release and thereafter the case shall proceed in accordance
with Rule 55-59 as if the proceedings had been instituted by
issuing a citation to the defendant.
c. When the defendant has not been released from custody under
paragraph b., the defendant shall be taken without unnecessary
delay before the issuing authority where a citation shall be filed
against the defendant. The defendant shall be given an immediate
trial unless:
1) the Commonwealth is not ready to proceed or the defendant
requests a postponement, and in either event, the defendant
shall be given the opportunity to deposit collateral for
appearance on the new date and hour fixed for trial, or
§ 53-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-6
1:25
Chapter 57
RECREATION BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 137.
§ 57-1. Creation of Recreation Board.
The Rostraver Township Recreation Board is hereby created.
§ 57-2. Authority of Recreation Board.
The Recreation Board shall have the authority to supervise, maintain and
regulate recreation areas and facilities and to conduct recreation programs
and to advise the Board of Commissioners on all Township matters
pertaining to recreation.
§ 57-3. Membership and tenure. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
421]
The Recreation Board shall be composed of seven members. Upon the
expiration of the initial term of appointment, members shall be appointed
to serve for a term of five years. Appointments to serve an unexpired term
shall be for the duration of that term.
2) the defendant’s criminal record must be ascertained before
trial as specifically required by statute for purposes of grading
the offenses charged, in which event the defendant shall be
given the opportunity to deposit collateral for appearance on
the new date and hour fixed for the trial, which shall be after
the issuing authority’s receipt of the required information.
E. Intent of Commissioners.
(1) The Commissioners recognize that Rule 71 and Section 8902 may
be amended from time to time. It is the intention of the
Commissioners that the police officers follow the terms of the rule
or statute that is currently in effect as of the date of the arrest,
whether or not these guidelines have formerly been amended to
comply with any rule or statute changes.
(2) It is not the intention of the Commissioners to modify, restrict or
otherwise prohibit a police officer of the Township of Rostraver
from making other warrantless arrests for summary offenses where
such arrests have been expressly authorized by any other rule or
statute.
§ 53-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 57-4
1:26
§ 57-4. Bylaws authorized.
The Recreation Board is empowered to formulate and adopt bylaws for its
operation.
Chapter 62
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 57-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-4
1:27

ARTICLE I
Elected Officials
[Adopted 9-5-1984 as Part 2, Ch. 1, Art. A, of the 1989 Code]
§ 62-1. Board of Township Commissioners. [Amended 2-23-2000 by
Ord. No. 421; 9-5-2001 by Ord. No. 45012]
§ 62-2. Treasurer.14
§ 62-3. Tax Collector. [Added 1-16-2013 by Ord. No. 636]
A. Each Commissioner of Rostraver Township elected or appointed to
office after the effective date of this ordinance13 shall receive
compensation as a Commissioner in the annual amount of $3,000.
B. Such compensation shall be paid in monthly installments.
A. The compensation of the position of Township Tax Collector shall be
$10,000.
B. The duly elected Tax Collector shall, in addition to said compensation,
be allowed such actual printing and postage expenses as may be
incurred in performing his duties as prescribed in the Local Tax
Collection Law.15
C. The compensation set forth in this section shall take effect on the first
Monday of January 2014 and shall apply to the duly elected Tax
Collector who has been elected in the year 2013.
D. The compensation of the Tax Collector may, from time to time, by duly
adopted ordinance be changed by the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Rostraver; provided, however, that said change in
compensation shall be in accordance with the law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as it applies to duly elected Tax
Collectors of Townships of the First Class.
12.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 9-12-2001.
13.Editor's Note: The term "this ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 450.
14.Editor’s Note: The position of Treasurer is now an appointed position with salary set by
resolution.
15.Editor’s Note: See 72 P.S. § 55.11.1 et seq.
§ 62-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-3
1:29
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 68
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 137.
§ 68-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any liquid intended for human consumption
containing more than 1/2 of 1% (.005) of alcohol by volume.
INTENT TO CONSUME — Includes any of the following:
OPEN CONTAINER — Any open bottle, can or container containing liquor,
beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
persons has access, including but not limited to any highway, street, road,
sidewalk, parking area, shopping area, place of amusement, playground or
park located within the borough, except that the definition of a public place
shall not include those premises duly licensed for the sale and consumption
of alcoholic beverages on the premises or within a person's own private
property.
§ 68-2. Prohibited acts; exception.
No person shall drink or consume an alcoholic beverage or possess with the
intent to consume an open container containing an alcoholic beverage in
any place except at a function for which a permit has been obtained from
the Township Secretary, as may be required.
§ 68-3. Possession of open container.
Possession with the intent to consume of an open container containing an
alcoholic beverage by any person shall create a violation of this chapter.
A. Drinking from the container.
B. Possession with movement of the container to the mouth.
C. Possession with alcohol on the breath of the possessor.
Any circumstances evidencing an intent to ultimately consume on any
public lands without permission.
D.
§ 62-3 ROSTRAVER CODE § 68-4
1:30
§ 68-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall be found to have violated any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$50 or more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 72
AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 53.
§ 72-1. License required for amusement device, machine or
apparatus.
No person, firm or corporation shall at any time have in its or their
possession within the Township any mechanical or electronic device,
machine or apparatus whatsoever for the playing of games, for profit,
amusement or entertainment, whether operated manually or by coins,
slugs, remote control, pins, pegs, balls, electric batteries, central lighting
system or by any other device, operated through the insertion therein of a
coin or any metal disc or otherwise, without first having procured a license
therefor as provided in this chapter.
§ 72-2. Application for license; investigation; issuance.
Any person, firm or corporation using or operating or causing to be used or
operated any such machine or musical device shall first make application
for a license or licenses to the Secretary, on forms provided by the
Township, which application shall set forth the name, residence, present
and previous occupation of the applicant, place where such machine or
machines are to be used or played, number and kind of machines or devices
to be operated and any other information which may be required in that
application, and the application shall be referred to the Chief of Police
for investigation and approval, and after approval thereof, a license shall
be issued by the Secretary for each separate machine, mechanical or
electronic device for the current license period.
§ 72-3. Licenses to be renewed annually; transfer of license.
[Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
A similar application and a similar license shall be required for each license
year or fraction thereof. In the event that a machine has to be replaced for
a portion of a license year for which the license has been paid or in the
event that there is a substitution of a similar machine for a period of time
during which the license has been paid, there shall be no additional license
§ 68-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-3
1:31
imposed in accordance with the schedule of licensing set forth in § 72-4, but
there shall be a permit or renewal or transfer fee to be paid in the amount
as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners, and
the transfer or substitution shall be made pursuant to application on forms
to be provided by the Township.
§ 72-4. License year; license fees.
§ 72-5. Issuance and display of license certificate or tag.
Upon payment of the license fee provided in § 72-4, there shall be issued
to the licensee a license certificate or tag, setting forth the number of
the license for each machine or device so licensed, which certificate shall
be attached to the respective machine or device or be displayed in some
conspicuous place on the premises.
§ 72-6. Gambling devices prohibited.
Nothing in this chapter shall be in any way construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling device or any mechanism that has been judicially
determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to law, nor shall
any such device be used or permitted to be used for gambling purposes.
§ 72-7. Regulation, supervision and inspection of devices.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to regulate and supervise the
operation of all said devices and to regularly inspect the premises where
A. The license year shall be from January to January and the license fee for
any type of mechanical or electronical device as hereinbefore set forth
shall be as follows: [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
(1) Music boxes: as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
(2) Mechanical or electronical devices for amusement: as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
(3) Mechanical or electronical devices being a game of chance: as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
(4) Pinball and pool tables: as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.
(5) All others: as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
B. However, should any mechanical or electronic device or music box be
installed and licensed after July 1 of any year, then, in such event, the
license fee shall be one-half of the respective fee; and provided, further,
that this chapter shall not impose a license fee upon mechanical or
electronic devices limited only to the sales of merchandise or services.
§ 72-3 ROSTRAVER CODE § 72-7
1:32
the same are being used and to require full compliance with the law and
Township ordinances, so that the same shall not amount to a nuisance or be
used in violation of any law.
§ 72-8. Revocation of licenses.
In the event that any such machines or devices are operated as to constitute
a nuisance or in violation of the laws of the commonwealth or ordinances of
the Township, then the license as to all machines and devices operated on
the premises shall be revoked and there shall be no rebate or return of any
part of the license fee and at least two months shall elapse before another
license may be granted to that person, firm or corporation.
§ 72-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
chapter shall, for every such violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than $50 or more than $600 and costs of prosecution and,
in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not
more than 30 days. Each day on which any machine or device, under the
terms of this chapter, is operated and used in violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense under this chapter and shall be
subject to a separate and distinct penalty under this chapter.
Chapter 76
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 124.
§ 76-1. Prohibited vegetation; declaration of nuisance; applicability.
A. No person owning or occupying any property within the Township shall
permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation whatsoever, not edible or
planted for some useful or ornamental purpose, to grow or remain upon
those premises so as to exceed a height of six inches or to throw off any
unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or to create
or produce pollen or any hazardous condition.
B. Any grass, weeds or other vegetation growing upon any premises in the
Township in violation of any provision of this section is declared to be a
nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort
of the inhabitants of the Township.
C. In the case of any tract of undeveloped land five acres or more in area,
this section shall not apply to grass, weeds of other vegetation growing
§ 72-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-1
1:33
§ 76-2. Responsibility for removing or trimming. [Amended
2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
The owner of any premises and, in the case of any premises occupied by
other than the owner, the occupant of the premises shall be responsible
to remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or other vegetation growing or
remaining on those premises in violation of any provision of § 76-1.
§ 76-3. Notice to remove or trim; authority for Township to do work
at expense of person in default. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
421]
The Board of Commissioners, or any officer or employee of the Township
designated by the Board of Commissioners for the purpose, is hereby
authorized to give notice, by personal service or by United States Mail,
to the owner or occupant, as the case may be, of any premises whereon
grass, weeds or other vegetation is growing or remaining in violation of any
provision of § 76-1, directing and requiring that owner or occupant, or both,
to remove, trim or cut the grass, weeds or vegetation, as to conform to the
requirements of this chapter, within five days after issuance of the notice. In
case any person neglects, fails or refuses to comply with the notice within
the period of time stated on it, the Township authorities may remove, trim or
cut the grass, weeds or vegetation, and the cost thereof, together with any
additional penalty authorized by the law, may be collected by the Township
from that person in the manner provided by law.
§ 76-4. Violations and penalties.
Every person who violates or who fails, neglects or refuses to comply with
any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and for every
such violation, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $50 or more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30
days. Each day's continuance of a violation, after the expiration of the time
limit specified in the notice referred to in § 76-3, shall constitute a separate
violation.
more than 150 feet from any public street in the Township or more than
150 feet from any residence.
D. Provided further, this section shall not apply to any farm land or
forested land.
§ 76-1 ROSTRAVER CODE § 76-4
1:34
Chapter 79
BUILDING REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 80.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 93.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 79-1. Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
Rostraver Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 79-2. Uniform Construction Code adopted by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of
Rostraver Township.
§ 79-3. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within Rostraver Township
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the Board
of Commissioners of Rostraver Township from time to time by resolution:
A. By the designation of an employee of the municipality to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of Rostraver Township;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or the thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Rostraver Township;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of Rostraver
Township;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 76-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-4
1:35
§ 79-4. Board of Appeals established.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners of Rostraver Township in conformity with the requirements
of the relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board
of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 79-5. Ordinances, regulations and policies in effect.
All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Rostraver Township not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 79-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by Rostraver Township for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be
established by the Board of Commissioners of Rostraver Township by
resolution from time to time.
§ 79-7. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, or clause of this chapter is held, for any
reason, to be invalid, such decision or decisions shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this chapter.
§ 79-8. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective immediately.
Chapter 80
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 93. Nuisances — See Ch. 124.
§ 80-1. Definitions.
The following words, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
hereby ascribed:
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof; included shall be all mobile homes and trailers used
or intended for use for human habitation or office purpose.
§ 79-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 80-1
1:36
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including but not limited to buildings, sheds, mobile homes
and other similar items.
UNSAFE — When applied to any building or structure, includes any of the
following: a building or structure or part thereof that is structurally unsafe,
unstable, unsanitary, inadequately provided with exit facilities; constituting
a fire hazard; unsuitable or improper for the use or occupancy to which
it is put; constituting a health or safety hazard because of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment; otherwise
dangerous to life or property; vacant buildings or structures or portions
thereof deemed to constitute a hazard.
§ 80-2. Investigation. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
Whenever it is reported to the Code Enforcement Officer that any building
or structure, completed or in the process of construction, or any portion
thereof, is in an unsafe condition, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
an investigation and examination to be made of that building or structure.
If that investigation indicated the building or structure to be unsafe in any
respect, the individual who made the investigation and examination shall
make a report in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer, specifying the
exact condition of the building or structure, and setting forth whether the
building or structure is capable of being properly repaired or whether it
should be removed as an unsafe structure.
§ 80-3. Notice to repair or remove. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
421]
If any building or structure is reported to the Code Enforcement Officer
as provided in § 80-2 to be in an unsafe condition, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall cause written notice to be served upon the owner or occupant
of the premises directing the correction or the removal of the dangerous
building or structure within such time as the Code Enforcement Officer, at
his sole discretion, considers to be reasonable under the circumstances. In
any case where the notice directs the repair of a building or structure, the
owner thereof shall have the option to remove the building or structure
instead of making repairs to it within the time limit.
§ 80-4. Service of notice.
The notice required by § 80-3 shall be served personally by the owner of the
building or structure to which such notice refers, if that owner is a resident
of the Township. If the owner is not a resident, then the notice may be
served upon the agent of the owner, if that agent has a residence or place
of business within the Township, or the notice may be served upon a tenant
or occupant of the structure. If the owner has no agent or tenant or if there
is no occupant of the building or structure, the service shall be by notice
posted upon the building or structure and, in addition, a copy of the notice
shall be sent to the owner of the building or structure, by certified mail, at
his last known address.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:37
§ 80-5. Failure to comply constitutes violation.
If the owner of any unsafe building or structure, to whom or which a notice
to repair or remove the building or structure shall have been sent under the
provisions of this chapter, fails to commence or to complete, as the case may
be, the repair or removal within the time limit stated in the notice, he shall
be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalty
prescribed in § 80-8, and that penalty and costs of prosecution may be in
addition to costs and expenses collected under § 80-7.
§ 80-6. Appeal; disregard of unsafe notice.
The owner or occupant of the premises on which an unsafe building or
structure is located may, within three days after receipt of the notice
referred to in § 80-3, appeal to the Board of Commissioners. If the Board
of Commissioners confirms the notice or order, the person on whom it
was served shall comply with the terms of the notice within 30 days after
the date of confirmation by the Board of Commissioners. The Board of
Commissioners may initiate an appropriate action in court to compel
compliance.
§ 80-7. Authority for Township to do work at expense of owner.
If the owner of any unsafe building or structure, to whom or which a notice
to repair or remove the building or structure shall have been sent under the
provisions of this chapter, shall fail to commence or to complete the repair
or removal within the time limit prescribed by the notice, the Board of
Commissioners shall have authority to cause the work of repair or removal,
as the case may be, to be done by the Township, and the cost and expense
thereof, with a penalty of 10%, shall be collected from the owner of the
building or structure in the manner provided by law. The recovery of the
costs and expenses, together with the penalty, may be in addition to the
penalty imposed for violation of this chapter as provided by § 80-8.
§ 80-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, for every such
violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
or more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each
violation of any provision of this chapter, and each day on which any such
violation is continued, shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 85
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 53. Nuisances — See Ch. 124.
§ 80-5 ROSTRAVER CODE § 80-8
1:38
§ 85-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business carried on for
a profit, or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is
invited.
MINOR — Any individual under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any person operating, managing or conducting any
establishment; and whenever used in any clause prescribing a penalty, the
term "operator" as applied to associations or partnerships shall include
its members or partners and as applied to corporations shall include its
officers.
PARENT — Any natural parent of a minor, a guardian or any adult person,
21 years of age or older, responsible for the care and custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground,
public building or vacant lot.
REMAIN — To loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon.
§ 85-2. Unlawful conduct of minors.
§ 85-3. Unlawful conduct of parents.
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain in or upon any public place
or any establishment at any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. of the following day.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor accompanied
by his parent or to any minor bearing a written statement, dated that
day and signed by his parent, declaring that that minor is on an
emergency errand.
C. Each violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a separate
offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any parent knowingly to permit a minor to
remain in or upon any public place or any establishment at any time
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a parent who
accompanied a minor, or who has furnished that minor with the written
statement, referred to in § 85-2B, authorizing him to be on an
emergency errand.
C. Each violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 80-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-4
1:39
§ 85-4. Unlawful conduct of owners or operators of establishments.
§ 85-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 85-6. Special events.
Where there are special events, programs or functions by properly
organized and supervised organizations to advance legitimate recreation,
character development, religious training and school activities in the
building of good citizenship in young people, the Chief of Police shall grant
special consideration in those cases upon receipt of advance notice of the
event, and minors will be permitted to proceed directly home from the event
without incident.
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any establishment or any of his
agents or employees knowingly to permit any minor to remain upon the
premises of that establishment at any time between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
B. Each violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a separate
offense.
A. Any police officer who finds or observes a minor violating any provision
of this chapter shall obtain information from that minor as to his name
and address, his age and the name and address of his parent or parents
and shall direct that minor to proceed to his home immediately. The
police officer shall make a report of every such incident to the Chief of
Police, who shall mail a written notice to the parents of the minor of the
violation of this chapter by that minor.
B. Any parent who permits any minor to violate any provision of this
chapter after having received notice of a prior violation shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalty prescribed in Chapter 1, Article II,
§ 1-16, of this Code.
C. Any operator of an establishment and any agent or employee of an
operator who violates any provision of this chapter shall, for each
violation, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty prescribed in
Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-16, of this Code.
D. The Chief of Police shall report to a society or organization authorized
to take charge of incorrigible and delinquent minors any minor who
violates this chapter more than three times, and a like procedure shall
be taken in cases where the arrest of a parent shall not be effective, or
where for any other reason the provisions of this chapter cannot be
made effective by the imposition of fines and penalties as authorized by
this section.
§ 85-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 85-6
1:40
Chapter 90
FEES AND CHARGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire departments and ambulance
associations — See Ch. 21.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 93.
§ 85-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-6
1:41

ARTICLE I
Emergency and Rescue Services
[Adopted 10-3-2007 by Ord. No. 567]
§ 90-1. Township support of right to bill.
The Township recognizes and supports the rights of the various fire
departments to bill persons and entities, including insurance companies
providing coverage to said persons and entities for the reasonable costs that
are related to the loss, damage and wear to apparatus, tools, equipment
and materials necessary to provide the emergency services rendered to said
person and entities.
§ 90-2. Fees to be collected; division of monies.
Fees shall be collected for services provided inside the Township's
geographical confines as well as those provided outside the confines of
the Township. The various fire departments shall utilize applicable incident
report information that will be forwarded to the various departments'
authorized agent for the collection of fees. All of the monies received
under this article shall be divided equally among the Township's three Fire
Departments.
§ 90-3. Submission of invoice.
The fire departments, or their authorized agent, shall submit an invoice
to the relevant insurance company covering the particular loss that is
related to the emergency services rendered. If it can be reliably determined
that there is no insurance coverage for a particular loss which causes the
fire department to incur loss, damage, wear and tear to apparatus, tools,
equipment and materials, then the fire department may hold responsible the
person or entity that received said emergency services except for Township
residents who are exempt from said collection.
§ 90-4. Exemptions.
A. Residents of the Township who have no insurance coverage for the
incident connected to the receiving of emergency services rendered by
the fire departments are exempted from the fire department service
charges herein contained. Any commercially owned, operated or
industrial owned property shall not be eligible for said exemption.
B. Calls for service at residential structure single-family residence fires
within the Township limits shall not be subject to any of the fire
department service charges contained herein, unless it is determined
that the emergency services rendered were connected to negligent and/
or malicious act(s) on the part of the property owners.
C. First responder/medical assist calls to a residence, i.e., not involving a
motor vehicle, within the Township limits are hereby exempted from the
fire department service charges contained herein unless it is
§ 90-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-4
1:43
§ 90-5. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances and resolutions in conflict with this
article are hereby repealed and are no longer of any force and effect.
§ 90-6. Severability.
If any provision of this article or application thereof to any person or
circumstance shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions or application thereof of this article which can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions
of this article are hereby declared to be severable.
determined that the emergency services rendered were connected to
negligent and/or malicious act(s) on the part of persons receiving the
treatment.
§ 90-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 90-6
1:44
ARTICLE II
Tax Collector
[Adopted 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 681]
§ 90-7. Charges for extra services.
The Rostraver Township Tax Collector is authorized to charge and collect
the following amounts for providing extra services in addition to her
compensation:
A. Tax certificates: $20.
B. Duplicate tax statements: $5.
§ 90-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-7
1:45
Chapter 93
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Departments — See Ch. 21. Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 80.
§ 90-7 ROSTRAVER CODE § 90-7
1:46
ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 10, Ch. 1, Art. A, of the 1989 Code]
§ 93-1. Adoption of standards.
For the purpose of establishing minimum regulations governing the
safeguarding of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion
arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances,
materials and devices; and from conditions hazardous to life or property in
the use or occupancy of buildings or premises, the Township of Rostraver
adopts as its Fire Prevention Code the BOCA National Fire Prevention
Code/1987 (Seventh Edition), as published by Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc. Copies of that code have been placed on
file at the Township Municipal Building and will remain on file there. The
whole of that code, except for those portions that are deleted, amended
or modified in the following sections of this article, is adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out verbatim in this article, and from the
date on which this Code of Ordinances takes effect, the provisions of that
Fire Prevention Code, as amended, shall be controlling in the Township
of Rostraver in all matters to which that code is made applicable. In this
article, the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code may be referred to as "the
code" or "this code."
§ 93-2. Deletions, amendments and modifications.
The Fire Prevention Code adopted in § 93-1 is amended and changed in the
following respects:
A. Whenever the words "name of jurisdiction" appear in brackets in the
code, the words "Township of Rostraver" shall be inserted in place of
those bracketed words. Likewise, the words "Township of Rostraver"
shall be substituted for the word "jurisdiction" where that word appears
singly without being preceded by the words "under the."
B. The words "Board of Township Commissioners" shall be substituted for
the term "chief appointing officer" or "appointing authority of the
jurisdiction," wherever either of the latter terms appears in the code.
C. The term "Township Solicitor" shall be substituted for the term "legal
counsel of the jurisdiction," wherever the latter term appears in the
code.
D. Wherever the term "Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention," "fire
official" or "code official" is used in the code, that term shall mean the
Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer of the Township as
specifically designated from time to time by the Board of
Commissioners.
E. Wherever the term "Fire Prevention Bureau" is used in the code, that
term shall mean the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township and, if
§ 93-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-2
1:47
the Code Enforcement Officer is in charge of any office or bureau of
Township government, that office or bureau.
F. Section F-100.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
F-100.1. Title: These regulations shall be known as the "Fire
Prevention Code of the Township of Rostraver," hereinafter referred to
as "the code" or "this code."
G. Section F-101.2 of the code is amended to read as follows:
F-101.2. Validity of other laws, regulations and ordinances:
Nothing in this code shall be construed to prevent the enforcement
of state laws and regulations and/or ordinances of the Township of
Rostraver which prescribe more restrictive or stricter requirements or
limitations.
H. Section F-102.2 of the code is amended to read as follows:
F-102.2. Inspections of buildings and premises: The Chief of
Police or Code Enforcement Officer shall have authority to detail the
Chiefs of the Volunteer Fire Departments or companies within the
Township the duty to inspect for violations and shall be permitted
to name them as inspectors who shall report violations to the Chief
of Police or the Code Enforcement Officer for enforcement. It shall
be the duty of those inspectors, to the Chief of Police or the Code
Enforcement Officer, to inspect all buildings and premises, except
the interiors of dwellings and dwelling units, as often as may be
necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected
any conditions liable to cause fire or any violation of the provisions of
this code and/or any other ordinance affecting fire hazards. Nothing
herein contained shall be intended to supersede or supplant the
procedure for removal of fire hazards set forth in the Act of 1927, P.L.
450, No. 291, Section 3, as amended, where that procedure shall be
followed by the Pennsylvania State Police or its assistants.
I. Section F-102.7 of the code is amended to add the following sentence at
the end thereof: "Furthermore, the Board of Commissioners shall have
authority, at its discretion, to abrogate any rule or regulation or part
thereof, in which case that rule or regulation shall cease to be in effect
in the Township."
J. Section F-103.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
F-103.1. Permits required: Permits shall be obtained from the fire
official and shall at all times: (a) be kept on the premises designated
in the permit; and (b) be available for inspection by the fire official. No
permit need be obtained from the Township under this section where
a license or permit is required by law or departmental regulation of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and where a valid state license or
permit is in possession of the person desiring to engage in the precise
activity authorized by the state license or permit.
§ 93-2 ROSTRAVER CODE § 93-2
1:48
K. Section F-103.1.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
F-103.1.1. Application for permit: Application for a permit required
under this code shall be made to the fire official on a form provided
by the Township. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by
plans or drawings where required by the fire official for evaluation of
the application. After investigation and approval by the fire official, he
shall issue the permit. Every permit shall be valid for the period of
time specified by the fire official, but in no instance for longer than
one calendar year or the portion of the calendar year remaining after
issuance of the permit.
L. Section F-103.6 of the code is amended to read as follows:
F-103.6. Fee: No fee shall be charged or collected for the issuance of
any permit under this code.
M. Section F-104.2 of the code is amended to read as follows:
F-104.2. Board of Commissioners serves as board of appeals. The
Board of Commissioners shall serve as the board of appeals and shall
have all authority, shall perform all the duties and may exercise all
powers vested in the board of appeals by this code.
N. Sections F-104.2.1 through F-104.2.6 of the code are deleted.
O. Section F-104.4 of the code is amended to read as follows:
F-104.4. Notice of meeting: The Board of Commissioners, when
meeting as a board of appeals, shall give notice of all such meetings
in the same manner as required for special meetings of the Board of
Commissioners.
P. Section F-104.5 of the code is deleted.
Q. Section F-104.6 of the code is amended to read as follows:
F-104.6. Actions of the Board: The Board shall confirm, modify
or reverse the decision of the fire official by a concurring vote of a
majority of the members of the Board present at the meeting.
R. The following new section is added to the code, directly after Section
F-104.6.2:
F-104.6.3. Determining vote: Failure to secure concurring votes of
a majority of the members of the Board present at a meeting shall be
deemed a confirmation of the decision of the fire official.
S. Section F-105.5.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
§ 93-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-2
1:49
F-105.5.1. Penalties.
(a) Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision
of this code, or who violates or fails to comply with any order
issued under this code, submitted and approved under the
terms of this code, or any certificate or permit issued under
this code, or any certificate or permit issued under this code,
and from which no appeal was taken, or who fails to comply
with any such order as affirmed by the Board of Commissioners,
or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
therein, shall severally be guilty of an offense and a violation
of this code, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100 or not more than $1,000 and costs
of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The imposition of
one penalty for any violation shall not excuse that violation or
permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy that violation or defect within a reasonable
time; and when not otherwise specified, each 10 days that any
prohibited condition is maintained shall constitute a separate
offense.
(b) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(c) If, at the expiration of the time limit for correction of the listed
violations, satisfactory remedial action has not been taken and
no exception has been filed to request consideration of the
order by the Board of Commissioners, such further action shall
be initiated by the Township as provided for by law, specifically
including the power of the Township to cause such remedial
action to be commenced and/or completed by the Township,
and the costs thereof and expenses incurred therewith, with
a penalty of 10%, shall be collected from the owner of the
property by action of assumpsit or by lien; provided, however,
that the recovery of the costs and expenses, together with the
penalty, may be in addition to the penalty imposed as provided
for this section.
T. Section F-313.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
Section 313.1. Designations: The Board of Commissioners shall
require and designate (or shall delegate to the Chief of Police or the
Code Enforcement Officer to require and designate) public or private
fire lanes as deemed necessary for the efficient and effective use of
fire apparatus and for the purpose of providing egress for occupants of
buildings in the vicinity. Fire lanes shall have a minimum width of 18
feet (5,486 millimeters).
U. The following new section is added directly after Section F-313.2:
§ 93-2 ROSTRAVER CODE § 93-2
1:50
§ 93-3. Interpretation of provisions.
F-313.3. Prosecution for illegal parking of vehicles in fire lanes:
Prosecution of persons parking illegally in fire lanes shall be in the
manner prescribed by the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania and in Chapter
187 of this Code of Ordinances for parking in locations where parking
is prohibited at all times.
A. The code shall not supersede any provision of the law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or of any regulation promulgated by
any department or agency of the Commonwealth by authority of law,
where such law or regulation is in conflict with or identical to a
provision of said code; provided, however, that any provision of said
code that is stricter than or in addition to any state law or regulation
governing a particular subject or activity shall be in effect and shall be
enforced within the Township of Rostraver, subject to the penalties
prescribed in the code.
B. Mention in or regulation by the code adopted by this article of any
specific use of property or of any business or industry shall not in itself
authorize such use of property or the establishment or carrying on of
any such business or industry in the Township. It is hereby declared
that the intent of the Board of Commissioners is that permitted and
prohibited uses of property in the Township shall be as governed by the
Township's Zoning Ordinance, its amendments and supplements.16
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 93-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-3
1:51

ARTICLE II
Smoke Detectors
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 6, Ch. 1, Art. E, of the 1989 Code]
§ 93-4. Smoke detectors required. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
421]
Every hotel or motel, nursing home, rooming house or sleeping room within
the Township and every apartment house shall be provided with approved
smoke detectors as set out hereafter. Said smoke detectors must meet the
requirements of the Fire Underwriters Laboratory Tests UL 167, UL 168 or
UL 217, or other nationally recognized testing agency.
§ 93-5. Characteristics of smoke detectors. [Amended 7-7-2004 by
Ord. No. 516]
The units as described in this article shall be provided with a detector of
products of combustion other than heat. The same shall be permanently
wired to an appropriate circuit for new construction after June 1, 1978.
When activated, the smoke detectors must sound an alarm which is audible
in the area.
§ 93-6. Newly constructed or substantially improved housing units.
[Amended 7-7-2004 by Ord. No. 516]
Each separate sleeping area of a newly constructed or substantially
remodeled housing unit after June 1, 1978, shall be equipped with smoke
detectors as provided by this article to protect each separate sleeping area
and at the head of each basement stairs. Detectors shall also be installed in
all other major areas and rooms of the unit, including any basement.17
§ 93-7. Location of smoke detectors.
Smoke detectors shall be located on the ceiling at a minimum of six inches
from the wall or on walls at a minimum of six inches from the ceiling.
§ 93-8. Maintenance of smoke detectors.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of every establishment referred
to in § 93-4 to maintain each smoke detector in a reliable condition and to
make periodic inspection and tests to ensure that each smoke detector is in
proper working condition.
17.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 6-1244, Requirements for existing buildings, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421.
§ 93-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-9
1:53
§ 93-9. Equipment approval required. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord.
No. 421]
All smoke detection equipment installed pursuant to this article shall be of
a type approved by the Fire Underwriters or other nationally recognized
testing agency.
§ 93-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall for every such
violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
or more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 93-9 ROSTRAVER CODE § 93-10
1:54
Chapter 95
FIREWORKS
§ 93-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-10
1:55

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted 9-6-2017 by Ord. No. 689. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
§ 95-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Rostraver Township
Fireworks Ordinance."
§ 95-2. Intent.
It is the intent of Rostraver Township to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the general public through limiting and regulating the use of
fireworks as hereafter defined. Fireworks by nature contain explosives
which when misused can damage property and endanger human life. This
article prohibits the use of fireworks and conduct of public displays as
defined herein by the general public but allows for the public display of
fireworks performed by professional, competent operators in a safe manner
and with appropriate safeguards through a permit process.
§ 95-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREWORKS — Includes all of those materials and/or devices and any
combination thereof which are defined as "consumer fireworks" and/or
"display fireworks" by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, limited liability company or
partnership, public or private corporation, incorporated or unincorporated
association, enterprise or any other legal entity and including, without
limitation with respect to each of the above, any agent, servant or employee
thereof.
PUBLIC DISPLAY — Any event whether or not open to the general public at
which fireworks are discharged, fired or activated.
§ 95-4. Permit required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to have, hold, or sponsor public
displays of fireworks within the limits of Rostraver Township, unless a
permit therefor is first granted by the Township Finance Director/Office
Manager or his designee.
B. Application for permits shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by
the Township to the Township Finance Director/Office Manager at least
45 days in advance of the date set for a public display, setting forth the
proposed location, the character thereof, the name and address of the
operator, and the name and address of the owner or owners of the
grounds on which the public display is to be held. If an application is
§ 95-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-4
1:57
§ 95-5. Bond for display.
The owner, operator, and/or applicant for a permit shall provide a bond in
an amount not less than $500 conditioned for the payment of all damages
to any person for any injury, death, or property damage arising out of or
relating to the public display of fireworks. The bond shall be filed with
the Township Finance Director/Office Manager as a condition of permit
approval. The terms of the bond shall be subject to Township approval.
§ 95-6. Display and discharge.
Every public display of fireworks within the Township shall be performed
by a competent operator and shall be of such character and so located,
discharged, fired or activated in such a manner so as not to be hazardous
to property or endanger any person or persons. The permit application shall
identify the operator and set forth the operator's credentials evidencing
competency to perform the public display.
§ 95-7. Disposal of unfired fireworks.
It shall be the sole responsibility of the owner, applicant and/or operator
to dispose of all unfired fireworks, trash and any other residue or remains
within 24 hours of the conclusion of the public display of fireworks. Any
submitted and executed by an operator acting on behalf of the owner,
the owner shall execute the application as well. Rostraver Township
may charge an application/permit fee which may be established and/or
modified by resolution from time to time.
C. As a condition of issuance of the permit, the applicant shall submit a
bond meeting the requirements of § 95-5 of this article.
D. If and after a permit is granted hereunder, the possession and use of
fireworks shall be lawful and limited solely for the purpose described in
the application and the permit.
E. The Township Finance Director/Office Manager may attach reasonable
conditions to the issuance of a permit under this section.
F. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.
G. If by reason of unfavorable weather the public display for which a
permit is granted does not take place at the time authorized, the person
to whom such permit is issued may, within 72 hours, apply to the
Township requesting a continuance of the public display to a new date.
Upon receiving an application for continuance, the Township Finance
Director/Office Manager may extend the permit under such terms and
conditions as are deemed appropriate.
H. The Township shall provide reasonable rules and regulations by
resolution which shall govern the display and sale of consumer
fireworks for display within the Township of Rostraver.
§ 95-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 95-7
1:58
materials which are hazardous or unsafe shall be immediately disposed of
in a proper manner.
§ 95-8. Compliance with other laws.
In addition to the above, any owner, applicant and/or operator hereunder
shall comply with all federal, state and local laws, regulations, and
ordinances as well as industry standards relating to the handling, display,
and disposal of fireworks. To the extent that the standards contained in
this article differ from those contained in any federal, state, or local law,
regulation, or ordinance or industry standard, the stricter provision shall
apply.
§ 95-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates a provision of this article shall, in an action brought
before a district justice and upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of
not less than $100 and not more than $1,000 for each and every offense
and, in default of payment, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Each day or portion thereof for which a violation of this article is found to
occur shall constitute a new and separate offense.
§ 95-10. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this article, which shall remain in
full force and effect and, for this purpose, the provisions of this article are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 95-11. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 95-12. When effective.
This article shall become effective after its passage or adoption.
§ 95-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-12
1:59
Chapter 97
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Agency — See Ch. 51.
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 101.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 164.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 95-12 ROSTRAVER CODE § 95-12
1:60
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 97-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,18 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of
its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of the Township of
Rostraver does hereby order as follows.
§ 97-2. Intent.
This intent of this chapter is to:
§ 97-3. Applicability.
§ 97-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
A. Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent of minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units and it residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake or cause to be undertaken any construction or
development anywhere within the Township unless a zoning permit has
been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator (Zoning Officer).
B. A zoning permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures.
18.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 97-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-5
1:61
§ 97-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 97-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur.
Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 97-5 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-6
1:62
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 97-7. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 97-8. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same lot
with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal
use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof; included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — Space which will remain totally dry during
flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage
of water and water vapor.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — Space which will remain dry during flooding,
except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the structure
is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
§ 97-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-8
1:63
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additional, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — The floodplain area specifically
identified in this chapter as being inundated by the one-hundred-year flood.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1)
A.
§ 97-8 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-8
1:64
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement) An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly, contained
in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which arrives at a
site completed and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that it may be used
with or without a permanent foundation. The term includes park trailers,
travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on
a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership,
which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more
manufactured homes for nontransient use.
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Provisions for the exclusion of certain land development from the
definition of "land development" contained above only when such land
development involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For purposes of this subclause, an "amusement park" is defined
as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved by proper authorities.
(3)
B.
§ 97-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-8
1:65
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support or the removal
or change of any required means of egress or rearrangement of parts of
a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor repairs
include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas oil, waste, vent
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after August 16, 1982, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring
each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood elevation
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit. The "actual start" means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
§ 97-8 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-8
1:66
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all or a designated portion of a floodplain.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devises,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however,
that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§§ 603(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation of an historic
structure.
B.
§ 97-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-8
1:67

ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 97-9. Zoning permits required.
Zoning permits shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Township.
§ 97-10. Floodplain Administrator.
A. Designation of Floodplain Administrator. The Zoning Officer is hereby
appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to
herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
(1) The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a zoning permit only after
it has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken
will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) Prior to the issuance of the zoning permit, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application for the permit to
determine if all other necessary government permits required by
state and federal laws have been obtained, such as those required
by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as
amended)19; the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act
(Act 1978-325, as amended)20; the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act
(Act 1937-394, as amended)21; and the U.S. Clean Water Act,
Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No zoning permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
(3) During the zoning permit period, the Floodplain Administrator or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine
that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the zoning permit application and with all applicable
municipal laws and ordinances. He/she shall make as many
inspections during and upon completion of the work as are
necessary.
(4) In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises
or development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation
of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(5) In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work
does not comply with the zoning permit application or any
19.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
20.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
21.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 97-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-10
1:69
§ 97-11. Application procedures and requirements.
applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false
statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain
Administrator may revoke the zoning permit and report such fact
to the Township Commissioners for whatever action it considers
necessary.
(6) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated
with the requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
(7) The Floodplain Administrator shall request the applicant to contact
the Department of Labor & Industry or a third-party agency to
comply with the requirements of Title 34 of the Pa. Code and the
2006 IBC and the 2006 IRC, or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a zoning permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator (Zoning Officer) on forms supplied by the
Township. Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for zoning
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this chapter and all
other applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
§ 97-10 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-11
1:70
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
(5) Building materials are flood resistant.
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used.
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information (e.g., any or all of the technical information
contained in § 97-32) as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed zoning permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) All property and lot lines, including dimensions and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet;
(d) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures
and other improvements, including the locations of any
existing or proposed subdivision and land development;
(e) The location of all existing streets, drives and other
accessways; and
(f) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the one-hundred-year flood;
(c) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a one-hundred-year flood; and
(d) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
§ 97-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-11
1:71
§ 97-12. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a
zoning permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 97-13. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an FE (special floodplain area), when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood
more than one foot at any point.
(b) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the one-hundred-year flood.
(c) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 97-27F, Storage, and § 97-28, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substance referred to in § 97-28 which are intended to be
used, produced, stored or otherwise maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 97-28
during a one-hundred-year flood.
(d) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development.
(e) Where any excavation of grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
§ 97-11 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-13
1:72
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Township Engineer, etc.) for review and
comment.
§ 97-14. Changes.
After the issuance of a zoning permit by the Floodplain Administrator
(Zoning Officer), no changes of any kind shall be made to the application,
permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with
the application without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain
Administrator. Requests for any such change shall be in writing and shall
be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for
consideration.
§ 97-15. Placards.
In addition to the zoning permit, the Floodplain Administrator may issue
a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the time
construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
zoning permit and the date of its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
§ 97-16. Start of construction.
§ 97-17. Inspection and revocation.
A. Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin
within six months and shall be completed within 12 months after the
date of issuance of the zoning permit or the permit shall expire unless a
time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator
Construction and/or development shall be considered to have started
with the preparation of land, land clearing, grading, filling, excavation
of basement, footings, piers or foundations, erection of temporary
forms, the installation of piling under proposed subsurface footings or
the installation or sewer, gas and water pipes or electrical or other
service lines from the street.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for
the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
A. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
B. In the discharge of his duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall have
the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or development
in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of proper
§ 97-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-17
1:73
§ 97-18. Fees; notice of violation; violations and penalties.
credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
C. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the zoning permit and report such fact to the Board for whatever
action it considers necessary.
D. A record of all such inspections and violations of this chapter shall be
maintained.
A. Applications for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable
to the municipality, as per the Township's most recently adopted zoning
permit schedule.
B. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall be in writing, include a statement of the
reasons for its issuance, allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period
of 30 days for the performance of any act it required, be served upon
the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided,
however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been
properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has
been served with such notice by any other method authorized or
required by the laws of this state; and contain an outline of remedial
action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
C. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine to
Rostraver Township of not more than $500, plus costs of prosecution. In
default of such payment, such person shall be imprisoned in county
prison for a period not to exceed 10 days. Each day during which any
violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense in
addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved,
including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter.
The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of or noncompliance
with this chapter shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or
permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct
or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time
Any development initiated or any structure or building constructed,
§ 97-17 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-18
1:74
§ 97-19. Appeals.
reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in noncompliance with
this chapter may be declared by the Board to be a public nuisance and
abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision or action of the
Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Township Zoning Hearing Board shall
set a time and place, within not fewer than 10 nor more than 30 days,
for the purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place
at which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township Zoning Hearing
Board may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the
laws of this commonwealth, including the Pennsylvania Floodplain
Management Act.
§ 97-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-19
1:75

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Area
§ 97-20. Identification.
§ 97-21. Description of floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the Township of
Rostraver, classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) dated March 17, 2011, and issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision
thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study.
B. The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments are hereby adopted by the Township of Rostraver and
declared to be a part of this chapter
A. FW (floodway area): the areas identified as "floodway" in the AE Zone in
the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the FEMA. The term shall also
include floodway areas which have been identified in other available
studies or sources of information for those floodplain areas where no
floodway has been identified in the Flood Insurance Study.
B. FF (flood-fringe area): the remaining portions of the one-hundred-year
floodplain in those areas identified as an AE Zone in the Flood
Insurance Study, where floodway has been delineated. The basis for this
outermost boundary of this area shall be the one-hundred-year-flood
elevations as shown in the flood profiles contained in the Flood
Insurance Study.
C. FE (special floodplain area): the areas identified as Zone AE in the
Flood Insurance Study, where one-hundred-year-flood elevations have
been provided, but no floodway has been delineated.
D. FA (general floodplain area): the areas identified as Zone A in the FIS
for which no one-hundred-year-flood elevations have been provided.
When available, information from other federal, state and other
acceptable sources shall be used to determine the one-hundred-year
elevation, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other
information is available, the one-hundred-year elevation shall be
determined by using a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site in question. In lieu of the
above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the
elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
§ 97-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-21
1:77
§ 97-22. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Commissioners where studies or information provided by a qualified agency
or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change, approval must be obtained from the FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify the FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 97-23. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Township Engineer, and any party
aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the Board. The burden of proof
shall be on the appellant.
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Township.
E. FO (shallow floodplain area): the areas identified as Zone AO in the FIS
that have flood depths of one to three feet as delineated on the maps
accompanying the FIS.
§ 97-21 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-23
1:78
ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 97-24. General.
§ 97-25. Special requirements for FW, FE, FA and FO Areas.
A. No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be
affected by such action have been notified by the municipality and until
all required permits or approvals have been first obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams, Waterways
and Wetlands. In addition, the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development, Strategic Planning and Operations Office, shall be
notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain areas shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
C. Submit technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision
(LOMR) within six months of the completion of any new construction,
development, or other activity resulting in changes in the BFE.
D. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will not
reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse in any
way.
A. With any FW (floodway area), the following provisions apply:
(1) Any new conduction, development, use, activity or encroachment
that would cause any increase in the one-hundred-year flood
heights shall be prohibited.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection.
B. Within any FE (special floodplain area), no new construction or
development shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development will not increase that
elevation of the one-hundred-year flood more than one foot at any point.
C. Within any FE (special floodplain area) or FA (General floodplain area)
or FO (shallow floodplain area), the following provisions apply:
(1) No new construction or development shall be located within the
area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
§ 97-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-25
1:79
§ 97-26. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection.
(2) Any new construction or development which would cause any
increase in the one-hundred-year flood heights shall be prohibited
within any floodway area.
A. Residential structures.
(1) Within any identified floodplain area (FW, FF, FE or FA), any new
construction or substantial improvement of residential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to or
above the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) Within any identified floodplain area (FO), any new construction or
substantial improvement of a residential structure shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) Within any identified floodplain area (FW, FF, FE or FA), any new
construction or substantial improvement of a nonresidential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
up to or above the regulatory flood elevation or be designed and
constructed so that the space enclosed by such structure shall
remain either completely or essentially dry during any flood up to
that height.
(2) Any nonresidential structure or part thereof, having a lowest floor
which is not elevated to at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundredyear-
flood elevation, shall be floodproofed in a completely or
essentially dry manner in accordance with the W1 or W2 space
classification standards contained in the publication entitled
"Flood-Proofing Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect which states that the
proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance
with the above-referenced standards.
(3) Within any identified floodplain area (FO), any new construction or
substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or be designed and
constructed so that the space enclosed by such structure shall
§ 97-25 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-26
1:80
remain either completely or essentially dry during any flood up to
that height.
(4) Any nonresidential structure or part thereof having a lowest floor
which is not elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as
high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM shall be
floodproofed in a completely or essentially dry the manner in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standards. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is
prohibited.
(2) Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle,
building access or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement shall be designed and constructed to allow for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "partially
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space
shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
§ 97-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-26
1:81
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring and outlets will be at least 1 1/2 feet above the
one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space
shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
E. Subdivisions. All subdivision proposals and development proposals
containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser,
in flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data are not available,
shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses
that determine base flood elevations and floodway information. The
analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a
format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision or
letter of map revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees
shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
F. Manufactured homes. Within any FW (floodway area) manufactured
homes shall be prohibited. Within any FA (general floodplain area)
manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the area measured 50
feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse Where
permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes, and any
improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
§ 97-26 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-26
1:82
§ 97-27. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is 1 1/2
feet or more above the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
G. Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles in Zones A1-30, AH and AE
must either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(3) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in
§ 97-26F.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling.
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to three horizontal feet unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes, are submitted to and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties. (See
Chapter 164 of the Code of the Township of Rostraver.)
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and
systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
§ 97-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-27
1:83
(3) No part of any on-site sewage shall be located within any identified
floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state and local
regulations for such systems. If any such system is permitted, it
shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it or contamination
from it during a flood.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life and
not listed in § 97-28, Development which may endanger flood elevation,
and/or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
§ 97-27 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-27
1:84
§ 97-28. Development which may endanger human life.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing
material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus
shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises or will involve the production,
storage or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject
to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
§ 97-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-28
1:85
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated
B. Within any FW (floodway area), any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above shall be prohibited.
C. Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the land described in Subsection A above shall
be:
(1) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood or, within
the FO Area, elevated or designed and constructed to remain
completely dry above the highest adjacent grade at least 1 1/2 feet
above the depth number specified in feet on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map; and
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a one-hundred-year flood. Any such structure or part
thereof that will be built below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for
completely dry floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-
Proofing Regulations" (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent watertight
standard.
§ 97-28 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-28
1:86
ARTICLE VI
Activities Requiring Special Permits
§ 97-29. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development,
Strategic and Operations Office, to implement the Pennsylvania Floodplain
Management Act, the following activities shall be prohibited within any
identified floodplain area unless a special permit has been issued by
Rostraver Township:
§ 97-30. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities or construction,
enlargement or expansion of any structure used or intended to be used
for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of or any construction of a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request, including a completed zoning permit application
form
B. A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of
1988, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of two
feet;
(3) All property and lot lines, including dimensions and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction and elevations;
§ 97-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-30
1:87
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities and any other natural and
man-made features affecting or affected by the proposed activity or
development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the one-hundred-year-flood elevations and
information concerning the flow of water including direction and
velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections and exterior building elevations as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood, depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with the one-hundred-year flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems and any other utilities and facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
§ 97-30 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-30
1:88
§ 97-31. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by Rostraver Township,
the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of Article III:
adequately designed to protect against damage from the onehundred-
year flood;
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer
architect, landscape architect or other qualified person, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a one-hundred-year flood, including a
statement concerning the effects such pollution may have on
human life;
(4) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on one-hundred-year-flood elevations and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amount of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the one-hundred-year-flood elevation and the effects such
materials and debris may have on one-hundred-year-flood
elevations and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's Planning Module for Land Development;
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166;
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explain the manner in which the site
will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a onehundred-
year flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forward to the Township Planning Agency and
Township Engineer for review and comment.
§ 97-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-31
1:89
§ 97-32. Special technical requirements.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Township shall
notify the applicant, in writing, stating in what respect the application
is deficient.
C. If the Township decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Township approves an application, it shall file written notification,
together with the application and all pertinent information, with the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development,
Strategic Planning and Operations Office, by registered or certified
mail, within five working days after the date of approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Township shall allow the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development,
Strategic Planning and Operations Office, 30 days, after receipt of the
notification by the Department, to review the application and decision
made by the Township.
F. If the Township does not receive any communication from the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development,
Strategic Planning and Operations Office, during the thirty-day review
period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development, Strategic Planning and Operations Office, should decide
to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Township and the
applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval and the
Township shall not issue the special permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of Article V of this chapter, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development
requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between any of the
following requirements and those in Article V of this chapter or in any
other code, ordinance or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall
apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the onehundred-
year flood without any lateral movement or damage to
either the structure itself or to any of its equipment or contents
below the one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
§ 97-31 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-32
1:90
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) elevation will be at least
1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year-flood elevation. Within
the FO Area, the lowest floor (including basement) elevation
will be above the highest adjacent grade at least 1 1/2 feet
above the depth number specified in feet on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the one-hundred-year flood.
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows or debris endangering life and property. All
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications,
who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect
currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses,
computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by Rostraver Township and the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development, Strategic Planning and Operations Office.
§ 97-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-32
1:91

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 97-33. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 97-34 shall apply.
§ 97-34. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation
of the one-hundred-year flood.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any FE Area that would, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, increase the one-hundred-year-flood
elevation more than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alternation, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% of more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 97-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-34
1:93

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 97-35. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Township may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of
the requirements.
§ 97-36. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Township in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 97-11 and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any FE Area that would, together with all
other existing and anticipated development, increase the onehundred-
year-flood elevation more than one foot at any point.
(3) Except for a possible modification of the one-and-one-half-foot
freeboard requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for
any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to
development regulated by special permit (Article VI) or to § 97-28,
Development which may endanger human life.
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, the Township shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considered necessary in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to
achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, the Township shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
§ 97-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-36
1:95
(c) That the granting of the variance will neither result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public
expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimize the
public or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulation.
(8) A complete record of all variance request and related actions shall
be maintained by the Township. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to the Federal Insurance Administration.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-hundred-year flood.
§ 97-36 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-36
1:96
ARTICLE IX
Adoption
§ 97-37. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on March 17, 2011, and shall remain in
force until modified, amended or rescinded by Rostraver Township,
Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
§ 97-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-37
1:97
Chapter 99
GAS AND OIL EXPLORATION
§ 97-37 ROSTRAVER CODE § 97-37
1:98
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 4-5-2017 by Ord. No. 686]
§ 99-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Rostraver Township
Seismic Testing Ordinance."
§ 99-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENERGY SOURCE OPERATIONS — Operations that involve the transmittal
of seismic waves to model the geophysical properties of the earth's crust.
§ 99-3. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any exploration activities
within the Township regarding oil, gas, and/or other materials by the use
of energy source operations, including, without limitation, weight drops,
explosives, and/or vibrating machines, thumper trucks or any other vehicles
or equipment that cause vibrations, without first obtaining a permit therefor
from the Township. To the extent an applicant, pursuant to this article,
seeks to conduct energy source operations on Township property, including
but not limited to Township roads, highways, and real estate, the Board of
Commissioners has the express right to grant or deny any application under
this article.
§ 99-4. Permit application; fee procedure.
A. Application for a permit hereunder shall be made with the Township.
Such application shall contain the following information:
(1) Name of the applicant;
(2) Address of the applicant;
(3) Type of explosives or other geophysical methods of mineral
exploration to be used, and the purposes therefor;
(4) A map designating a testing area and showing the location of all
points of use and the energy source to be used at each point;
(5) A traffic control plan for any operations or testing that will impede
traffic on a public right-of-way; and
(6) The applicant's insurance information, including the name of the
applicant's insurance carrier, the types and amount of insurance
covering its proposed operations, the name and telephone number
of an individual to contact in case of a claim for personal injury or
§ 99-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-4
1:99
§ 99-5. Term of permit.
The term of a permit issued under this article shall be for one year
beginning on the date of approval of the permit by the Board of
Commissioners, and all energy source operations shall be completed within
said term. The applicant shall notify the Township or its designee a
minimum of seven business days in advance of the actual commencement
of energy source operations. Once operations have commenced, in the
event the applicant is rendered unable, wholly or in part, by circumstances
beyond the applicant's control, to complete operations within the remaining
term of the permit, then the time for completion may be extended, at the
sole discretion of the Township Commissioners, for a period of time not to
exceed six months, upon written request by the applicant setting forth full
particulars of the circumstances causing the delay which were not within
the control of the applicant and which the applicant could not have avoided
by the exercise of due diligence and care.
§ 99-6. Operations in general.
property damage, and the procedure for obtaining a copy of the
applicant's certificate of insurance. A nonrefundable permit fee of
$2,500 for processing the application and preparing the permit
shall accompany each such application.
B. On receipt of such application, the Township or designee shall prepare
a report showing all Township facilities or infrastructure that may be
affected by the proposed exploration activity located in the testing area
shown in such application. Such report and the application shall then be
submitted to the Board of Commissioners with the recommendations of
the Township Zoning Officer or his designee. No permit shall be issued
except upon approval of the Township Board of Commissioners.
A. All geophysical operations shall be limited to the areas determined by
the Township Board of Commissioners and depicted on the map kept in
the Township office. A copy of such map shall be attached to any permit
issued by the Township. If, during the course of operations, any utility
line must be relocated to maintain compliance with the terms and
conditions set forth herein or to ensure the safety of the general
population, the applicant shall notify the Township office at least seven
business days prior to embarking on such relocation, which shall be
performed in compliance with Township standards.
B. The applicant shall employ an engineer specializing in seismology to be
approved by the Township, who shall be on the job site during the entire
period of testing to mitigate any potential damage to public or private
property. The applicant shall also designate a point of contact who will
respond within 24 hours to any request from the Township for
information regarding the applicant's testing operations, including a
request for maps of the testing area that show the points of use as
planned by the applicant at the time of the request.
§ 99-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 99-6
1:100
§ 99-7. Notice.
C. The applicant shall obtain written permission, as required by law, from
property owners before entering upon or crossing their property.
D. The applicant shall be responsible for and shall settle all reasonable and
legitimate claims, demands, and causes of actions relating to property
or persons arising out of or as a result of the applicant's operations
under this permit and shall handle all such claims in an expedient
manner.
A. The applicant shall notify each owner of property in writing by certified
United States mail to or personal delivery at the property, located
within 250 feet of its planned energy source operations, a minimum of
10 working days prior to the conducting of any test. Said notice will
include the anticipated start date of energy source operations and the
energy source planned to be used. The applicant will offer to provide
and will provide if requested, to such owner, in writing, the insurance
information required by § 99-4 to be included in its application.
B. The applicant shall notify each owner of property, in writing by United
States mail to or personal delivery at the property, within 400 feet of
charge tests or 125 feet of vibroseis or weight drop tests, a minimum of
10 working days prior to the conducting of any test, of the availability at
no cost to the property owner of pre- and post-test inspections of all
structures subjected to a peak particle velocity greater than 35/100
inch per second located on or under said property, including
appropriate testing and lab test for water wells and springs. The
applicant shall perform the offered inspections if requested by the
property owner. The applicant shall maintain records of such
inspections for a period of two years and shall make such records
available upon request by the Township.
C. The applicant shall notify the Township's water supplier and Township's
sewage provider in writing by certified United States mail to or
personal delivery of its planned energy source operations, a minimum
of 10 working days prior to the conducting of any test. Said notice will
include the anticipated start date of energy source operations and the
energy source planned to be used. The applicant will offer to provide
and will provide, if requested, to the Township's water supplier or the
Township's sewage provider, in writing, the insurance information
required by § 99-4 to be included in its application.
D. The applicant shall place newspaper advertisements in the Mon Valley
Independent newspaper of not less than three inches by four inches
explaining the work to be performed, the location of the proposed work,
and a toll-free telephone number where residents may call for more
information. Said advertisements shall be placed continuously during
the two-week period immediately before the permit application is
scheduled to be considered by the Township Board of Commissioners,
and again during the two-week period immediately before actual
§ 99-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-7
1:101
§ 99-8. Energy level restrictions.
operations commence in the testing area. The toll-free telephone
number provided by the applicant shall be answered during hours of
operation as set forth in § 99-6 while work is ongoing in the Township,
and an answering machine shall be installed to receive after-hours
calls.
A. The applicant shall engineer all source locations (explosive charge size
and depth, and vibrator source sweep frequency and drive levels or
other geophysical sources) so that no structure, subject to limitations
contained in § 99-11D herein, shall be subject to any peak particle
velocity greater than 6/10 inch per second. The applicant shall conduct
all the necessary engineering tests on property located within a onehundred-
mile radius from the Township and containing soils similar to
that at the planned locations of the geophysical operations, and shall
provide all reports to the Township in an appropriate format for
evaluation at the time of application.
B. Using industry standard equipment and techniques, the engineer
required by § 99-6 shall monitor and record, during operations, all
pertinent locations to ensure compliance with the maximum peak
particle velocity established by Subsection A. If peak particle velocity
for any test exceeds said maximum, the engineer shall notify the
Township and cease all operations until corrections are made. The
applicant shall maintain all documentation of monitoring activities for a
period of at least two years and make said documentation available
upon request for inspection by the Township.
C. The applicant shall obtain location and/or maps for all springs, water
wells, septic systems, underground hazardous waste storage/disposal
sites, and water, sewer, oil, gas and chemical pipelines as well as
underground utilities located in the testing area and conduct all energy
source operations in a manner so as to not damage, interrupt, or
otherwise interfere with said structures. Information obtained by the
applicant shall be used by the surveying teams and operations manager
to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of this permit and
that safe operating distances are maintained. If requested by the
applicant, the Township shall make available for inspection and
copying, maps, if any, prepared by or on behalf of the Township that
indicate subsurface structures or facilities; provided, however, that the
applicant's reliance on any information furnished by the Township, its
agents, representatives, and employees, whether written or verbal,
shall be at the sole risk of the applicant and the following disclaimer
shall be placed on and shall apply to any and all such information:
APPLICANT ACKNOWLEDGES THAT THE TOWNSHIP HAS NOT
MADE ANY INDEPENDENT INVESTIGATION OR VERIFICATION OF
INFORMATION REGARDING SUBSURFACE STRUCTURES AND
FACILITIES FURNISHED TO APPLICANT AND MAKES NO
REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY OR
§ 99-7 ROSTRAVER CODE § 99-8
1:102
§ 99-9. Hours of operation.
Energy source testing may be conducted from 8:00 a.m. until the earlier of
sunset or 7:00 p.m. local time, on Monday through Friday, and from 9:00
a.m. until the earlier of sunset or 7:00 p.m. local time, on Saturday and
Sunday.
§ 99-10. Lands, streets, rights-of-way, and casements.
COMPLETENESS OF SUCH INFORMATION. APPLICANT EXPRESSLY
ACKNOWLEDGES THAT THE TOWNSHIP MAKES NO WARRANTY OR
REPRESENTATION, EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, OR ARISING BY
OPERATION OF LAW, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY
WARRANTY OF FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR USE OR PURPOSE OF
SUCH SUBSURFACE INFORMATION.
D. All Township- or city-owned structures, including but not limited to
susceptible underground utilities (water mains, sewer mains, etc.) shall
have pre- and post-testing inspections paid for by the applicant if
subjected to a peak particle velocity greater than 35/100 inch per
second. The Township shall have the option of receiving reimbursement
of its actual cost of performing said inspections or having the
inspections done by a third-party firm hired by the applicant. Any
reimbursement provided by this section shall be paid to the Township
within 30 days following the applicant's receipt of an invoice from the
Township.
A. The applicant shall restore, at its own cost, Township-owned lands or
rights-of-way used in its operations to the original condition just prior to
the testing operations, free of damage, including ruts or any injury to
landscaping.
B. The applicant shall ensure that its operations will not interfere with the
free and safe flow of traffic. When operations are immediately adjacent
to the pavement, all equipment shall be parked and/or operated in one
lane of traffic.
C. The applicant shall notify the Township of any equipment to be operated
on Township streets that will exceed the maximum load limit of 10 tons
and obtain any special permitting required as described in § 187-16 of
the Rostraver Township Code.
D. Cables placed on the pavement within rights-of-way must be arranged
so they do not create a hazardous condition or rumble strip effect. All
cables must be securely anchored to the roadway with materials that
will not damage and/or puncture the pavement. Nails, spikes, and
similar materials used for anchors shall not be placed inside the
pavement edge.
E. Operations under the permit shall be barred when the Township
determines that the ground conditions are such that operations would
§ 99-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-10
1:103
§ 99-11. Testing.
cause ruts deeper than five inches in the rights-of-way or easements.
In addition, when ground conditions would cause the tracking of mud,
gravel, rock, or debris onto the roadway surface of any right-of-way or
other Township improvements in a way that creates a safety hazard or
potential for damage to vehicles, operations shall include measures to
prevent such hazardous tracking. In the event that hazardous tracking
occurs, the applicant shall immediately clean the roadway of all mud,
gravel, rock or debris and cease operations until such time as
appropriate preventative measures are implemented to ensure that said
hazardous tracking does not occur.
F. Each testing crew performing work that impedes the flow of traffic,
such as testing on Township streets or rights-of-way, shall be
accompanied by a certified peace officer provided by the applicant. The
applicant shall furnish at its cost adequate signs, barricades, flares,
flagmen, etc., as necessary, to protect the traveling public.
A. The applicant shall furnish to the Township, or designee, a schedule of
each week's test plans. If thumper trucks are utilized on Township
roads, which will require permission of the Township, the Township
Engineer shall inspect the road before and after testing. The applicant
shall pay any and all costs incurred by the Township as a result of these
inspections.
B. All vibroseis or weight drop operations shall be conducted a minimum
distance of 75 feet from any building, which shall mean a structure built
for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, chattel, or movable
property of any kind and which is affixed to the land. No charge test
shall be detonated within 300 feet of any building, water well, spring or
underground hazardous waste storage/disposal site. The applicant will
provide multiple monitoring of any charge testing within 600 feet of any
occupied building.
C. The applicant shall maintain and make available upon request to the
Township, for a period of two years, the daily log of energy source tests
showing date, location, energy source used, drive level, operator, and
all other related information, including seismic and pre- and post-test
survey.
D. No energy source operation shall subject any building intended for
human habitation, utility line, water well, spring or underground
hazardous waste storage/disposal site to a peak particle velocity
greater than five-tenths-inch per second.
E. Explosives shall be transported in constantly attended type-three
magazines as defined by Section 1902.4.7 of the 1994 Standard Fire
Prevention Code. All vehicles transporting explosives will be placarded
according to Regulation of Hazardous Materials 49 CFR. Only the
necessary amount of explosives for each day's operations, during such
§ 99-10 ROSTRAVER CODE § 99-11
1:104
§ 99-12. Bond, insurance, and indemnity.
period as the permit is in effect, shall be transported within the
Township at any given time. No explosives shall be stored within the
corporate Township limits, unless approved by the Township's Fire
Chief. If such storage is approved, explosives must be stored in a
locked and secure, constantly attended type-two magazine, as defined
by Section 1902.4.6 of the 1994 Standard Fire Prevention Code, at a
single, isolated, and sparsely populated location.
F. The applicant shall notify the Township, or designee, within three
business days after the occurrence of any violation of these permit
requirements.
A. Performance bond.
(1) The applicant shall submit to the Township a performance bond in
the amount of $250,000 from a surety authorized to do business in
the state. The performance bond shall be valid for a period of two
years from the date that the permit is issued. The bond shall
provide, but not be limited to, the following condition: there shall
be recoverable by the Township, jointly and severally from the
principal and surety any and all damages, loss or costs suffered by
the Township in connection with the applicant's geophysical
operations within the Township. The bond shall contain the
following endorsement:
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be
canceled by the surety company until 60 days after receipt by the
Township, by registered mail or written notice, of such intent to
cancel or not to renew."
(2) The rights reserved to the Township with respect to the bond are in
addition to all other rights of the Township, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such bond shall
affect any other rights of the Township.
B. Prior to conducting any operations hereunder, the applicant and/or its
contractors shall furnish a certificate of insurance to the Township
showing the Township as an additional insured with respect to
operations conducted within the Township and showing liability
insurance coverage covering commercial, personal injury, and general
liability in amounts not less than $1,000,000 per person, $3,000,000
per occurrence, and $1,000,000 property damage.
C. The applicant shall protect, indemnify, defend and hold the Township,
its officers, employees, agents, and representatives harmless from and
against all claims, demands, and causes of action of every kind and
character for injury to, or death of, any person or persons, damages,
liabilities, losses, and/or expenses, occurring or in any way incident to,
arising out of, or in connection with its or its contractors', agents', or
§ 99-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-12
1:105
§ 99-13. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion of this
article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portion thereof.
§ 99-14. Violations and penalties.
A person who knowingly violates any provision of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in
an amount not to exceed $2,000. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 99-15. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon passage.
§ 99-16. Construction of article.
The enactment and existence of this article shall not be construed as
creating any right or entitlement whatsoever in any individual, group or
business entity to perform energy source operations on Township property
or any other property, private or public. Furthermore, this article shall
not be construed as conferring the legal right to perform energy source
operations as described herein on private property, and the issuance of a
permit pursuant to this article does not concomitantly confer any right to
perform energy source operations on such property. This article neither
expands nor limits the requirements for energy source operations on private
representatives' operations under this permit, including attorneys' fees,
and any other costs and expenses incurred by the Township in
defending against any such claims, demands, and causes of action.
Within 30 days of receipt of same, the applicant shall notify the
Township, in writing, of each claim for injuries to, or death of, persons
or damages or losses to property occurring or in any way incident to,
arising out of, or in connection with its or its contractors', agents',
or representatives' operations conducted under this permit. At the
Township's discretion, the Township may conduct an independent
investigation, monitor, and review the processing of any such claim to
ensure that such claim is handled as required herein.
D. Any permit granted hereunder may be revoked upon breach of any term
or condition contained herein.
E. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, any permit
granted hereunder shall not be effective unless and until a copy of the
permit, signed by an authorized officer of the applicant, the
performance bond, and the certificates of insurance have been filed
with the Township Secretary.
§ 99-12 ROSTRAVER CODE § 99-16
1:106
property, but rather leaves applicable law regarding the same intact. This
article shall not be construed as rendering on behalf of the Township
any statement, assertion, warranty or guarantee concerning the scope,
methods, and/or safety of energy source operations by any individual,
group, or entity permitted by the Board of Commissioners under this article.
Accordingly, the Township shall not, as a result of any decision to grant or
deny any permit under this article, be held liable for any harm directly or
indirectly related to energy source operations performed in the Township.
§ 99-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-16
1:107
Chapter 101
GRADING, EXCAVATING AND FILLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 97.
Nuisances — See Ch. 124.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 164.
Street openings — See Ch. 166.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 178.
§ 101-1. Permit required for certain grading, excavation or filling of
ground.
It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake or cause to be undertaken
the excavation, filling and/or grading of any land of:
§ 101-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
EARTH MATERIAL — Any rock, natural soil or fill, and/or any combination
thereof.
EXCAVATION — The mechanical removal of earth material.
FILLING — The deposition of earth material.
GRADING — Any excavating or filling or combination thereof.
PERSON — Any person, persons, partnership, business or corporation.
§ 101-3. Application for permit.
Application for the permit referred to in § 101-1A shall be made in writing
to the Code Enforcement Officer on forms supplied by the Township. The
application shall contain at least the following:
A. Five acres or more within the Township unless an approved permit has
been obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer; or
B. Fifteen acres or more within the Township unless an erosion control
permit has been obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection.
A. The name and address of:
(1) The applicant;
(2) The owner of the land on which the work will be performed; and
(3) The contractor performing the work.
§ 99-16 ROSTRAVER CODE § 101-3
1:108
§ 101-4. Issuance of permit.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work will be in conformance with all
applicable requirements and regulations.
§ 101-5. Restrictions on making changes after permit issued.
After the issuance of a permit by the Code Enforcement Officer, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or other documents
submitted with the application without the written consent of the Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 101-6. Issuance and display of placards.
In addition to the permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time the work is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date of
its issuance and be signed by the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 101-7. Time limit for starting and completing work.
§ 101-8. Inspection of work; revocation of permit.
During the permitted work period, the Code Enforcement Officer or other
authorized official may inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
application and with all applicable laws and ordinances. In the event that
the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the work does not comply with
the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances or that there
has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the Code
B. An identification and description of the work to be covered by the
permit for which application is made.
C. A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by
lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description
which will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed work.
D. An estimate of the value of the proposed work.
E. Such other information as reasonably may be required by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
A. The proposed work shall begin within six months after the date of
issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension
is granted, in writing, by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. All work shall be completed within one year of the date of issuance of
the permit. If any work is to be performed beyond this period, a new
permit must be obtained under the conditions and requirements cited
in §§ 101-3 and 101-4.
§ 101-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-8
1:109
Enforcement Officer shall revoke the permit and report that fact to the
Board of Commissioners for whatever action it considers necessary.
§ 101-9. Permit fee accompanies application.
Application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
Township, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed work as
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer at the following rates:
Estimated Cost Fee
$0 to $ 200 $0
$201 to $1,000 $5
Each additional $1,000 or part thereof beyond
the first $1,000
$1
§ 101-10. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the Code Enforcement Officer's estimate of the
cost of the proposed work may appeal to the Board of Commissioners. The
appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the determination by
the Code Enforcement Officer. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Board of
Commissioners shall set a time and place not less than 10 nor more than
30 days after the filing of the appeal for the purpose of hearing the appeal.
Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to all parties
at which time they may appear and be heard. The determination of the
estimated cost by the Board of Commissioners shall be final in all cases.
§ 101-11. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 106
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of any notice,
order or direction of the Code Enforcement Officer or of any other
authorized employee of the Township shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 or more than $1,000 and
costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to
undergo imprisonment for not more than 10 days. Each violation of any
provision of this chapter, and each day the same is continued, shall be
deemed a separate offense.
B. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are reserved,
including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter.
The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of or noncompliance
with this chapter shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or
permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct
or remedy such violations and noncompliances within a reasonable
time. Any excavation, filling and/or grading in noncompliance with this
chapter may be declared by the Board of Commissioners to be a public
nuisance and abatable as such.
§ 101-8 ROSTRAVER CODE § 101-11
1:110
INSURANCE
§ 101-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-11
1:111

ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Proceeds
[Adopted 3-4-1998 by Ord. No. 370]
§ 106-1. Designated officer.
The Township of Rostraver hereby appoints the Township Secretary as the
designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 106-2. Certificate required.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
Township of Rostraver (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$7,500, unless the insuring agent is furnished by the Municipal Treasurer
with a municipal certificate pursuant to Section 508(b) of the Insurance
Company Law of 1921, as amended22 [and unless there is compliance
with Section 508(c) and (d) of the Insurance Company Law of 1921, as
amended,23 and the provisions of this article].
§ 106-3. Payment procedures.
Where, pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of the Insurance Company Law of
1921, as amended,24 the Municipal Treasurer issues a certificate or, at the
discretion of the municipality, a verbal notification which shall be confirmed
in writing by the insuring agent, indicating that there are no delinquent
taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against real property, the
insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided, however,
that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring agent
equal or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies
covering the building or other structure, the following procedures must be
followed:
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
designated officer of the municipality in the aggregate of $2,000 for
each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim,
this section to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less, the
amount transferred to the municipality shall be $2,000; or
B. If, at the time of a loss report, the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure, in an amount less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the insuring
22.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 341 et seq.
23.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 368(c) and (d).
24.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(i).
§ 106-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-3
1:113
agent shall transfer to the municipality from the insurance proceeds the
amount specified in the estimate.
C. The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
D. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the designated officer shall return the amount of
the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of the estimate to the
named insured, if the municipality has not commenced to remove,
repair or secure the building or other structure.
E. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall do
the following:
(1) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in a separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing, or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the municipality. Such costs shall include, without limitation,
any engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the
municipality in connection with such removal, repair or securing of
the building or any proceedings related thereto.
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent, when transferring the
proceeds, to provide the municipality with the name and address of
the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the
name and address of the named insured, the designated officer
shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have
been received by the municipality and notify the named insured
that the procedures under this subsection shall be followed.
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the municipality and the required proof of
such completion received by the designated officer, and if the
municipality has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the
municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund, and if excess funds remain, the municipality shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured.
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to this section, but not returned to the
named insured, such interest shall belong to the municipality. To
the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named
insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
F. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
§ 106-3 ROSTRAVER CODE § 106-3
1:114
§ 106-4. Adoption of procedures and fees.
The Township of Rostraver may by resolution adopt procedures and
regulations to implement the Insurance Company Law of 1921, as amended,
and this article, and may by resolution fix reasonable fees to be charged
for municipal activities or services provided pursuant to the Insurance
Company Law of 1921, as amended, and this article; including, but not
limited to, issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections and
opening separate fund accounts.
§ 106-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
421]
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per
violation, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 106-6. Filing of copies.
This article shall become effective immediately and a copy shall be filed with
the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development,
together with the name, position and phone number of the designated
officer.
section shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the named
insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of
funds to the named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the
damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 106-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-6
1:115
Chapter 112
JUNK AND JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 124.
Solid waste — See Ch. 161.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 106-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 106-6
1:116
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 6, Ch. 2, Art. B, of the 1989 Code]
§ 112-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 112-2. Junk dealers to obtain license annually.
No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer in the Township
without first having obtained a license from the Secretary, for which license
the fee shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners for each and every calendar year, that fee to be for the use
of the Township. The license shall be renewed annually on or before the
first day of January. In any case where a junk dealer's business shall be
established in the Township on or after the first day of July in any year, the
license fee payable by that junk dealer for the remainder of such year shall
be at one-half the yearly rate.
§ 112-3. Issuance and display of license.
The license provided for in § 112-2 shall be issued by the Secretary after
application for the license has been made by the person desiring to be
licensed. The license shall state the name of the person to whom the license
is issued and the premises from which the business is to be conducted. The
license shall be posted conspicuously upon the premises licensed under it.
The name of licensed junk dealer and the number of the license under which
he operates shall be placed in a conspicuous place on the outside of every
vehicle used for business purposes by that dealer.
A. As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings set out in this section:
JUNK — Any discarded material or article such as is not ordinarily
disposed of as rubbish or refuse, and shall include, but not be limited
to, scrap metal and scrapped motor vehicles, and shall not include any
garbage or other organic waste or any paper, rubbish, rags or other
flammable article or material.
JUNK DEALER — Any person, as defined in this section, who shall
engage in the business of selling, buying and dealing in junk or who
shall have on his premises more than one junked motor vehicle for a
period of 30 days of more.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which does not bear a
then-current registration plate and an approved and current inspection
sticker of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or of the
Motor Vehicle Bureau of any other state.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm or corporation.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:117
§ 112-4. Restrictions on junk dealers.
No person licensed under this article shall, by virtue of one license, keep
more than one place of business within the Township for the purpose of
buying, selling and dealing in junk; nor shall any such person engage in
business as a junk dealer in any place other than the place designated
upon his license; nor shall any such person, or any other person, operate
upon any street in the Township, whether from a vehicle or upon foot, as a
scavenger or an itinerant buyer or seller of junk.
§ 112-5. Conditions for transfer of license.
No license issued under this article shall be transferable from one person
to another person except when the ownership of a licensed premises shall
change. In any such case, the new owner shall apply for a transfer of such
license to him and shall pay a transfer fee as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 112-6. Maintenance of junk on licensed premises for 48 hours.
Every junk dealer licensed under this article shall keep and retain upon the
licensed premises, for a period of 48 hours after the purchase or receipt
thereof, all junk, including abandoned vehicles, received or purchased by
him where no title or proof of ownership is in the possession of that dealer,
and he shall not disturb or reduce the same or alter the original form, shape
or condition until that period of 48 hours shall have elapsed; provided,
however, that the dealer may remove and store valuable parts during that
period.
§ 112-7. Maintenance of licensed premises; when open for business.
Every junk dealer licensed under this article shall constantly maintain the
licensed premises in the manner prescribed by this section, as follows:
A. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a
nuisance or a menace to the health of the community or of residents
nearby or a place for the breeding of rodents and vermin.
B. No garbage or other organic waste and no paper, rubbish, rags or other
flammable articles or materials shall be kept on said premises, except
salable interiors which are affixed to the junked motor vehicles.
C. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received in the premises as junk,
all gasoline except in salvageable gasoline tanks shall be drained and
removed therefrom, and none shall be permitted to remain upon the
premises.
D. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the premises, and to facilitate access for firefighting
purposes, a reasonable areaway shall be maintained at all
times. A ten-foot fire lane width from traveled road or adjacent property
§ 112-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 112-7
1:118
§ 112-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, for every such
violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
or more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each
day's violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a separate
offense.
must be maintained on either side of rows of storage, which shall not
be deeper than five cars end to end.
E. The premises shall not be open for business nor shall any work be done
therein in connection with the storage, processing and transporting or
removal of junk at any time on the first day of the week, commonly
called "Sunday," or on any other day of the week before 7:00 a.m. or
after 6:00 p.m., except usable, repairable parts of automotive
equipment of an emergency nature.
§ 112-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-8
1:119

ARTICLE II
Storage of Vehicles and Other Materials
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 5, Ch. 2, and Part 6, Ch. 2, Art. F, of the
1989 Code; amended in its entirety 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
§ 112-9. Findings.
§ 112-10. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ABANDONED — Any item resting for 96 hours or more and which is
inoperable or without current registration plates or certificate of inspection
or in such a condition as to be unusable.
APPLIANCE — A stove, refrigerator, television set, furnace, water heater,
water softener, washer, dryer or mangle, any household article used to
perform any of the necessary work in a household and any article used in
business to increase production or to speed, ease or eliminate work.
BOAT — Any vessel capable of transporting a person on any river, stream,
creek, lake or ocean.
DISCARDED — Any item resting for 96 hours or more with no known or
apparent owner.
HOUSEHOLD FURNISHING — All items normally found and used in a
home.
JUNKED — Items sold or to be sold for scrap, being stripped or being used
or sold for parts.
TRAILER — A wheeled device used as a means of carrying, hauling or
conveying any vehicle, person, animal, object or boat.
A. The accumulation or storage of junked, abandoned or discarded
vehicles, trailers, boats, appliances and household furnishings creates a
hazard and danger to the health and welfare of people of the Township.
B. The accumulation or storage of junked, abandoned or discarded
vehicles, trailers, boats, appliances or household furnishings provided a
breeding area for rodents and other unhealthful animals.
C. The accumulation or storage of junked, abandoned or discarded
vehicles, trailers, boats, appliances or household furnishings creates an
attractive nuisance for children who are not aware of the danger
involved in them.
D. The accumulation or storage of junked, abandoned or discarded
vehicles, trailers, boats, appliances or household furnishings violates all
concepts of ecological and environmental principles.
§ 112-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-10
1:121
VEHICLE — An automobile, motorcycle, motorbike, minibike, bicycle, gocart,
truck or other wheeled means of conveyance, motorized or selfpropelled.
§ 112-11. Unlawful accumulation and storage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or store any junked,
abandoned or discarded vehicle, trailer, boat, appliance or household
furnishing on private or public property within the Township. All such items
shall be removed by the owner or occupier of those grounds after notice to
do so, and in default thereof, the Township may cause the same to be done
and collect the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of such costs
in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims or by
action of assumpsit or may seek relief by bill in equity.
§ 112-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, for every such
violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50
or more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each
violation of any provision of this article, and each day on which the same is
continued, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 112-10 ROSTRAVER CODE § 112-12
1:122
Chapter 118
MINIBIKES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 187.
§ 118-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited as the "Rostraver Township Minibike Control
Ordinance of 1974."
§ 118-2. Policy.
The Board of Commissioners of Rostraver Township has determined that the
prevalent use of minibikes, snowmobiles, two-wheeled and three-wheeled
vehicles or skid-equipped vehicles which are unlicensed and self-powered
have become a very serious detriment to the health, comfort, living
conditions, welfare and safety of the citizens of Rostraver Township. It is
hereby declared to be the policy of the Board of Commissioners to safeguard
the citizens of Rostraver Township from such danger and nuisance.
§ 118-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them:
BOARD — The Township Board of Commissioners.
PERSON — An individual, regardless of age.
VEHICLE — Self-powered, unlicensed, two-wheeled or three-wheeled
vehicle or skid-equipped vehicle.
§ 118-4. Enforcement.
The Rostraver Township Police Department shall have the power and duty
to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 118-5. Prohibited acts.
After the enactment of this chapter, no person or individual, regardless of
age, shall operate a self-powered, two-wheeled or three-wheeled vehicle
or skid-equipped vehicle that is unlicensed upon the streets and alleys or
public property of the Township.
§ 112-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-6
1:123
§ 118-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall first be given a
warning, and if that person is under the age of 16 years, that warning shall
be given to the parent or guardian of that minor, the warning shall be in
writing and recorded by the Police Department. Upon the second violation
of any provision by the same person, that person, upon conviction, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 or more than $600 and
costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each violation of any provision of
this chapter, and each day on which the violation continues shall be deemed
a separate offense.
Chapter 124
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 80.
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 101.
Junk and junk dealers — See Ch. 112.
Street openings — See Ch. 166, Art. I.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 178.
§ 124-1. "Nuisance" defined.
A. The word "nuisance," as used in this chapter, shall mean any use of
property within the Township or any condition upon property within the
Township that, other than infrequently, causes or results in annoyance
or discomfort to persons beyond the boundaries of that property;
interference with the health and/or safety of persons beyond the
boundaries of that property or of persons who might reasonably be
expected to enter upon or be in that property; and/or disturbance to or
interference with the peaceful use of the property of others within the
Township, in any case taking into consideration the location of the use
or condition and the nature and condition of the surrounding
neighborhood.
B. Specifically, the word "nuisance" shall include but shall not be limited to
the following:
(1) Loud playing of radios, television sets, jukeboxes, amplifiers and
other sound devices so as to be heard beyond the premises from
which the sound emanates.
(2) Operation of model airplanes equipped with gasoline engines on
any public street or on any public ground, including any
playground.
§ 118-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 124-1
1:124
(3) Keeping or harboring any dog or other animal or fowl which, by
frequent howling or barking or other noise or odor, shall annoy or
disturb the neighborhood or a number of persons.
(4) Maintaining or permitting the maintenance of any of the following
dangerous conditions, structures or premises:
(a) Open wells or cisterns.
(b) Open excavations.
(c) Unfinished buildings, foundations or other structures.
(d) Dangerous placement of materials or equipment.
(e) Lakes, ponds or swimming pools not properly safeguarded.
(f) Stagnant water in pools in which mosquitoes, flies or insects
multiply.
(5) Carrying on any building or road construction, excavation or
trenching or the operation of heavy equipment or trucks in
connection therewith at any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. of the following day without a special permit issued
by the Secretary. That special permit shall be issued only if it is
shown that the construction work must proceed as a matter of
emergency or that it can be carried on in such a manner or in such
a place that the public or residents will not be annoyed or disturbed
by that construction work.
(6) Carrying on construction work in such a manner that dirt is carried
by wind onto adjacent properties or that mud is tracked or drained
into streets adjacent to the project.
(7) Washing, tracking or otherwise depositing dirt, mud, soil, stone or
debris upon or onto the pavement of any street without removing
the material before 5:00 p.m. of the day on which the material was
deposited.
(8) Using any property or operating any business or other activity so as
to permit or cause smoke, soot, cinders, fly ash, dust, mud, dirt,
acid, noxious or offensive fumes, gases or odors to be carried off
the premises or to cause any water to become polluted by sewage,
industrial wastes, acid or other substance or to cause a glare from
lights or noise of such character as to cause annoyance to residents
or interference with the normal use of adjacent properties.
(9) Creation or maintenance of attractive nuisances, which is the
leaving of a dangerous instrumentality which by its character is
dangerous and attractive to children and in a place frequented by
children.
§ 124-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-2
1:125
§ 124-2. Unlawful to create or maintain nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for any person to create, continue, cause, maintain or
permit to exist any nuisance at any place within the Township.
§ 124-3. Removal or abatement of nuisance.
Any person who creates, continues, causes, maintains or permits to exist
any nuisance at any place within the Township shall, within 10 days after
notice from the Board of Commissioners to do so, remove or abate that
nuisance. If that person fails, neglects or refuses to abate the nuisance
within the time limit, the Board of Commissioners shall have authority, in
person or by its agents and/or employees, to remove or abate the nuisance
and, in so doing, shall have authority to enter upon the property of the
person in default. Thereupon, the Board of Commissioners shall collect the
cost and expense of the abatement or removal from the person who created,
continued, caused or maintained the nuisance and/or permitted it to exist,
that person having failed, neglected or refused to remove or abate the
nuisance, with an additional amount of 10%, in the manner provided for the
collection of municipal claims or by an action in assumpsit. The cost and
expense may be in addition to any penalty imposed under § 124-4.
§ 124-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, for every such
violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
or more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 124-5. Construal of provisions; enforcement.
This chapter shall not be construed to be the sole means for abatement
of nuisances within the Township, and nothing shall preclude any person
from proceeding individually or with other injured persons to effect the
abatement of a private nuisance. Furthermore, in the exercise of the powers
conferred in this chapter, the Township may institute proceedings in equity.
Chapter 129
OBSCENITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 129-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 124-2 ROSTRAVER CODE § 129-1
1:126
AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC — The matter or performance may be
purchased or attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee
arrangement or for a separate fee for each item or performance.
DISSEMINATE — To transfer possession of, with or without consideration.
KNOWINGLY — Being aware of the character and the content of the
material.
MATERIAL — Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written
material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other
pictorial representation or any statue or other figure or any recording,
transcription or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction or any
other articles, equipment or machines.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area
with less than a fully opaque covering, or the depiction of covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
OBSCENE — To the average person applying contemporary community
standards:
PERFORMANCE — Any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or other
exhibition performed before an audience.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
PROMOTE — To cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
SERVICE TO PATRONS — The provision of services to paying guests in
establishments providing food and beverages, including but not limited to
hostessing, hat checking, cooking, bartending, serving, table setting and
clearing, waiter and waitressing and entertaining.
§ 129-2. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
The predominant appeal of the matter, taken as a whole, is to prurient
interest; i.e., a shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct, nudity or
excretion;
A.
The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner sexual
conduct regulated by the laws of Pennsylvania; and
B.
The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
C.
A. Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to the public any
obscene material.
B. Knowingly engage in or participate in any obscene performance made
available to the public.
§ 129-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-2
1:127
§ 129-3. Notice of obscene material or action.
§ 129-4. Types of proceedings.
C. Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials
depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity or excretion,
utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements and other public sales
efforts that promote such commerce primarily on the basis of their
prurient appeal.
D. Provide services to patrons in such a manner as to expose to public
view:
(1) His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or
pubic hair region;
(2) Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region
or pubic hair region; or
(3) Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof.
E. Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above listed acts.
A. Actual notice of the obscene nature of such material, performance or
activity may be given to a person involved in or responsible for such
from the Township Solicitor or by the Chief of Police on the basis of
information lawfully gathered and supplied to them by the Township
police or citizens.
(1) Such notice shall be in writing and delivered by mail or in person to
the alleged offender.
(2) Such notice shall state:
(a) That in the opinion of the Township Solicitor or Chief of Police,
the activity engaged in falls within the prohibitions of § 129-2;
(b) That if such activity has not ceased within seven judicial days,
the Township will take appropriate legal action; and
(c) That a declaratory judgment proceeding as described in
§ 129-4 is available if a person engaged in the challenged
activity wishes to initiate the legal determination of whether
the activity is in fact obscene.
B. A person who promotes any obscene activity as prohibited in § 129-2 in
the course of his business is presumed to do so with knowledge of its
content and character.
A. In rem proceedings.
§ 129-2 ROSTRAVER CODE § 129-4
1:128
(1) The Chief of Police may apply to the Township Solicitor to institute
an attachment proceeding against any material which is alleged to
be obscene in a sworn affidavit.
(2) Upon filing of an application for attachment authorized in
Subsection A(1) of this section, the Chief of Police shall
immediately cause notice thereof to be served either personally or
by mail upon any person residing or doing business in the Township
who is known or believed by the Chief of Police to have any of the
following interests in material named in the complaint:
(a) The publisher;
(b) The wholesaler, distributor, circulator; and
(c) Every retailer or dealer who has or may have possession of any
material identical to material named in the complaint.
(3) Trial shall be held no later than the fourth judicial day following the
filing for attachment. No trial under this section shall be continued
or otherwise postponed more than one judicial day, but may be
conducted by a judge pro tempore in the event of unavailability of
the trial judge.
B. Declaratory judgment.
(1) Any person receiving notice from the Township Solicitor under
§ 129-3 that a specified activity is obscene may bring action against
the Township for a declaratory judgment to determine whether
such activity is obscene.
(2) If it is adjudged and declared by the court that such activity is
obscene, then the Township Solicitor may cause the publication of
such judgment in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township, and upon such publication, all persons residing or doing
business in the Township will be presumed to have actual notice of
the nature of the activity.
C. Criminal prosecution.
(1) The Township Solicitor may cause criminal charges to be brought
against any person presently engaging in or who has engaged in
any prohibited activity in violation of § 129-2.
(2) If the Township Solicitor has given notice pursuant to § 129-3, then
such criminal charges may be brought only after seven judicial
days after receipt of the notice.
D. Injunction.
(1) The Township Solicitor may seek a temporary restraining order in
the Court of Common Pleas in order to enjoin any obscene
performance or the service of patrons in violation of this chapter.
§ 129-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-4
1:129
§ 129-5. Evidence; defenses.
§ 129-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 133
PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 53. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 187.
§ 133-1. Definitions; applicability and scope.
(2) If the Township Solicitor has given written notice pursuant to
§ 129-3, he may, after the passage of seven judicial days, seek a
temporary restraining order.
E. Proceedings authorized by this section shall be in addition to any others
provided by law.
A. Expert affirmative evidence that the materials or activities are obscene
is not required when the materials or activities themselves are
presented as evidence.
B. It shall be an affirmative defense in any prosecution under this chapter
that allegedly obscene material was disseminated or presented for a
bona fide scientific, medical, educational, governmental or judicial
purpose by a physician, psychologist, teacher, clergyman, prosecutor or
judge.
A. In an in rem proceeding against sexually explicit material under
§ 129-4, the court shall, upon a determination by the trier of fact that
the material is obscene, make an order confiscating the obscene
material and authorize and direct the Chief of Police to, pending the
exhaustion of all appeals, destroy the same.
B. Whoever violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not less than $50 or more than $600 plus costs of prosecution and, in
default of payment of fine and costs, be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days.
C. After conviction, in addition to any other penalty imposed for a violation
of this chapter, the Board of Commissioners may, at its discretion,
revoke the business license of the offender, and upon conviction of the
offender for the second violation, the Commissioners shall revoke the
business license of that person.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
§ 129-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 133-1
1:130
§ 133-2. Certain processions and assemblages unlawful without
advance notice; permit required.
§ 133-3. Conditions of permit.
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people, without vehicles, which might
interfere with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street or with the normal use of any park, public square or public
ground.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that might interfere with the
normal movement of traffic. A procession does not include a funeral
cortege or a military convoy.
B. This chapter applies to processions and assemblages that would occupy
any street or sidewalk in the Township of Rostraver or any public
square, park or public ground of the Township.
C. Insofar as this chapter applies to processions and/or assemblages in
streets and highways, its provisions shall be construed and observed
along with provisions of the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania [particularly
Sections 6109(a)(3) and 6109(d)25] and of regulations and requirements
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation pertaining to
processions and assemblages on streets, including state-designated
highways. Those state regulations and requirements shall be strictly
observed in the Township, and where any such regulation or
requirement is stricter than or in addition to a provision of this chapter,
Township personnel and persons holding or participating in processions
or assemblages subject to state requirements and regulations shall
acquaint themselves with those regulations and requirements and
observe the same, along with specific provisions of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, organize or sponsor an
assemblage or procession, as defined in § 133-1, unless, at least nine
days in advance of the assemblage or procession, he gives written
notice to the Chief of Police of the character or object of the assemblage
or procession; the time, location and/or route; the expected number of
persons participating in the assemblage or procession; and the names
and addresses of the sponsor or organizer and/or officers of the group
or organization desiring to hold the assemblage or procession.
B. Following receipt of the notice, the Chief of Police, subject to approval
of the Board of Commissioners, shall have the authority, and it shall be
his duty, to issue a permit, which shall be granted without fee, for the
assemblage or procession.
A. The permit referred to in § 133-2 shall specify the conditions under
which it is granted, as follows:
25.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(3) and (d).
§ 133-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-3
1:131
§ 133-4. Police escort.
The Chief of Police may furnish whatever escort may be necessary or
advisable to protect persons and property and to maintain the peace and
good order of the Township.
§ 133-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall for every such
violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50
or more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Each violation of any provision of this chapter, and each day on which a
violation is continued, shall constitute a separate violation. In any case
when a violation is solely a violation of a provision of the Vehicle Code26 or
of any regulation adopted by authority of the Vehicle Code, the penalty shall
be as governed by the Vehicle Code.
Chapter 137
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Board — See Ch. 57. Solid waste — See Ch. 161.
§ 137-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
(1) The location of the assembly, and the route to be followed by the
procession.
(2) The portion of any street, public square, park or public ground to
be occupied.
(3) The estimated number of participants.
(4) The date and the hour when the assemblage or procession will
commence and the hour when it will end or be disbanded, as the
case may be.
B. The person to whom the permit is granted shall be responsible for
making certain that the conditions of the permit are adhered to, and
any failure to observe the conditions shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
26.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 133-3 ROSTRAVER CODE § 137-1
1:132
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Those facilities owned by the Township,
developed and implemented by or under the control and/or lease of the
Board of Commissioners or the Recreation Board. Recreational facilities
shall include ball fields, tennis courts, basketball courts, playgrounds,
football fields, soccer fields, baseball or softball fields and any other
facilities designated "recreational."
§ 137-2. Facilities to be used only for purpose for which designed.
No person shall come upon those facilities for any other purpose than those
for which the facilities are designed. That is to say, no games other than
tennis and/or modifications or variations of that game shall be played on
tennis courts; no facilities shall be used for purposes for which they were
not intended, conceived or designed.
§ 137-3. Township residents have priority in use of facilities.
The purpose of the Township creating and maintaining recreational
facilities is to provide those facilities for the use and pleasure of Township
citizens and residents, both those who are sui juris and minors, and
Township residents shall have priorities for their use. These priorities shall
be established either by and/or through the Board of Commissioners or
the Recreation Board or Commission of the Township. Any other person or
persons, not residents of the Township, shall have to remove themselves
from the facility upon demand of the facility for use by Rostraver residents
unless the same shall have been assigned or contracted by the Board of
Commissioners or the Township Recreation Commission.
§ 137-4. Refuse disposal regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or leave debris, papers, garbage
or refuse upon any recreation facility of the Township, and upon failure to
properly maintain and clean the same, the use shall be forfeited.
§ 137-5. Violations and penalties.
If any person fails to remove himself from any recreational facility upon
demand of or direction by a duly constituted officer of the Township,
including police officers, or designated officials of the Township, including
the Board of Commissioners and/or Recreation Commission members, then
this shall be considered to be a summary offense punishable by the District
Justice according to the following conditions:
A. Upon conviction of failing to remove himself upon appropriate direction
from Township recreational facilities, the District Justice may impose a
fine of not less than $50 or more than $600 and cost of prosecution on
each person guilty of such violation or, in default of payment of fine and
costs, the violator shall undergo imprisonment for not more than 30
days.
§ 137-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-5
1:133
§ 137-6. Civil actions to recover damages and losses.
For damages inflicted upon any recreational facility, the Solicitor is
authorized to institute a civil action to recover those damages and any
losses occasioned thereby, including costs of suit and reasonable attorney's
fees, all according to the Township Code and the municipal codes applying
to recreation.
Chapter 141
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 141-1. Permit and license required.
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser as defined in § 141-2
to engage in that business within the limits of the Township without first
obtaining a permit and license therefor in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 141-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — Any individual, whether resident of the
Township of Rostraver or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile,
motor truck or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from
house to house or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders
for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature
whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed
in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale
a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance
payments on such sales or not, provided that this definition shall include any
person who, for himself or for another person, firm or corporation, hires,
leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad box car, boat,
hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the
Township for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for
future delivery.
TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANT — Any person, firm or corporation,
whether principal or agent, who shall hire, lease or occupy any room,
building, vacant lot or other premises within the Township of Rostraver for
a period of less than six months for the purposes of purchasing or selling or
taking orders for any goods, wares or merchandise.
B. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to deposit refuse or debris in
violation of § 137-4, and upon conviction thereof before a District
Justice, that person shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 or more than $600 and costs
of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 137-5 ROSTRAVER CODE § 141-3
1:134
§ 141-3. Application for permit and license; application fee.
§ 141-4. Investigation and issuance.
A. Applicants for permit and license under this chapter must file with the
Secretary a sworn application in writing (in duplicate) on a form to be
furnished by the Secretary, which shall give the following information:
(1) Name and description of the applicant.
(2) Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold.
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
(6) The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or
orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced,
where such goods or products are located at the time said
application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery.
(7) A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately
prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be
two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.27
(8) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance,
the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor.28
B. At the time of filing the application, a fee as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners shall be paid to the Secretary
to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated in the application.
A. Upon receipt of the application, the original shall be referred to the
Chief of Police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's
business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the
protection of the public good.
B. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police
shall endorse on the application his disapproval and his reasons for the
same and shall return the application to the Secretary, who shall notify
27.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 6-2083(h), requiring fingerprints and evidence of good
character, which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
421.
28.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 6-2083(j), requiring a physician's statement, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421.
§ 141-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-4
1:135
§ 141-5. Fees.
the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit and
license will be issued.
C. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of
Police shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a permit
addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied
for and return the permit, along with the application, to the Secretary,
who shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the
applicant his permit and issue a license. That license shall contain the
signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name,
address and photograph of the licensee, the class of license issued and
the kind of goods to be sold under the license, the amount of fee paid,
the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative,
as well as the license number and other identifying description of any
vehicle used in such soliciting or canvassing. The Secretary shall keep a
permanent record of all licenses issued.
A. The license fee which shall be charged by the Secretary for the license
shall be an amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners per day, per week, per month or per year. Nonprofit
corporations, as the same are defined by the law of the commonwealth,
shall pay a license fee of an amount as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners per day, per week, per month
or per year.
B. The annual fees herein provided shall be assessed on a calendar-year
basis, and on or after July 1, the amount of such fee for annual license
shall be 1/2 the amount stipulated above for the remainder of the year.
C. None of the license fees provided for by this section shall be so applied
as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case
where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to
place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to the
Township for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be
discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce. Such
application may be made before, at or within six months after payment
of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and
supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross
volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other
information as the Township may deem necessary in order to determine
the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The Board
of Commissioners shall then conduct an investigation comparing the
applicant's business with other businesses of like nature and shall make
findings of fact from which it shall determine whether the fee fixed by
this chapter is unfair, unreasonable or discriminatory as to the
applicant's business and shall fix as the license fee for the applicant an
amount that is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory or, if the fee has
already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above
§ 141-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 141-5
1:136
§ 141-6. Applicant's bond; insurance.
§ 141-7. Exhibiting of license; furnishing of tax identification
number.
the fee so fixed. In fixing the fee to be charged, the Board of
Commissioners shall have the power to base the fee upon a percentage
of gross sales or any other method which will assure that the fee
assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like
nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the fees
as prescribed by Subsection A of this section. Should the Board of
Commissioners determine the gross sales measure of the fee to be the
fair basis, it may require the applicant to submit, either at the time
of termination of applicant's business in the Township or at the end of
each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross sales and pay
the amount of fee therefor, provided that no additional fee during any
one calendar year shall be required after the licensee shall have been
paid an amount equal to the annual license as prescribed in Subsection
A of this section.
A. Every applicant, not a resident of the Township, or who, being a
resident of the Township, represents a firm whose principal place of
business is located outside the State of Pennsylvania, shall file with the
Secretary a surety bond, running to the Township in the amount of
$1,000 with surety acceptable to and approved by the Board of
Commissioners, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with
all the provisions of the ordinances of the Township and the statutes of
the State of Pennsylvania regulating and concerning the business of
solicitor and guaranteeing to any citizen of the Township that all money
paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to
the representations of the solicitor and further guaranteeing to any
citizen of the Township doing business with that solicitor that the
property purchased will be delivered according to the presentations of
that solicitor. Action on such bond may be brought in the name of the
Township to the use or benefit of the aggrieved person.
B. In addition to such bond, every applicant except approved nonprofits,
whether resident or nonresident, must furnish to the Township a
certificate evidencing a comprehensive general liability policy covering
personal injury and property damage naming the Township as an
additional insured thereon. The amount of such coverage shall be no
less than $1,000,000 for personal injury and $1,000,000 for property
damage. [Added 9-2-2009 by Ord. No. 592; amended 7-5-2012 by
Ord. No. 628]
A. Solicitors and canvassers are required to exhibit their licenses at the
request of any citizen.
§ 141-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-7
1:137
§ 141-8. Badges.
The Secretary shall issue to each licensee at the time of delivery of his
license a badge which shall contain the words "Licensed Solicitor," the
period for which the license is issued and the number of the license,
in letters and figures easily discernible from a distance of 10 feet. The
badge shall, during the time that licensee is engaged in soliciting, be worn
constantly by the licensee on the front of his outer garment in such a way
as to be conspicuous.
§ 141-9. Transient retail merchants. [Added 9-7-1993 by Ord. No.
273]
B. Each solicitor and canvasser except approved nonprofits must furnish
to the Township a tax identification number as issued by the Internal
Revenue Service. [Added 9-2-2009 by Ord. No. 592]
A. Cleanup requirements. Each transient retail merchant selling food or
drink ready to consume must provide a sufficient litter receptacle for
customer use. Each transient retail merchant must keep the area within
a fifty-foot radius of any truck, wagon, cart, stand, tent or vending
station used by such merchant reasonably clean of all litter and trash
that originates from the goods, drink and/or food sold by the transient
retail merchant, such as wrappers, sacks, cups, napkins and the like.
Each transient retail merchant shall pay for a commercial garbage
service account at not less than the minimum per month.
B. Property use. No license shall be issued to a transient retail merchant
who is using a site owned by another except upon proof of written
permission to use said site, signed by the owner thereof. Such proof of
written permission shall be provided to the Township prior to issuance
of the license and shall be available for inspection at all times the
licensed business is operating within the Township.
C. Applicable permits required. No license shall be issued to a transient
retail merchant except upon proof that the applicant has all valid
licenses or permits required by any authority having jurisdiction over
the conduct of the business to be conducted by the applicant. Further,
all such required licenses or permits shall be kept current as a
condition of maintaining the Township licenses.
D. Unlawful transactions. There shall be no peddling or hawking of any
stolen property. Food vendors shall comply with all applicable food
handling and health regulations.
E. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any farmer
or his agent or employee who sells fruits, vegetables or other edible
farm produce grown by such farmer within Rostraver Township,
Westmoreland County, or to any nonprofit or charitable organizations
located in Rostraver Township where the income from the peddling
§ 141-7 ROSTRAVER CODE § 141-9
1:138
§ 141-10. Duty of police.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Township to require any
person seen soliciting or canvassing, and who is not known by that officer
to be duly licensed, to produce his solicitor's or canvasser's license and
to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be
violating the same.
§ 141-11. Required records.
The Chief of Police shall report to the Secretary all convictions for violation
of this chapter, and the Secretary shall maintain a record for each license
issued and record the reports of violation therein.
§ 141-12. Revocation of permits and license.
§ 141-13. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the Secretary in
the denial of a permit or license as provided in § 141-4 or the action of the
Board of Commissioners in the assessing of the fee as provided in § 141-5C
shall have the right of appeal to the Board of Commissioners. The appeal
shall be taken by filing with the Board, within 14 days after notice of the
action complained of has been mailed to that person's last known address, a
entirely benefits such nonprofit or charitable organization; provided,
however, that they make application with the Township.
A. Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the Board of Commissioners, after notice and hearing, for
any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as solicitor or as canvasser.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business of soliciting or of canvassing in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set
for hearing.
§ 141-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-13
1:139
written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Board
of Commissioners shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal and
notice of the hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner
as provided in § 141-12 for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision
and order of the Board of Commissioners on the appeal shall be final and
conclusive.
§ 141-14. Expiration of licenses.
All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire
on the 31st of December in the year when issued. Other than annual
licenses shall expire on the date specified in the license.
§ 141-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall for every such
violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 or
more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 145
PROPERTY, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 137.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 166.
Streetlighting — See Ch. 169.
§ 145-1. Unlawful to tamper with public property or property on
street, alley or public ground.
No person shall destroy or injure, in any way whatsoever, or tamper with
or deface any public property of the Township or any authority thereof
within or without the Township or any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work,
building, streetlight or gas or water stop box or other facility of any public
utility on or in any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground in the Township.
"Defacement" shall include, but shall not be limited to, the making of graffiti
or other markings upon any of the property herein referred to or upon the
surface of any street, alley, sidewalk or curb in the Township.
§ 145-2. Unlawful to tamper with stakes, posts or monuments.
No person shall in any manner interfere with or meddle with or pull, drive,
change, alter or destroy any stake, post, monument or other evidence of
any elevation, grade, line, location, corner or angle in the Township made,
placed or set, or hereafter made, placed or set, or caused to be done by the
authorities of the Township in any survey of or in any street, alley or public
§ 141-13 ROSTRAVER CODE § 145-2
1:140
ground in the Township to evidence the location, elevation, line, grade,
corner or angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, drain or
other public work, matter or thing.
§ 145-3. Unlawful to tamper with warning lamps, signs or
barricades.
No person shall willfully or maliciously destroy, remove, deface, obliterate
or cover up any lamp, warning sign or barricade erected by the authorities
of the Township or by any person doing work by permission of the
authorities of the Township on any street, alley, sidewalk or bridge in the
Township or on any public ground of the Township, whether located within
or without the Township, as a warning of danger.
§ 145-4. Unlawful to take earth, stone or other material from street,
alley or public ground.
No person shall take any earth, stone or other material from any street,
alley or public ground in the Township.
§ 145-5. Certain activities not prohibited.
This chapter shall not apply to normal activities in connection with the
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public grounds and the structures and fixtures located thereon or therein or
to incidental results of work done thereon or therein upon permit from or
by authority of the Township.
§ 145-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 or more than $600
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The fact that a violator has
been penalized, after hearing, as herein provided, shall not preclude the
Township or other injured party from taking proper legal action to recover
damages resulting from such violation.
Chapter 149
RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORT
§ 149-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning:
LESSEE — That person or persons, firm or corporation who has the use
of real estate of a lessor and is responsible for the giving of any type of
§ 145-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-1
1:141
consideration therefor, but excluding those who are lessees for a period of
less than 30 days.
LESSOR — Any person who grants a lease or otherwise permits the use of
his real estate or portion thereof for a consideration, monetary or otherwise,
for a period of at least 30 days.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
§ 149-2. Lessor's report on rental real estate. [Amended 2-23-2000
by Ord. No. 421]
All lessors, within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, or, in
case of real estate thereafter acquired or thereafter rented or becoming
available for rental, within 15 days after the acquisition, rental or
availability for rental thereof, as the case may be, shall report to the
Township Manager, in writing, addressed to him at the Township office, the
number of parcels or units of real estate presently or hereafter rented and
available for rental, a description (by address, number and/or some other
meaningful method) of said parcel or units and the names of its lessees and
other occupants at the time of such report, together with a description as
to which parcel or unit is occupied by each and the date of occupancy. The
report may be a copy of the lease agreement if one is in existence.
§ 149-3. Changes in occupancy and in identity of lessees.
Any change in the occupancy of real estate rented or leased or in the
identity of the lessee from that shown in the report of the lessor as required
in § 149-2 shall be reported by the lessor to the Manager within 15 days
after that change. It is intended hereby that lessors shall report a new lease
or a lessee who rents or leases a different parcel or unit of lessor's real
estate and when a parcel or unit of their real estate becomes vacant.
§ 149-4. Status of occupancy report.
The Manager may prepare a form report entitled "status of occupancy
report," which form report may require that information set forth above
and such other pertinent information that the Township Commissioners by
resolution may direct the Manager to incorporate into said report form. The
failure to have such report forms, however, shall not excuse the obligation
of lessors to provide the information required in this chapter. The report
may be filed by presenting to the Manager a copy of any lease agreement
which may be in effect or a copy of any other form that the lessor may be
required to submit to any other agency concerning tenants.
§ 149-5. Violations and penalties.
Any lessor who violates any provision of this chapter shall, for every such
violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 or
§ 149-1 ROSTRAVER CODE § 149-5
1:142
more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 155
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 101.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 164.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 166.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 149-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-5
1:143

ARTICLE I
Rehoboth Sewage District
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 11, Ch. 1, Art. A, of the 1989 Code;
amended in its entirety 10-7-1991 by Ord. No. 244]
§ 155-1. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Township of Rostraver does hereby adopt the rules and regulations
dated July 2, 1991, which sets forth the rules and regulations governing
the use of the Rehoboth Sewage Disposal System, its operation and
maintenance.
§ 155-2. Modification of rules and regulations.
The Rostraver Township Sewage Authority may, from time to time, modify,
add to or remove from said rules and regulations herein by its resolution.
§ 155-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
421]
Any person violating any of the provisions of the rules and regulations
adopted by the Rostraver Township Sewage Authority shall, upon conviction
thereof before any District Justice, be subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000 for each offense plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of such fine and cost of prosecution, shall be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days. For the purposes of this section, each day or a fraction
thereof during which any person shall remain in violation of any provision
of this article, the Rules and Regulations of the Rostraver Township Sewage
Authority or the Rostraver Township Sewage Authority resolution covered
hereby, or suffer or permit any condition which constitutes a violation of any
provision to continue, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 155-4. Enforcement agency.
The Rostraver Township Sewage Authority is designated as the enforcement
agency for the purposes of this article.
§ 155-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-4
1:145

ARTICLE II
Sweeney-Fellsburg-Pollock Run Drainage Area
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 11, Ch. 1, Art. B, of the 1989 Code]
§ 155-5. Applicability; "sewer system" defined.
All sewers and branches thereof for the disposal of sanitary sewage and/
or industrial wastes within the Sweeney-Fellsburg-Pollock Run Drainage
Area of the Township at any time heretofore and hereafter constructed or
otherwise acquired by the Township and/or any municipal authority of the
Township may cause to be created for such purposes are declared to be
for the purposes of Ordinance No. 157-1973 (§§ 155-5 through 155-22 of
this article) and the subject matter hereof a common system of sanitary
sewers for that drainage area of the Township, and are in that ordinance
and §§ 155-5 through 155-22, called the "sewer system."
§ 155-6. Certain properties to be connected on notice.
The owner or owners of each property accessible to and whose principal
building, heretofore and/or hereafter constructed, is within 200 feet of the
sewer system shall connect therewith at any time within 60 days after
notice to make such connection is served on such owner or owners by
the Township Commissioners, either by personal service or by certified or
registered mail. The terms "to connect," the "connection" and the "sewer
connection," as used in §§ 155-5 through 155-22, shall mean the extension
of the sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes drainage system of the
building or premises to the Y's, T's or other connections or extensions
thereof forming a part of the sewer system.
§ 155-7. Authority for Township to make connection at expense of
defaulting property owner.
In case any property owner or owners of such building or premises shall
neglect or refuse to connect with the sewer system within the sixty-day
period immediately following service of the notice to connect with the
sewer system, the Township Commissioners or their agents may enter upon
such property and construct such sewer connection. Upon construction of
such sewer connection by the Township Commissioners or their agents,
the Township Commissioners shall send an itemized bill of costs of the
construction of such sewer connection to the owner or owners of such
property, which bill shall be payable forthwith. In case the owner or owners
neglect or refuse to pay such bill of costs, the Township Commissioners may
file a municipal lien for the costs of said construction within six months after
the completion of the construction of such sewer connection, as provided
by law, or the Township Commissioners may pursue any other legal or
equitable remedy available to them to collect such bill of costs.
§ 155-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-8
1:147
§ 155-8. Permit required before commencement of work.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb the sewer system without first obtaining a
written sewer connection permit. Owners of premises desiring or required
to connect with the sewer system shall first make application therefor in
writing to the Township or its duly appointed agent for such purposes, who,
upon approval of the application, shall refer it to the Township Secretary.
§ 155-9. Bond required in certain cases.
§ 155-10. Issuance of permit.
Upon the return to the Secretary of the bond approved by the Township or
its duly appointed agent for those purposes, in all cases where a bond is
required under § 155-9, and upon payment of the sewer connection charge
provided in § 155-11, the Secretary shall issue a sewer connection permit
authorizing the applicant to connect the premises with the sewer system.
A. If the owner of the premises will have to connect with the sewer system
by means other than through an existing Y, T or other connections on
the sewer system and extension thereof to the curbline or cartway line
of the road or street, the Township Secretary, upon receipt of the
approved application, shall prepare and deliver to the applicant a form
of bond payable to the Township in the amount the Township shall
determine from time to time but not less than $1,000, with sufficient
corporate sureties to indemnify the Township:
(1) Against all damages for injury to the sewer system.
(2) To replace in good condition any curbing, pavement or earth
disturbed.
(3) To indemnify and save harmless the Township, for two years from
the completion of the work, from such repairs, costs and expenses,
all damages, injuries and such actions and suits as are caused or
occasioned by defective materials and workmanship and from all
damages from any accident and from all costs and attorney's fees
incurred by reasons of any matter, or thing done, committed or
omitted by such owner, his agents or employees under such permit.
(4) To comply in all respects with the ordinances, rules and regulations
of the Township now in force or hereafter to be passed.
B. Upon receipt by the Secretary of the bond duly executed, he shall
submit the bond to the Township or its duly appointed agent for such
purpose for approval.
§ 155-8 ROSTRAVER CODE § 155-11
1:148
§ 155-11. Sewer connection charge. [Amended 5-22-1990 by Ord.
No. 226; 9-1-1996 by Ord. No. 320]
The sewer connection charge shall be paid by all owners of property
connecting with and/or having use of the Township sewer system and
owners of property who may hereafter connect to and/or have use of said
system. The sewer connection charge shall be determined in accordance
with the following schedule:
Classification Full Rate
Single-family dwelling, one lateral $2,500
Multifamily dwellings, mobile home parks, apartments and
motel buildings, each public or private lateral
$650
For each unit from the first unit, to and including the
fourth unit
$2,500
For each unit in excess of the first 4 units $2,167
Churches, schools and other institutions, each lateral $2,500
Commercial and industrial, each lateral, each unit $2,500
Industrial, each lateral, each unit $2,500
§ 155-12. Property owners responsible for certain costs; liability for
loss or damage.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation of the sewer connection
and connection of the premises with the sewer system shall be borne by the
owner or owners of the premises. The owner or owners shall indemnify and
save harmless the Township from any loss or damage directly or indirectly
caused by or arising out of such installation and connection.
§ 155-13. Separate connections for individual buildings; exceptions.
The connection fee schedule notwithstanding, at least one separate sewer
connection shall be provided for every principal building, except that when
a building stands at the rear of another and no separate connection to
the sewer system can be made through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway, the sewer connection from the front building may be extended
to the rear building upon written approval of the Township or its duly
appointed agent for such purpose. In this case, each building shall be
subject to the payment of a separate connection fee. In a complex of
commercial or industrial buildings, each structure in the complex and each
unit in an integrated structure shall be subject to payment of a separate
connection fee.
§ 155-14. Supervision over and approval of materials and methods.
All sewer connections, materials therefor, joint materials and methods used
shall at all times be subject to the direction, supervision and approval of the
Township or its duly appointed agent for such purpose.
§ 155-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-15
1:149
§ 155-15. Manner of making connection.
The size and slope of the sewer connection shall be subject to the approval
of the Township or its duly appointed agent for such purposes, but in no
event shall the diameter be less than four inches nor shall the slope of
such four-inch pipe be less than 1/8 of an inch per foot. The invert of the
sewer connection at the point of connection with the building or premises
shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert at the point of
connection with the sewer system.
§ 155-16. Special permits required for certain types of connection;
drilling and tapping permit.
No person or persons shall connect with the sewer system other than
through, by or into Y's, T's or other connections or extensions thereof
furnished by the Township or its agent in the sewer system without a
special sewer connection permit and the designation of the location of said
connections by the Township or its duly appointed agent for such purpose.
No person shall drill into or tap any of the sewer system without written
permission from the Township or its duly appointed agent for such purpose.
§ 155-17. Notification of readiness for inspection; inspection
required before backfilling.
The owner or owners holding sewer connection permits shall notify the
Secretary when the sewer connection is ready for inspection and connection
with the sewer system. In no case shall backfill be placed until that
inspection has been made.
§ 155-18. Guarding of excavations; restoration of streets, sidewalks
and public property disturbed.
All excavations for sewer connections shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights to protect the public from hazards. All streets,
sidewalks and public property disturbed in the course of making a sewer
connection shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Township or its
duly appointed agent for such purpose.
§ 155-19. Abandonment of certain receptacles when sewer
available; use of temporary holding tanks.
A. After 60 days have elapsed since the owner or owners received notice to
connect with the sewer system as provided in § 155-6, the owner or
owners shall forthwith abandon all privies, cesspools, sinkholes, septic
tanks and other receptacles on premises for receiving sewage and/or
industrial wastes, or at any time thereafter to erect, construct, use or
maintain any pipe, conduit, drain or other facility for the discharge of
sewage and/or industrial wastes except into the sewer system, and all
privy vaults or cesspools or similar receptacles for human excrement
shall be cleansed and filled under the direction of the Township or its
§ 155-15 ROSTRAVER CODE § 155-19
1:150
duly appointed agent for such purpose, and no connection shall be
permitted from any privy vault or cesspool to the sewer system.
B. It shall be lawful, if the public sewer system is not available in the area
of a property requiring sewage services, for the owner thereof to build a
private sewage installation, which shall be either a holding tank or
small flow sewage treatment plant that in either case serves only one
lot and is approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. The private sewage installation may be used only until
public sewage treatment is made available by the Township of
Rostraver or its Sewage Authority and it shall be subject to the
following conditions: [Amended 6-3-1998 by Ord. No. 375]
(1) Any private sewage installation shall be located on the lot it serves.
(2) The owner will construct and properly operate the private sewage
installation in accordance with all requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Rostraver
Township and the Rostraver Township Sewage Authority.
(3) The owner will abandon the private sewage installation and
connect (at his cost) to central disposal facilities when trunk and
interceptor sewers are made available by the Township or its
Authority.
(4) No surface or roof drain water will be connected to the private
sewage installation.
(5) The owner will give adequate notice to Rostraver Township before
connecting a private sewage installation to enable Township
personnel to inspect the private sewage installation before it is
covered.
(6) In the event that the owner sells the property while a private
sewage installation is still in operation, the owner will include in
the deed a covenant that the private sewage installation will be
maintained by the grantees in accordance with this article.
(7) The owner will give a bond in the amount of $3,000 to Rostraver
Township as security for the compliance by the owner and the
successors and assigns of the owner with this article. [Amended
4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 510]
(8) After 10 days' notice to the owner, either Rostraver Township or the
Rostraver Township Sewage Authority may take such action as is
necessary to bring a private sewage installation in compliance with
this article if the owner does not do so. The owner will pay to the
Township or the Authority on demand any and all costs incurred by
the Township or Authority pursuant to this Subsection B(8).
(9) The owner will enter into a contract with the Township of Rostraver
evidencing the obligations of the owner under this article.
§ 155-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-20
1:151
§ 155-20. Certain liquids not to be drained into sewer system.
No owner shall discharge or permit the discharge of any stormwater,
surface water, swimming pool waters, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into the sewer
system.
§ 155-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of §§ 155-5 through 155-22 shall be
guilty of an offense and for every such violation, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 or more than $1,000 and
costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Whenever any such person has
been notified, in writing, by the Board of Township Commissioners, or its
duly appointed agent for that purpose, that that person is guilty of violating
any provision of §§ 155-5 through 155-22, each violation, and each full week
that a violation is continued after receipt of the notification, shall be deemed
a separate offense.
§ 155-22. Township authorized to delegate authority.
In all cases in §§ 155-5 through 155-22 where the Township is required to
perform an act, the Township may delegate this to its duly authorized agent.
§ 155-23. Schedule of sewer charges adopted.
A. The schedule of sanitary sewage collection, transportation and
treatment rates, rents and charges for sewer service for the Sweeney-
Fellsburg-Pollock Run Sewage System that is set forth in Schedule A
attached to and made a part of this section and that has been adopted
by Rostraver Township Sewage Authority is adopted by Rostraver
Township.
B. Schedule A: Sewer Service Rates. [Amended 5-22-1990 by Ord. No.
225; 7-1-1996 by Ord. No. 319; 2-4-1998 by Ord. No. 368;
3-3-1999 by Ord. No. 398; 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 422; 11-1-2006
by Ord. No. 554; 11-5-2008 by Ord. No. 578; 3-4-2009 by Ord. No.
588; 3-6-2013 by Ord. No. 638]
(1) Modification of rates: District 1.
(a) Residential users. The base rate for all residential users (as
such term is defined within the Authority's Rules and
Regulations) of Rate District 1 shall be $35 per month
minimum service charge plus $5.75 per 1,000 gallons of water
usage with an allowance of 4,500 gallons per quarter. The
monthly minimum service charge shall apply to each
residential unit connected to the system.
(b) Commercial users. The base rate for all commercial users (as
such term is defined within the Authority's Rules and
§ 155-20 ROSTRAVER CODE § 155-23
1:152
§ 155-24. Billing; property owner ultimately liable for payment.
All bills for sanitary sewage collection, transportation and treatment
charges shall be rendered to the owner, or after proper arrangements,
to the tenant of the premises to which the sewer service is furnished.
Nevertheless the owner of the premises shall in all cases be ultimately liable
for payment of such bills.
§ 155-25. Sewage Authority manages sewer system; adoption of
regulations.
The Board of Commissioners appoints the Rostraver Township Sewage
Authority to have charge and management of the sewer system and shall
issue from time to time rules and regulations governing the use, operation
and maintenance of said sewer system. The Township of Rostraver does
Regulations) of Rate District 1 shall be $35 per month
minimum service charge plus $15.75 per 1,000 gallons of
water usage. The monthly minimum service charge shall apply
to each commercial unit connected to the system.
(c) School districts. The base rate for all school districts (as such
term is defined within the Authority's Rules and Regulations) of
Rate District 1 shall be $35 per month minimum service charge
plus $15.75 per 1,000 gallons of water usage. The monthly
minimum service charge shall apply to each school building
connected to the system.
(2) Modification of rates: District 2.
(a) Residential users. The base rate for all residential users of Rate
District 2 (as such term is defined within the Authority's Rules
and Regulations) shall be $60 plus $5.75 per 1,000 gallons of
water usage with an allowance of 4,500 gallons per quarter.
The monthly service charge shall apply to each residential unit
connected to the system.
(b) Commercial users. The base rate for all commercial users of
Rate District 2 (as such term is defined within the Authority's
Rules and Regulations) shall be $60 plus $15.75 per 1,000
gallons of water usage. The monthly service charge shall apply
to each commercial unit connected to the system.
(c) School districts. The base rate for all school districts (as such
term is defined within the Authority's Rules and Regulations) of
Rate District 2 shall be $60 per month minimum service charge
plus $15.75 per 1,000 gallons of water usage. The monthly
minimum service charge shall apply to each school building
connected to the system.
(3) Tap fees. The fee associated with connecting to the Authority's
system shall be $4,750 per equivalent dwelling unit.
§ 155-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-25
1:153
hereby adopt the sewer system rules and regulations29 of the Rostraver
Township Sewage Authority dated August 2, 1974, in each and every
respect and in the form adopted by the Rostraver Township Sewage
Authority on August 2, 1974, and as the same may be amended from time
to time; the Township reserves the right to refuse permission to connect
directly or indirectly to the sewer system, to compel discontinuance of use
of the sewer system or to compel pretreatment of sewage and industrial
wastes by any establishment in order to prevent discharges deemed harmful
or to have a deleterious effect upon any portion of the sewer system.
Nonresidential establishments having large variations in rates of water
discharge shall install such devices at their own expense as may be required
and approved by the Township for equalizing waste discharge rates. The
Township's representatives shall have access at all reasonable times to
both residential and nonresidential establishments for the purpose of
establishing, determining or checking water consumption and employees,
wastewaters discharged to or excluded from the sewer system and the
character of discharges to the sewer system and to require installation and
maintenance of water meters at the property owner's expense subject to the
approval of the Township.
§ 155-26. When charges due and payable; penalty and interest
added to delinquent charges.
The sanitary sewage collection, transportation and treatment charges
imposed under § 155-23 shall be due and payable immediately upon receipt
of the bill by the owner and/or tenant and shall be paid not later than
the due date appearing on the bill. Said charges shall be subject to a tenpercent
penalty if not paid within 15 days from the billing date, and if not
paid before 90 days following the billing date, the charge plus the penalty
shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2% per month or any fraction thereof until
paid.
§ 155-27. Moneys deposited into proper accounts.
All sanitary sewage collection, transportation and treatment charges
received by the Authority or any other agency which the Township may
appoint shall be promptly deposited to the appropriate account established
for such purposes.
§ 155-28. When charges become effective and billings commence.
The sanitary sewage collection, transportation and treatment charges
imposed under § 155-23 shall become effective in accordance with Schedule
A of that section. Billings in accordance with this section shall commence
immediately.
29.Note: Copies of the Rules and Regulations referred to in this section are available for
public inspection during business hours in the Township Municipal Building.
§ 155-25 ROSTRAVER CODE § 155-29
1:154
§ 155-29. Responsibility for billing and collection.
The Board of Commissioners, either directly or through any person whom
it may by resolution appoint or with whom it may contract, including
the Authority, will render such bills for the sewer service charges and
surcharges imposed by §§ 155-23 through 155-34 and will make collections
thereof in accordance with those sections and any agreement or
agreements entered into between the Authority and the Board of
Commissioners relating to such billings and collection.
§ 155-30. Delinquent charges become lien; remedies available to
Township and Authority.
Each sewer service charge, surcharge and penalty imposed by §§ 155-23
through 155-34 shall be a debt due the Township or Board of Commissioners
and shall be a lien on the property served and, if not paid within 90 days
after the date of the bill, shall be deemed delinquent. In such event, the
Township or Board of Commissioners may proceed to file a lien in the
nature of a municipal lien in the office of the Prothonotary of Westmoreland
County, Pennsylvania, and to collect the same in the manner provided by
law for the filing and collection of municipal claims; or the Township or
Board of Commissioners may proceed to collect such delinquent sewer
service charge, surcharge and penalty by an action in assumpsit or by
distress of personal property on the premises. In the event of failure to
pay the sewer service charge, surcharge or penalty after they become
delinquent as herein provided, the Township or Board of Commissioners
shall be authorized, in addition to any other remedies authorized by law,
to remove or close the sanitary sewer connection and shall have the right
to enter upon the property served for such purpose and to take such steps
as may be necessary to accomplish such removal or closing. The expenses
of such removal or closing, as well as the expense of restoring any such
sewer service or connection, shall likewise be a debt due the Township
or Board of Commissioners and a lien on the property served and may
be filed and collected as hereinabove provided, and such sanitary sewer
connection shall not again be turned on or the sewage service restored until
all sewer service charges, surcharges and penalties, including the expense
of removal, closing and restoration, shall have been paid.
§ 155-31. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
421]
Any person who violates any provision of §§ 155-23 through 155-34 or of
the rules and regulations adopted in § 155-25 shall be subject to a fine or
penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense and
costs of prosecution, to be collected as fines or penalties are recoverable by
law, and, in default of payment of such fine and cost of prosecution, shall be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days; and whenever such person
shall have been notified by the Board of Commissioners or by the service
of a summons in a prosecution or in any other way that he is violating any
provision of §§ 155-23 through 155-34, each day that he shall continue such
§ 155-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-31
1:155
violation after receipt of such notification shall constitute a separate offense
punishable by a like fine or penalty.
§ 155-32. Effect of change of ownership or occupancy of property.
Change of ownership or occupancy of any property served by the public
sanitary sewage system as to which the service charge, surcharge or
penalty imposed by any provision of §§ 155-23 through 155-34 is delinquent
as provided in § 155-30 shall not be a cause for reducing or eliminating the
rights and remedies of the Township or Board of Commissioners set forth in
the above-cited sections.
§ 155-33. Township authorized to delegate authority.
The Board of Commissioners may by agreement with the Authority or
any other person delegate, transfer, set over and assign to the Authority
or to such other person any and/or all administrative duties, obligations
and rights of the Board of Commissioners under §§ 155-23 through 155-34
and such other duties, obligations and rights of that Board as may be so
assigned.
§ 155-34. Implementation by Township.
The proper officers of the Township are authorized and directed to make,
execute and deliver the necessary drafts or vouchers in payment for and
discharge of the obligation or obligations of §§ 155-27 through 155-34, if
any, and the work herein directed, and to do and perform all and every
act and thing necessary or convenient to fully and completely carry out the
obligations and purposes of the Township set forth in §§ 155-23 through
155-34.
§ 155-31 ROSTRAVER CODE § 155-34
1:156
ARTICLE III
Grease Remediation
[Adopted 3-3-1999 by Ord. No. 400]
§ 155-35. Title.
This article shall be hereafter known as the "Rostraver Township Grease
Remediation Ordinance."
§ 155-36. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXCESSIVE AMOUNTS OF GREASE — Discharge concentrations exceeding
100 parts per million (ppm) of grease, oil and fat downstream of an
interceptor or trap.
FOOD PREPARATION FACILITY — Any food establishment in any building,
room or place or any portion thereof or appurtenance thereto, where human
food or drink is mixed, cooked or otherwise prepared, offered for sale, sold,
served or given with or without charge to patrons, customers or guests for
consumption on the premises; provided, however, that this does not include
the mixing, cooking or other preparation of serving of food in single-family
dwellings to the resident family or its guest.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — An interceptor whose rated flow exceeds 35
gallons per minute (gpm) and which is located underground outside the
building.
GREASE TRAP — An interceptor whose flow rate is 35 gpm or less and
which is located inside the building. Grease traps shall be rated for a
minimum 22.5 gpm.
RESTAURANT — Any public eating place where meals are prepared, offered
for sale, sold and served to patrons, customers or guests for compensation
based on the price charged for and generally paid at the conclusion of each
meal. The words "meals," as used herein, means meals generally consisting
of courses embracing some kind of meat or its equivalent, vegetables,
bread, pastry, beverages and accompaniments.
§ 155-37. Plumbing to be in good repair.
Every building or room occupied or used as a food preparation facility or
restaurant shall be well drained. All soil pipes, waste pipes, drains or other
plumbing fixtures shall be of adequate size to enable a passage of any waste
intended to pass through it to the main public sewer. All drains, sewers,
waste and soil pipes, traps in water and gas pipes shall at all times be kept
in good repair and order so that no gasses or odor shall escape therefrom
and so that the same shall not leak, and all vent pipes shall be kept in good
order and repair and free from obstruction.
§ 155-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-38
1:157
§ 155-38. Grease traps and grease interceptors required.
§ 155-39. Installation of grease interceptors and traps.
A. On or before June 1, 1999, every building, room or space or part thereof
used as a restaurant or food preparation facility, whether new or
existing, shall install or cause to be installed a grease interceptor or
grease trap. The type of installation shall be determined by the total
fixture flow-through rate of potential grease laden fixtures discharging
through the building sewage lines as determined by the Rostraver
Township Sewage Authority. For flow-through rates 35 gpm or less, an
internal grease trap may be installed in certain existing structures used
as restaurants and food preparation facilities. For flow-through rates
exceeding 35 gpm, an external underground grease interceptor must
be installed in all new structures or changes of use involving
restaurants or food preparation facilities.
B. All new restaurants or food preparation facilities shall be required to
install an exterior, underground grease interceptor of a minimum onethousand-
gallon capacity, regardless of flow-through rate.
C. In all existing restaurants or food preparation facilities, there shall be
installed a grease interceptor or grease trap as determined by flowthrough
rate, as detailed above. In existing facilities where it is
determined by Rostraver Township that a grease trap is not sufficient,
Rostraver Township or its responsible agent or assigns may require that
a grease interceptor (as detailed above) be installed. Such insufficiency
shall be evidenced by excessive amounts of grease being discharged
into the public sewer system by a facility. All existing restaurants or
food preparation facilities shall, at a change of ownership or alteration,
install an exterior, underground grease interceptor of a minimum onethousand-
gallon capacity. In all existing structures, buildings or parts
thereof in which there is a change of use or occupancy to that of a
restaurant of food preparation facility, there shall be installed a grease
interceptor, minimum one-thousand-gallon capacity, regardless of flowthrough
rate. Each grease interceptor or grease trap shall and must be
installed by a plumber registered width the Westmoreland County
Plumbing Department.
A. Said grease trap or interceptors shall be installed at an appropriate
location along the sewer line between the restaurant and/or food
preparation facility and the lines entry into the main public sewer line.
An inspection site tee shall be installed between the interceptor
discharge and connect to the public sewer system. All installations shall
be in accordance with Rostraver Township Sewage Authority Rules and
Regulations.
B. No solid waste device, such as waste grinders, disposal, potato peelers,
etc., shall discharge through the grease trap or grease interceptor. Only
potential grease laden fixtures may discharge through the trap or
interceptor.
§ 155-38 ROSTRAVER CODE § 155-40
1:158
§ 155-40. Maintenance of grease interceptors and grease traps;
testing.
§ 155-41. Violations and penalties.
A. All grease interceptors and grease traps shall be maintained and kept in
good working order at all times. The interceptor or trap shall limit the
amount of grease discharged into the public sewer system to levels not
exceeding those permitted by the Rostraver Township Sewage
Authority. Oil/grease discharges shall not exceed 100 ppm downstream
of the interceptor or trap.
B. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any owner, lessee or agent of
any restaurant or food preparation facility to, at a minimum of,
quarterly inspect the grease interceptor or trap. A written record shall
be kept of all inspections. The inspection record shall, at a minimum list
the name (inspector and company), address, phone number of the
inspection/disposal company, the method and frequency of cleaning
schedule and the date of the cleaning/inspection. Such records shall be
presented to the municipality upon request. A more frequent cleaning/
inspection schedule may be ordered to be performed by the facility
when it is determined by the municipality that the facility is discharging
excessive amounts of grease to the public sewer system.
C. Rostraver Township Sewage Authority has the authorization to request
random samplings for the testing of grease traps in restaurants and
food preparation facilities. Said testing shall require the grease trap
samples to be sent to a laboratory. It shall be the responsibility of any
owner, lessee or agent of any restaurant or food preparation facility
who fails the laboratory analysis involved with the grease-trap testing
to pay the administrative costs that the Rostraver Township Sewage
Authority incurred as a result of the test. Said administrative cost shall
be in addition to any other fines or penalties that may be assessed in
accordance with this article. [Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 476]
A. Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of up to $1,000 for each
offense plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine
and cost of prosecution, shall be imprisoned for a period not exceeding
30 days. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
B. Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall cease to
discharge or infiltrate or permit the discharge or infiltration of the
violating materials and substances upon receiving 30 days' notice, in
writing, to do so. In case the violator neglects or refuses to do so, in
addition to the fines set forth above, Rostraver Township may proceed
to have the violating system disconnected and the cost thereof, together
with the penalty of 10% additional thereto, shall be collected from the
violator in the manner now provided by law. In addition to the penalties
provided above, the Township of Rostraver shall have the right, upon
§ 155-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-41
1:159
§ 155-42. Right of entry/inspection of facility maintenance.
§ 155-43. Rostraver Township Sewage Authority Rules and
Regulations.
The Township of Rostraver reserves the right to invoke and enforce a
Rostraver Township Sewage Authority regulation relating to the subject
matter of this article and to seek the imposition of the penalties provided in
the said Rostraver Township Sewage Authority Rules and Regulation.
proper notification, to cause water service to the offending premises to
be terminated by the provider thereof.
C. Whosoever fails the laboratory analysis involved with the grease-trap
testing shall pay the administrative fees within 30 days of notice. Any
fees not paid within 30 days may initiate legal action for collection.
[Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 476]
A. In the discharge of duties, Rostraver Township Code Enforcement
Officer, Rostraver Township Sewage Authority personnel or authorized
representative shall have the authority to enter, at any reasonable hour,
any restaurant or food preparation facility in the jurisdiction to enforce
the provisions of the article.
B. The Rostraver Township Code Enforcement Officer may cooperate with
or delegate his authority to the appropriate official of the Rostraver
Township Sewage Authority or other county agency charged with the
duty of enforcing any ordinance or regulations relating to the subject
matter of the within ordinance.
§ 155-41 ROSTRAVER CODE § 155-43
1:160
Chapter 161
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 76.
Junk and junk dealers — See Ch. 112.
Nuisances — See Ch. 124.
§ 155-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-43
1:161

ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 5, Ch. 6, of the 1989 Code]
§ 161-1. Declaration of policy.
The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of solid waste must
be controlled by the Township for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. The Board finds that to give effect to this policy, a
comprehensive system for the periodic collection, removal and disposal
of solid waste from all premises in the Township and, therefore, all such
occupants, owners, controllers of or persons maintaining premises within
Rostraver Township, are required to have solid waste collection service.
§ 161-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be
construed as defined in this section:
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of Rostraver Township.
CUSTOMER — Any person, firm or corporation receiving solid waste service
under the provisions of this article.
DISPOSAL AREA — Any area designated or provided by the Board from time
to time for the purpose of disposal of garbage.
GARBAGE — Any and all matter and materials which are rejected,
abandoned or discarded by the owners or producers thereof as offensive
or useless or no longer desired by said owners or producers thereof and
which by their presence or accumulation may injuriously affect the health,
comfort or safety of the community. It shall include rubbish, waste matter,
swill, salvageable waste and similar substances or materials of the nature
described above, but shall not include garden refuse.
PLACE or PREMISES — Every dwelling house, dwelling unit, apartment
house or multiple-dwelling building, trailer or mobile home park, store,
restaurant, rooming house, hotel, motel, hospital, office building,
department store, manufacturing, processing or assembling shop or plant,
warehouse and every other property or building where any person resided
or any business or activity is carried on or conducted within the Township
of Rostraver or where solid waste may accumulate.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible, useless, unused, unwanted or discarded
material or debris, either combustible or noncombustible, which by its
presence may injuriously affect the health, safety and comfort of persons
and property in the vicinity thereof.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, swill, rubbish and other discarded materials,
including but not limited to solid and liquid waste materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural and residential activities.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTOR — An agent or employee of the Township
assigned and directed by the Board to collect solid waste or any person or
§ 161-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-2
1:163
the agents, assignees or employees thereof to whom a license shall have
been issued under the terms of this article for the collection of solid waste
as hereinafter set forth.
STANDARD CONTAINER — A container watertight with a close-fitting
cover, cover handle and side handles or a sturdy polyethylene-type bag
which shall be secured at the opening when set out for collection. Insofar
as commercial establishments are concerned, "standard container" shall
be construed to mean a container which is both watertight, close fitted
with a cover and resistant to damage during handling. No commercial
establishment shall be permitted to use polyethylene-type bags for any
substances except paper or dry substances.
SWILL — All classes of putrescible animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable
matter, and shall include matter or substances used in the preparation,
cooking, dealing in or storage of meats, fowl, fish, fruits and vegetables that
are subject to immediate decay and the attraction of flies or rodents.
§ 161-3. Prohibited and permitted means of disposal.
§ 161-4. Restrictions on accumulation of solid waste. [Amended
7-7-2004 by Ord. No. 517]
Every person shall keep the premises occupied by him and every owner
of any unoccupied premises or property shall keep the same in a clean
and sanitary condition and shall not cause, suffer or permit any garbage
to accumulate on such premises or property for a period in excess of one
calendar week or cause, suffer or permit any rubbish to accumulate on his
premises for a period in excess of one calendar month; provided, however,
that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit any person from
keeping material on any premises or property during the period of active
construction, reconstruction or repair of a building or structure thereon
under a current valid zoning permit, nor the keeping of wood, neatly piled,
upon such premises for household use, nor the composting of grass or
trimmings.
A. No person shall throw, drop, leave, dump, bury, place, keep, accumulate
or otherwise dispose of any solid waste upon any property within the
limits of the Township, either with or without intent to remove the same
from such property, or upon any street, way, sidewalk, gutter, stream or
creek or the banks thereof or any public place or public property within
the limits of the Township; provided, however, that this section should
not apply to any land used by the Township for a disposal area.
B. All solid waste produced in Rostraver Township shall be deposited
within the Township in Board-approved disposal sites only. [Amended
2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
§ 161-2 ROSTRAVER CODE § 161-5
1:164
§ 161-5. Frequency of collection; transfer of contents of containers
to vehicles.
Collection of garbage or swill shall be made at least once a week and
collection of rubbish shall be once per month. The collector shall transfer
the contents of all containers into the collection vehicle provided therefor
without spilling any contents.
§ 161-6. Containers required. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
It shall be unlawful for any person occupying any premises within the
Township or for any person owning, controlling or maintaining any premises
within the Township where solid waste is created, produced or accumulated
to fail or neglect to obtain a sufficient number of standard containers
for receiving and holding without leakage or escape of odors all garbage
produced, created or accumulated upon such premises, except as
hereinafter provided; and all such persons shall deposit all such garbage
in such containers and all such containers shall be at all times kept in a
good usable and sanitary condition. Containers shall be kept continuously
closed except when garbage is being placed therein or removed therefrom
and shall at all times be closed against access of flies, rodents and animals
to the contents thereof. Garbage and rubbish may be deposited in the same
container, but if mixed, all rules relating to garbage hereunder shall then
apply to mixed garbage and rubbish. Containers shall not exceed 30 pounds
in weight when filled for removal.
§ 161-7. Number of containers required.
A. All places or premises within the Township shall have sufficient
containers to hold all garbage generated, produced or accumulated on
the place or premises during a one-week period, unless a more frequent
collection schedule has been approved by the Board. In determining the
sufficiency of the number of containers required, the following
minimum standards shall apply:
(1) One-family and two-family dwellings: one standard container per
dwelling unit.
(2) Three-family dwellings, apartment houses and multiple-dwelling
buildings: one standard container per dwelling unit.
(3) Motel, hotel, trailer park or mobile home park: one standard
container per unit or space.
(4) Commercial place or premises: not less than one standard
container.
B. Customers responsible for solid waste collection services to apartment
houses, multiple-dwelling buildings, commercial and industrial places
or premises may arrange for the use of detachable containers and/or
drop box containers instead of standard containers. These
arrangements shall be made with the licensed collector on the basis of
§ 161-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-7
1:165
§ 161-8. Containers not to be placed on cartway.
Solid waste containers shall not be placed or allowed to remain in or on any
cartway of a road.
§ 161-9. Placement of containers for collection.
On single-family and two-family premises, solid waste containers shall be
placed by the customer on the premises and collected by the collector as
follows:
§ 161-10. Placement of explosive or hazardous materials in
containers.
No person shall deposit in any container any explosive, highly flammable,
radioactive or otherwise hazardous material or substance without first
having made special arrangements therefor with the collector thereof.
§ 161-11. Prevention of spillage or blowing from vehicle.
All solid waste hauled by any person over public streets in the Township
shall be secured during the hauling thereof so as to prevent spillage or
blowing.
§ 161-12. Requirements for collection vehicles; avoidance of noise
by collector.
All collections shall be made with vehicles of a design approved by the
Board. All collections shall be made as quietly as possible, and use of any
unnecessarily noisy trucks or equipment is prohibited.
§ 161-13. License required; interference with license holder;
assignment of part of work by collector.
charges established for this purpose subject to the approval of the
Board.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the joint use of a
detachable container or drop box container by two or more customers
upon approval of the Secretary.
A. No greater than five feet inside the property line nearest to the street or
road where the solid waste collector maintains his route. All containers
shall be screened from public view when stored so as not to be
unsightly.
B. Bulky rubbish of unusual shape or size such as tree limbs or discarded
furniture, etc., shall be placed adjacent to containers and compactly
tied for pickup.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
collecting solid waste within the Township unless such person is a
§ 161-7 ROSTRAVER CODE § 161-13
1:166
§ 161-14. Removal and disposal of solid waste by producers.
Any person may remove or dispose of or may cause to be removed and
disposed of from premises occupied by him or under his control such
solid waste as is created or produced on such premises in excess of the
regular garbage collection made by the Township licensee if the following
conditions have been or will be complied with:
§ 161-15. License fee payable by collectors.
The license fee for engaging in the business of collecting solid waste in the
Township shall be the sum as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.
§ 161-16. Application for license.
Applications for licenses under this article shall be submitted in writing to
the Secretary. Each application shall contain the following information:
designated employee or agent of the Township or has been granted a
license by the Board so to do or is the employee of a person who has
been so licensed.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner with the
lawful operations of such licensee or his authorized agents or
assignees.
C. The Township may provide in any license issued pursuant to this article
that the licensee may assign a portion or portions of the garbage
collection services for which he is so licensed to one or more agents or
assignees upon approval of the Board. The licensee shall be responsible
for the operation and conduct of such agents or assignees.
A. Such removal and disposal activity shall be only by the owner or
occupant personally or by such owner's or occupant's regularly
employed personnel carried on the owner's or occupant's payroll
records as an employee.
B. All vehicles used in carrying out such removal and disposal activities
shall be owned by or under the exclusive control of owner or occupant
and shall meet all the requirements of this article and all other laws and
ordinances of the commonwealth and the Township. Any such vehicle
shall be subject to inspection by the Board.
C. The solid waste shall be disposed of in a Board-approved disposal site.
D. Any person engaged in the business of gardening or tree trimming or
building demolition is authorized to remove and dispose of rubbish as
an incident to such business but must comply with the rules and
regulations of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act.30
30.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 161-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-16
1:167
§ 161-17. Advertisement for competitive bids authorized.
The Board may, in its discretion, in lieu of considering applications for
license, advertise for competitive bids for licenses under this article.
§ 161-18. Issuance or refusal of license; content of license.
§ 161-19. Limit on number of licenses.
In order to preserve the health, safety and welfare of the people in the
Township, the Board retains the authority to limit the number of licenses for
the collection of solid waste which will be issued under this article.
§ 161-20. Insurance requirements.
A. Name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a firm or
partnership, names of all owners and partners of all classes, limited and
general, shall be listed. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and
titles of each of the officers and directors shall be listed and, in addition,
the names of all stockholders owning, holding or controlling 5% or more
of corporate stock shall be listed.
B. The type of license sought.
C. The number, kind and capacity of the vehicles and other equipment to
be used for such purposes.
A. Upon consideration of an application or bids for a license, the Board
may refuse to grant the requested license or may grant a license to any
such applicant or bidder as may appear from said application or bids to
be, in its opinion, best qualified to render proper and efficient collection
service.
B. Every license granted by the Board pursuant to the provisions of this
article shall cover the following matters:
(1) The name and address of the person, firm or corporation to whom
the license is issued.
(2) The type of collection service authorized.
(3) Whether the license is exclusive or nonexclusive, limited or
unlimited.
(4) The term for which the license is granted.
(5) Such other conditions as the Board may provide.
A. No license shall be issued under the provisions of this article nor shall
any such license be valid after issuance unless there is at all times in
force and effect to provide protection against liability for damages
which may be imposed for the negligence of the licensee or his
employees or agents a liability insurance policy or policies approved by
§ 161-16 ROSTRAVER CODE § 161-20
1:168
§ 161-21. Faithful performance bond of collector.
Each person granted a license to collect garbage pursuant to the provisions
of this article shall file with the Secretary a faithful performance bond or
other form of security satisfactory to the Township in an amount not to
exceed the sum of $5,000. Said bond or security shall be conditioned upon
the faithful performance of all the terms and conditions of said license and
the provisions of this article, insofar as they are applicable to said licensee.
§ 161-22. Conditions for transfer of license.
No license granted by the Board pursuant to the provisions of this article
can be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in
part, either by forced or involuntary sale or by voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation, change in control of the corporation or company, stock
transfer, transfer in trust, mortgage or otherwise, without the prior written
consent of the Board. The Board may grant or deny such a request or
impose such conditions as it may deem to be in the public interest.
the Solicitor and issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the commonwealth.
B. Such policy or policies shall provide protection against liability of the
licensee for the payment of damages in amounts, at least, as follows:
(1) In the amount of $100,000 on account of bodily injuries to or death
of one person;
(2) In the amount of $300,000 against the total liability of the licensee
on account of bodily injuries to or death of more than one person as
a result of any one accident;
(3) In the amount of $25,000 for one accident resulting in damage or
destruction of property, whether the property of one or more than
one claimant.
C. A liability insurance policy required by this section shall inure to the
benefit of any persons who shall be injured or who shall sustain
damages to property proximately caused by the negligence of the
licensee insured by this policy, his employees or agents.
D. Satisfactory evidence that the liability insurance required by this
section is at all times in full force and effect shall be furnished the
Secretary by each licensee required to provide such insurance.
E. The policy of insurance shall contain a provision against cancellation
except upon 10 days' prior written notice thereof to the Township
Secretary.
§ 161-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-23
1:169
§ 161-23. Revocation of license.
Any license granted by the Board pursuant to the provisions of this article
may be revoked by the Board if, after conducting a public hearing on the
revocation, the Board finds and determines that the person doing business
by virtue of such license has failed to comply with any of the terms of said
license or this article or has failed to render satisfactory collection services.
§ 161-24. Charges to customers for collection service.
§ 161-25. Customer may contract for excess collection.
Any owner or occupant of any premises may contract with the licensee or
his agents or assignees for special haul services for the removal of solid
waste in excess of services provided by the licensee under regular collection
fees established by the Board.
§ 161-26. Charges for collection; liability for payment.
A. Charges to customers for garbage service shall be set by the Board
upon approval of an application for a license or upon acceptance of a
bid received for a license. Said charges may be revised by the Board
from time to time.
B. The basic minimum rate in the schedule of charges adopted by the
Board shall provide for the collection of one standard container of
garbage per week per occupied premises by the collector.
C. Charges for industrial garbage service shall be as negotiated between
the collector and the customer and shall not be subject to Board review
and mediation.
A. Every person, firm or corporation owning any premises or place within
the Township is required to have solid waste collection service, the
charge of which shall be set by the Board of Commissioners by
resolution. Every dwelling unit, within or comprising a duplex, multiple
dwelling or building, apartment building, trailer or mobile home park
shall be charged a separate collection service or user's fee, which fee
shall be the same as charged to a single-family residence, and the
owner of the duplex, multiple dwelling or building, apartment building,
trailer or mobile home park shall be responsible for the payment of such
fee.
B. For industrial, business or professional customers, the contractor shall
establish rates for removal of such customers and shall negotiate and
collect such rates from said customers on a fair, uniform and equitable
schedule of rates. Payment and collection of such rates shall be directly
from the customer to the contractor; provided, however, that the
contractor agrees to allow each such customer a credit against the
rates negotiated with such customer in an amount equal to 1/2 the
amount paid by such customer to the Township under the terms of this
§ 161-23 ROSTRAVER CODE § 161-26
1:170
§ 161-27. Collection of charges.
article and the regulations established by the Township for payment of
garbage pickup service.
C. The contractor is authorized to make an extra charge to be negotiated
with each family customer for removal of matter subject to the terms of
this article if the matter is in excess of the load limit of four twentygallon
cans as hereinabove provided.
D. (Reserved)31
A. The Township garbage service or user's fee shall be collected by the
Township Tax Collector on behalf of the Board of Commissioners.
B. The Township garbage service or user's fee shall be placed upon the tax
duplicates for collection purposes by the Township Tax Collector.
C. Senior citizens, being those users or consumers 65 years of age and
older, shall be exempt from an amount of not more than 1/2 of the
service or user's fee charged to their residence, the actual fee for senior
citizens to be determined from time to time by the Township
Commissioners.
D. Delinquent accounts. Any payment not made on or before July 31 of
each year that this article remains in effect shall be delinquent and the
following penalty shall be imposed thereon:
(1) A penalty of 5% if payment is made on or after August 1, but prior
to November 1.
(2) Stoppage of service after November 1. Service shall be resumed
thereafter only on payment of accumulated fees and penalty for the
period of collection and noncollection, plus interest.
E. Legal remedies. The stoppage of services hereinbefore authorized for
nonpayment of collection charges shall be in addition to the right of the
Township to proceed for the collection of such unpaid charges in the
manner provided by law, either by action in assumpsit or by the filing of
a municipal claim or lien.
F. The Code Enforcement Officer or his agent is charged with the
enforcement of this article.
31.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding multifamily apartment complexes
comprising more than 50 individual dwelling units located on a single tract of land owned
by one firm or corporation described in one deed opting out of the Solid Waste Program of
Rostraver Township, added 12-30-2002 by Ord. No. 480, was repealed 10-6-2010 by Ord.
No. 608.
§ 161-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-28
1:171
§ 161-28. Records kept by collector; access of representatives of
Township.
Each person granted a license under the provisions of this article shall
maintain detailed records of all receipts and expenditures received or
incurred in the operation of such business, including all fees collected
for services rendered. The Township, its officers and employees shall be
entitled to inspect, audit and copy such books and records upon notice at all
reasonable times.
§ 161-29. Inspection of premises.
The Board may inspect all premises within the Township from time to time
and examine the conditions of the premises to determine compliance with
the provisions of this article.
§ 161-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, who violates or assists
in the violation of any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction, for every such offense shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $100 or more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and,
in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not
more than 30 days. Each day on which any such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 161-31. Approved types of collection vehicles.
The following types of collection vehicles are approved for solid waste
collection:
A. For public collection: garbage packer truck.
B. For removal of solid waste by producers: any truck with tarpaulin cover
which shall be attached and covering load at all times during
transportation of solid waste.32
32.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 5-6032, Annual fee for residential customers and senior
citizens, which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
421.
§ 161-28 ROSTRAVER CODE § 161-31
1:172
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 7-16-1990 by Ord. No. 232]
§ 161-32. Title.
The short title of this article shall be the "Township of Rostraver Recycling
Ordinance," and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 161-33. Definitions.
The following words and phrases used throughout this article shall have the
following meanings:
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act of 1988. 33
ALUMINUM — Empty all-aluminum beverage or food cans.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty food or beverage containers consisting of
steel and aluminum.
COLLECTOR — The entity or entities authorized by the Township of
Rostraver to collect recyclable materials from residences or authorized by
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments that do not receive
collection services through the Township of Rostraver contract to collect
recyclable materials from those properties.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes and those multiple-dwelling residential
buildings containing more than two dwelling units.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals that include, but are not limited to, fairs, bazaars,
socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more
individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin-coated food or beverage
containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Expressly excluded are non-container glass, plate glass, automotive
glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments and
in residences.
33.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 161-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-33
1:173
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, day-care centers, schools and universities.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Include, but shall not be limited to, automotive,
truck and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden
residues, chipped shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including grass
clippings.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Any properties having two or
more dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Public facilities operated by the Township
of Rostraver and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or other
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material,
resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities and any sludge
not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste
Management Act34 from a municipal, commercial or institutional water
supply treatment plan or air pollution control facility. The term does not
include source-separated recyclable materials.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Rostraver.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and
opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
Expressly excluded are newspapers which have been soiled, color comics,
glossy advertising inserts and advertising inserts printed in colors other
than black and white often included with newspapers.
PERSON(S) — Owners, lessees and occupants of residences and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers. Due
to the wide variety of types of plastics, the Township of Rostraver may
stipulate specific types of plastic which may be recycled.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials generated by residences and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments which are specified
by the Township of Rostraver and can be separated from municipal waste
and returned to commerce to be reused as a resource in the development of
useful products. Recyclable materials may include, but are not necessarily
limited to, clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans,
high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, plastics Classes 1 and
34.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 161-33 ROSTRAVER CODE § 161-33
1:174
2 and any other items selected by the Township of Rostraver or specified
in future revisions to Act 101. The recyclable materials selected by the
Township of Rostraver may be revised from time to time as deemed
necessary by the Township of Rostraver.[Amended 4-3-2002 by Ord. No.
45935]
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be
disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized separation and
treatment of municipal waste (other than through combustion) and creation
and recovery of reusable materials.
RESIDENCES — Any occupied single-family or multifamily dwellings having
up to two dwelling units per structure.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The
term does not include source-separated recyclable materials or material
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for
beneficial use.
§ 161-34. Establishment of program; grant of power.
A. The Township of Rostraver hereby establishes a recycling program for
the mandatory separation and collection of recyclable materials and the
separation, collection and composting or other processing of leaf waste
from all residences and all commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments located in the Township of Rostraver for which waste
collection is provided through the Township of Rostraver contract or
any other collector.
B. Collection of the recyclable materials shall be made at least once per
month or more frequently as required by the Board of Commissioners,
by the solid waste collectors operating in the Township of Rostraver and
authorized to collect recyclable materials from residences or from
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments. The recycling
program shall also contain a sustained public information and
education program.
C. Specific program regulations are provided as an attachment to this
article.36 The Board of Commissioners is empowered to make changes
to program regulations as necessary, as described in § 161-41.
Subsequent changes in the program regulations may be made through
approval of the Board of Commissioners and public notice and
notifications of all affected parties.
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the recycling of plastics began 4-3-2002.
36.Editor's Note: Said regulations are on file in the Township offices.
§ 161-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-35
1:175
§ 161-35. Lead acid batteries.
Disposal by persons of lead acid batteries with other municipal wastes is
prohibited and shall be a violation of this article.
§ 161-36. Separation and collection.
A. All persons who are residents of the Township of Rostraver shall
separate all of those recyclable materials designated by the Township of
Rostraver from all other municipal waste produced at their homes,
apartments and other residential establishments, store such materials
for collection and place the same for collection in accordance with the
guidelines established hereunder.
(1) Persons in residences must separate recyclable materials from
other refuse. Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curbside
in containers provided by the Township of Rostraver for collection.
Any containers provided to residences for collection shall be the
property of the Township of Rostraver and shall be responsible for
leaving the allocated container within the residence or shall pay
the replacement cost of said container(s). Use of recycling
containers for any purpose other than the designated recycling
program or use of the recycling containers by any person other
than the person allocated such container(s) shall be a violation of
this article.
(2) An owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of a
multifamily rental housing property with more than two units must
comply with its recycling responsibilities by establishing a
collection system at each property. The collection system must
include suitable containers for collecting and sorting the recyclable
materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and written
instructions to the occupants concerning the use and availability of
the collection system.
B. All persons must separate leaf waste from other municipal waste
generated at their houses, apartments and other residential
establishments for collection, unless those persons have otherwise
provided for composting or other processing of leaf waste.
C. Persons must separate high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated
paper, leaf waste and such other materials as may be designated by the
Township of Rostraver generated at commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments and from community activities and store
the recyclable materials until collection or, in the case of leaf waste,
unless those persons have otherwise provided for composting or other
processing of leaf waste. A person may be exempted from this
subsection if that person submits documentation to the Township of
Rostraver annually indicating that the designated recyclable materials
are being recycled in an appropriate manner.
§ 161-35 ROSTRAVER CODE § 161-37
1:176
§ 161-37. Ownership of recyclable materials.
All recyclable materials placed by persons for collection by the Township of
Rostraver or authorized collector pursuant to this article shall, from time of
placement at the curb, become the property of the Township of Rostraver
or the authorized collector, except as otherwise provided by § 161-39 of
this article. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impair the ownership
of separated recyclable materials by the generator unless and until such
materials are placed at the curbside for collection.
§ 161-38. Collection by unauthorized persons.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation,
other than the Township of Rostraver or one authorized by the Board of
Commissioners or other entity responsible for providing for collection of
recyclable materials, to collect recyclable materials placed by residences
or commercial, municipal and institutional establishments for collection
by the collector then under contract with the Township of Rostraver or
another authorized collector, unless such person, firm or corporation has
prior written permission from the generator to make such collection. In
violation hereof, unauthorized collection from one or more residences or
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments on one calendar day
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
§ 161-39. Existing recycling operations.
Any residence or commercial, municipal or institutional establishment may
donate or sell recyclable materials to any person, firm or corporation,
whether operating for profit or not, provided that the receiving person,
firm or corporation shall not collect such donated recyclable materials from
the collection point of a residence or commercial, municipal or institutional
establishment without prior written permission from the Board of
Commissioners or other entity responsible for authorizing collection of
recyclable materials to make such a collection.
§ 161-40. Recycling of materials.
Disposal by persons of recyclable materials with wastes is prohibited and
shall be a violation of this article. The collected recyclable materials shall be
taken to a recycling facility. Disposal by collectors or operators of recycling
facilities of source-separated recyclable materials in landfills or to be
burned in incinerators is prohibited unless markets do not exist and the
collectors or operators have notified the Township of Rostraver Code
Enforcement Officer in writing.
§ 161-41. Enforcement and administration; violations and penalties.
A. The Board of Commissioners are hereby authorized and directed to
make reasonable rules and regulations for the operation and
§ 161-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-41
1:177
§ 161-42. Franchise or license.
The Township of Rostraver may enter into an agreement with public or
private agencies or firms to authorize it to collect all or part of the
recyclable materials from curbside.
§ 161-43. Modifications.
The Township of Rostraver may, from time to time, modify, add to or remove
from the standards and regulations herein and as authorized in § 161-41.
enforcement of this article as deemed necessary, including but not
limited to:
(1) Establishing recyclable materials to be separated for collection and
recycling by residences and additional recyclable materials to be
separated by commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments.
(2) Establishing collection procedures for recyclable materials.
(3) Establishing reporting procedures for amounts of materials
recycled.
(4) Establishing procedures for the distribution, monitoring and
collection of recyclable containers.
(5) Establishing procedures and rules for the collection, composting or
other processing of leaf waste.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this
article shall receive an official written warning of noncompliance for
the first and second offense. Thereafter, all such violations shall be
subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, any person, firm or corporation who or
which shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more
than $600 and costs of prosecution for each and every offense and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more
than 30 days. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
D. The Township of Rostraver reserves the right not to collect municipal
waste containing recyclable materials in combination with
nonrecyclable materials.
§ 161-41 ROSTRAVER CODE § 161-43
1:178
Chapter 164
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 97.
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 101.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 161-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-43
1:179

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 164-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Rostraver Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance.”
§ 164-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the Rostraver Township finds that:
A. Stormwater runoff from lands modified by human activities threatens
public health and safety by causing increased runoff flows and
velocities, which overtaxes the carrying capacity of existing streams
and storm sewers, and greatly increases the cost of public facilities to
convey and manage stormwater.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion of
streambeds and stream banks thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals
and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss
of recharge.
C. These impacts happen mainly through a decrease in natural infiltration
of stormwater.
D. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and other activities causing loss
of natural infiltration, is fundamental to the public health, safety,
welfare, and the protection of the people of the municipality and all the
people of the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a federal permit for stormwater discharges from
their separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
G. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
municipality.
§ 164-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-3
1:181
§ 164-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
Rostraver Township and its watersheds by minimizing the damages
described in § 164-1 of this chapter, through provisions designed to:
§ 164-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
stormwater runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247, the Municipalities Planning Code,37 as amended, and Act of October
A. Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause these problems.
B. Provide review procedures, performance standards and design criteria
for stormwater planning and management for both new and
redeveloped sites.
C. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems as much as
possible.
D. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which requires
a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
E. Focus on infiltration of stormwater to prevent degradation of surface
and ground water quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
F. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the
municipality and commonwealth.
G. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality to support those
uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in special
protection streams.
H. Prevent stream bank and streambed scour and erosion.
I. Provide for proper operations and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities that are constructed in the
municipality.
J. Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the NPDES
permit requirements.
K. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to
address nonstormwater discharges into the municipality’s separate
storm sewer system.
L. To provide Rostraver Township with a workable set of performance
standards that may be revised with new and improved stormwater
management practices.
§ 164-3 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-4
1:182
4, 1978, P.L. 864, Act 167, the Storm Water Management Act,38 and the
appropriate municipal code.
§ 164-5. Applicability.
A. This chapter shall be applicable to all subdivision or site plan and land
development applications, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a
waiver by the Township of Rostraver under the specifications of Article
IV, § 164-30 of this chapter. The chapter also applies to land
development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability
criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development
activities may take place at different times on different schedules. In
addition, all plans must be reviewed by Westmoreland County
Conservation District officials to ensure that established water quality
standards will be maintained during and after development of the site
and that postconstruction runoff levels are consistent with any local and
regional watershed plans.
B. To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the Township of
Rostraver has developed a set of performance standards that must be
met at new development sites. These standards apply to any
construction activity disturbing 5,000 or more square feet of land. The
following activities may be exempt from these stormwater performance
criteria:
(1) Any logging and agricultural activity which is consistent with an
approved soil conservation plan or a timber management plan
prepared or approved by Westmoreland County Conservation
District, as applicable.
(2) Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures less
than 1,000 square feet.
(3) Developments that do not disturb more than 5,000 square feet of
land, and do not create more than 1,000 square feet of impervious
surface, provided that they are not part of a larger common
development plan.
(4) Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary
by the Township of Rostraver.
C. When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a
redevelopment project as defined in Article II of this chapter, decisions
on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed
by stormwater sizing criteria found in the current chapter. This criteria
is dependent on the amount of impervious area created by the
redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all
37.Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
38.Editor’s Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 164-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-5
1:183
§ 164-6. Repealer.
Any ordinance or ordinance provision of the municipality inconsistent with
any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
§ 164-7. Severability.
In the event that any section or provision of this chapter is declared invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 164-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the
Township of Rostraver.
A. Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter to do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or
ordinance. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous
requirements for stormwater management, the specific requirements
contained in this chapter shall be followed.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
municipality’s requirements regarding stormwater matters which do
not interfere with the provisions of this chapter, such as local
stormwater management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type,
collection system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.).
§ 164-5 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-8
1:184
ARTICLE II
Word Usage; Definitions
§ 164-9. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 164-10. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of human activities and the natural processes, at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; the
changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; or earth disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for approval, including a project plan under § 164-23, to engage
in any land development involving earth disturbance 5,000 square feet or
greater at a project site in the municipality.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, measures
or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from land development,
to protect and maintain water quality and groundwater recharge and to
otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter, including, but not limited
to, infiltration, filter strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds,
permeable paving, grassed swales, forested buffers, sand filters and
detention basins.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word “includes” or “including” shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word “person” includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other
similar entity.
D. The words “shall” and “must” are mandatory; the words “may” and
“should” are permissive.
E. The words “used or occupied” include the words “intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained.”
§ 164-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-10
1:185
BUILDING — An independent and detached structure having a roof
supported by columns or walls or resting on its own foundation, including,
but not limited to, mobile homes, garages, greenhouses and other accessory
buildings and utilized for housing, shelter or enclosure of person, animals,
chattels or activity sites. 39
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and head ward cutting of
small channels and waterways due to erosion caused by increased rate or
volume of stormwater runoff.
COMMON DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A development plan that has been
approved, with a stormwater management plan that has sufficient space
for further development. Any further development other than that already
approved for stormwater management must have a revised stormwater
management plan submitted if it creates more than 1,000 square feet of
impervious area.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Westmoreland County Conservation
District.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a two-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater BMPs.
DETENTION — The temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater
management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and
providing gravity settling of pollutants.
DETENTION FACILITY — A detention basin or alternative structure
designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface
runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
DEVELOPER — A person that seeks to undertake any land development at
a project site in the municipality.
DEVELOPMENT SITE: PROJECT SITE — The specific tract of land where
any land development is planned, conducted or maintained.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A legal right granted by a landowner to a
grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management
purposes.
EARTH DISTURBANCE — A construction or other human activity which
disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development, road
39.Editor's Note: The former definition of "building permit," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 7-7-2004 by Ord. No. 514. See now the definition of "zoning
permit."
§ 164-10 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-10
1:186
maintenance, and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil,
rock or earth materials.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including
channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A site-specific
plan identifying BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation,
pursuant to 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
FEE IN LIEU — A payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the
stormwater performance standards required by this chapter.
FIRST FLUSH — The initial or early stages of stormwater runoff from a
storm event which commonly delivers a disproportionately large amount of
previously accumulated pollutants due to the rapid rate of runoff. The “first
flush” is defined as the first 1/2 inch of direct runoff from the contributing
drainage basin.
FLOODPLAIN — For a given flood event, that area of land temporarily
covered by water which adjoins a watercourse.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HOTSPOT — An area where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
HYDROGRAPH — A graphical comparison of runoff being discharged from
any particular site (measured in cubic feet per second) on the vertical axis,
versus time (measured as time into the storm event such as hour 1, 2, 3 etc.)
on the horizontal axis.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — A Natural Resource Conservation
Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff
potential groups. The groups range from A soils, with high permeability and
little runoff production, to D soils, which have low permeability rates and
produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the percolation of water
into the ground. Impervious surface includes, but is not limited to, any roof,
parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface
areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to
be impervious surfaces: pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant level associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
INFILTRATION FACILITY — Any structure or device designed to infiltrate
retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or
below grade.
§ 164-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-10
1:187
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as “hydrophytic vegetation.”
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group
of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or
lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure, or the division or
allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features; or a subdivision of land; excluding the conversion
of an existing single-family detached dwelling or single-family semidetached
dwelling into not more than three residential units, unless such units are
intended to be a condominium; and the addition of an accessory building,
including farm buildings on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Any activity which changes the volume
or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This
may include the building construction, grading, digging, cutting, scraping,
or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction,
substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or
involves the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
MUNICIPALITY — Rostraver Township, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania.
OFFSET FEE — A monetary compensation paid to a local government for
failure to meet pollutant load reduction targets.
OFF-SITE FACILITY — A stormwater management measure located outside
the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land
development activity.
ON-SITE FACILITY — A stormwater management measure located within
the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land
development activity.
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an
open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural
and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes
flowing partly full (for computational purposes).
OUTFALL — Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain.
§ 164-10 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-10
1:188
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity.
PROJECT SITE — The specific tract of land where any land development in
the municipality is planned, conducted or maintained.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any construction, alteration or improvement
exceeding 1,000 square feet in areas where existing land use is highdensity
commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily residential, such
as building additions, or increased impervious surface areas.
RETENTION — A practice designed to store stormwater runoff by collection
as a permanent pool of water without release except by means of
evaporation, infiltration, or attenuated release when runoff volume exceeds
storage capacity of the permanent pool.
RIPRAP — A combination of large stone, cobbles and boulders used to line
channels, stabilize stream banks, and reduce runoff velocities.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or introduction of
sediment into the waters of the commonwealth.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A system of pipes, open channels,
streets and other conveyances intended to carry stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even
layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by SCS, and found in its publication Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55, SCS, January 1975.
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — A classification of soils by the Soil
Conservation Service into four runoff categories. The groups range from A
soils, which are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which
are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years.
STORMWATER — The total amount of precipitation reaching the ground
surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads,
discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates.
STORMWATER RETROFIT — A stormwater management practice designed
for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater
§ 164-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-10
1:189
management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the
stormwater management requirements of the site.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
WATERCOURSE — A stream of water; river; brook; creek; or a channel or
ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state regulations,
protection of designated and existing uses (See 25 Pa. Code Chapters 93
and 96.):
WATERSHED — Region or area bounded peripherally by water parting and
draining to a particular watercourse or body of water.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
ZONING PERMIT — A permit or other approval issued by Rostraver
Township for construction and/or earth disturbance.[Added 7-7-2004 by
Ord. No. 514]
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a designated use, such as
cold-water fishery or potable water supply, which are listed in Chapter
93. These uses must be protected and maintained, under state
regulations.
A.
“Existing uses” are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Land development
must be designed to protect and maintain existing uses and maintain
the level of water quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams,
and to protect and maintain water quality in special protection streams.
B.
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After land development, these
characteristics can be impacted by addition of pollutants such as
sediment, and changes in habitat through increased flow volumes and/
or rates. Therefore, discharges to surface waters must be designed
and managed to protect the stream bank, streambed and structural
integrity of the waterway, to prevent these impacts.
C.
§ 164-10 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-10
1:190
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Requirements
§ 164-11. General requirements.
§ 164-12. Permit requirements by other governmental entities.
[Amended 7-7-2004 by Ord. No. 514]
The following permit requirements apply to certain land development
activities and must be met prior to municipal approval of subdivision
approval or land development plans, or issuance of zoning or occupancy
permits, where applicable:
A. All land development within the municipality shall be designed,
implemented, operated and maintained to meet the purposes of this
chapter through these two elements:
(1) Erosion and sediment control prevention during land development
(e.g., earth disturbance during construction); and
(2) Water quality protection measures after completion of land
development (e.g., postconstruction).
B. No approval of any subdivision or land development plans, or issuance
of any zoning permit or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any
earth disturbance at a project site within the municipality, shall proceed
until the requirements of this chapter are met, including approval of a
project plan under § 164-23 and a permit under PADEP regulations,
where applicable. [Added 7-7-2004 by Ord. No. 514]
C. Erosion and sediment control during land development shall be
addressed as required by § 164-14.
D. Water quality protection shall be addressed as required by § 164-15.
E. All best management practices (BMPs) used to meet the requirements
of this chapter shall conform to the design criteria contained in
§ 164-17 and shall use the calculation methods as described in § 164-18.
F. Techniques described in Appendix C (Low Impact Development)40 are
encouraged because they reduce the costs of complying with the
requirements of this chapter and the state water quality requirements.
G. The fee for review of any land development application shall be based
on the amount of land to be disturbed at the site, and the fee schedule
shall be established by the Township of Rostraver. All of the monetary
contributions shall be credited to a local budgetary category to support
local plan review, inspection and program administration, and shall be
made prior to the issuance of any zoning permit for the development.
[Added 7-7-2004 by Ord. No. 514]
40.Editor’s Note: Appendix C is on file in the Township offices.
§ 164-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-12
1:191
§ 164-13. Approved stormwater management project plan required.
§ 164-14. Erosion and sediment control during land development.
A. All earth disturbance activities subject to standards and possible permit
requirements by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by PADEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by PADEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way subject to approval by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
A. Any person conducting any new land development activities or
redevelopment activities creating an impervious area of 1,000 square
feet or greater in the municipality or involving earth disturbance of
5,000 square feet or greater, shall submit and obtain approval from the
municipality of a project plan meeting the requirements of this chapter,
prior to commencing the activity.
B. The project plan shall describe the BMPs for erosion and sediment
control, and the postconstruction BMPs for water quality protection.
C. The project plan shall follow the design criteria and calculation
methodology contained in §§ 164-17 and 164-18 respectively.
D. The requirements in this section apply to the total land development
project, even if it is to take place in stages.
E. All redevelopment projects over 1,000 square feet shall evaluate the
feasibility of reducing site impervious area by at least 20%. Where
project site conditions prevent the reduction of impervious area, then
stormwater BMPs shall be evaluated to provide qualitative controls for
at least 20% of the site’s impervious area.
A. Earth disturbance activities of 5,000 square feet or greater require
design, implementation and maintenance of erosion and sediment
control BMPs that control erosion and prevent sediment pollution
during the earth disturbance activities.
B. The BMPs shall be identified in a plan, and a permit, if applicable, as
required by PADEP regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
§ 164-12 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-14
1:192
§ 164-15. Water quality requirements after land development is
complete.
C. The local county conservation districts are frequently delegated the
authority to issue permits and other approvals by PADEP. Evidence of
any necessary permits for the earth disturbance activities from the
appropriate PADEP regional office, or the local county conservation
district office if delegated by DEP, must be provided to the municipality.
D. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, shall be available at the project
site at all times.
A. The project plan shall specify permanent stormwater BMPs to be
implemented, operated and maintained to meet legal water quality
requirements. Because water quality requirements vary depending on
the uses of the water bodies in the watershed, a framework
methodology is provided here.
B. In order to protect and maintain water quality, additional stormwater
runoff created by the development project must be captured, stored and
treated. In addition, postconstruction stormwater infiltration of runoff
must replicate preconstruction infiltration of runoff to the maximum
extent possible, in high quality and exceptional value watersheds,
special requirements may apply.
C. The volume of additional stormwater runoff to be captured, stored and
treated is called the “water quality volume” (WQv).
(1) The formula for determining WQv is:
WQv = [(P) (Rv) (A)]/12], where:
P = Rainfall depth in inches, using the ninety-percent-storm, the
volume of rainfall for 90% of the storm events which produce
runoff in the watershed annually (e.g., 1.0 inches). (See Appendix
A.41)
A = Project area in acres
Rv = Volumetric runoff coefficient [0.05 + 0.009(I)], where I is
the impervious surface percentage (impervious area ÷ total
project area) x 100%
(2) In special protection watersheds, as described in 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93, this volume may be required to remain on site through
infiltration and other methods, to protect water quality. Guidance
can be obtained from PADEP.
(3) Runoff treatment BMPs must be employed where necessary to
ensure the water quality requirements are met.
41.Editor’s Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 164-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-15
1:193
(4) Design systems that are capable of removing 80% TSS and 40% TP
removal.
D. Water temperature is a particular concern in high quality and
exceptional value watersheds. Temperature sensitive BMPs and
stormwater conveyance systems are to be used and designed with
storage pool areas and supply outflow channels, and should be shaded
with trees. Vegetation shall be planted within the facilities, provided
that capacity for volumes and rate control as required by this chapter is
maintained.
(1) At a minimum, the southern half on pond shorelines shall be
planted with shade or canopy trees within 10 feet of the pond
shoreline.
(2) In conjunction with this requirement, the maximum slope allowed
on the berm area to be planted is 10 to one. This will lessen the
destabilization of berm soils due to root growth.
(3) A long-term maintenance schedule and management plan for the
thermal control BMPs is to be established and recorded for all
development project sites.
E. The applicant may, subject to approval of the municipality, use any of
the following stormwater credits, described in the following table, in
computing the required water quality volume:
Stormwater Credit Description
Natural area conservation Conservation of natural areas, such as
forest, wetlands, or other sensitive
areas in a protected easement,
thereby retaining their
predevelopment hydrologic and water
quality characteristics. Using this
credit, a designer may subtract
conservation areas from total site area
when computing the required water
quality volume.
Disconnection of rooftop
runoff
Credit is given when rooftop runoff is
disconnected and then directed over a
pervious area where it may either
infiltrate into the soil or filter over it.
Credit is typically obtained by grading
the site to promote overland flow or by
providing bioretention on single-family
residential lots. If a rooftop area is
adequately disconnected, the
impervious area may be deducted
from the total impervious cover.
§ 164-15 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-15
1:194
§ 164-16. Infiltration.
Stormwater Credit Description
Disconnection of non-rooftop
runoff
Credit is given for practices that
disconnect surface impervious cover
by directing it to pervious areas where
it is either infiltrated or filtered
through the soil. As with rooftop
runoff, the impervious area may be
deducted from the total impervious
cover thereby reducing the required
water quality volume.
Stream buffer credit Credit is given when a stream buffer
effectively treats stormwater runoff.
Effective treatment constitutes
capturing runoff from pervious and
impervious areas adjacent to the
buffer and treating the runoff through
overland flow across a grass or
forested area. Areas treated in this
manner may be deducted from total
site area.
Grass channel (open section
roads)
Credit may be given when open grass
channels are used to reduce the
volume of runoff and pollutants during
smaller storms. If designed according
to appropriate criteria, these channels
may meet water quality criteria for
certain types of residential
development.
Environmentally sensitive
rural development
Credit is given when a group of
environmental site design techniques
are applied to low-density or rural
residential development. This credit
eliminates the need for structural
practices to address water quality
volume. See Appendix C.42
F. The volume and rate of any stormwater discharges allowed under this
chapter must be managed to prevent the physical degradation of
receiving waters, such as by stream bank scour and erosion. If a
detention facility is proposed which is part of the BMPs approved for
the project, the facility (ies) must be designed to provide for a twentyfour-
hour extended detention of the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm
event (i.e., the stormwater runoff will be released over a minimum 24
hours for the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm event).
42.Editor’s Note: Appendix C is on file in the Township offices.
§ 164-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-16
1:195
A. Prevention of stormwater runoff is a key objective of Chapter 93 of the
DEP regulations, because runoff can change the physical, chemical and
biological integrity of water bodies thereby impacting water quality.
B. The project plan shall describe how these water quality protection
requirements will be met. Infiltration BMPs shall be evaluated and
utilized to the maximum extent possible to manage the net change in
stormwater runoff generated so that postconstruction discharges do
not degrade the physical, chemical or biological characteristics of the
receiving waters. These BMPs may be used to satisfy all or part of the
requirements in § 164-15.
C. Postconstruction stormwater infiltration of runoff shall replicate
preconstruction infiltration of runoff to the maximum extent possible. In
high quality and exceptional value watersheds, special requirements
may apply. Guidance is available from PADEP.
D. In calculating the volume of runoff that can be infiltrated at a site, the
following methodology shall be used:
(1) Methodology:
(a) Recharge volume calculation.
Rev = [(S)(Rv)(A)]/12, where:
Rev = Recharge volume (acre-feet)
S = Soil specific recharge factor (inches)
A = Site area contributing to the recharge facility (acres)
Rv = Volumetric runoff coefficient, Rv = 0.05 + 0.009 (I),
where I = percent impervious area; and
S shall be obtained based upon hydrologic soil group based
upon the table below:
Hydrologic Soil Group Soil Specific Recharge Factor
(S)
A 0.38
B 0.25
C 0.13
D 0.06
(b) If more than one hydrologic soil group (HSG) is present at a
site, a composite recharge volume shall be computed based
upon the proportion of total site area within each HSG.
(2) In selecting the appropriate infiltration BMPs, the applicant shall
consider the following:
§ 164-16 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-16
1:196
(a) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(b) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(c) Seasonal high-water table.
(d) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(e) Erodibility of soils
(f) Land availability and topography
(3) A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be performed to
determine the suitability of infiltration BMPs. The evaluation shall
be performed by a qualified professional and, at a minimum,
address soil permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to
sinkhole formation, and subgrade stability. The general process for
designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
(a) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and manmade
features within the watershed to determine general
areas of suitability for infiltration BMPs.
(b) Provide field-testing data to determine appropriate percolation
rate and/or hydraulic conductivity.
(c) Design infiltration BMPs for required stormwater volume
based on field-determined capacity at the level of the proposed
infiltration surface.
(4) Soil characteristics: subject to the specific considerations in
Subsection D(7) below:
(a) Infiltration BMPs are particularly appropriate in hydrologic soil
Groups A and B, as described in the Natural Resources
Conservation Service Manual TR-55.
(b) Low-erodibility factors (K factors) are preferred for the
construction of basins.
(c) There must be a minimum depth of 48 inches between the
bottom of any facility and the seasonal high-water table and/or
bedrock (limiting zones), except for infiltration BMPs receiving
only roof runoff which shall be placed in soils having a
minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the facility
and the limiting zone.
(d) There must be an infiltration and/or percolation rate sufficient
to accept the additional stormwater load, and to drain
completely as determined by field tests.
(e) Infiltration BMPs shall be located a minimum of 10 feet away
from the foundation wall of any building.
§ 164-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-16
1:197
(f) The infiltration system shall have positive overflow controls to
prevent storage within one foot of the finished surface or
grade.
(g) Infiltration rates shall not be used in computing the storage
volume of the infiltration system.
(h) Surface inflows shall be designed to prevent direct discharge
of sediment into the infiltration system.
(5) The recharge volume provided at the site shall be directed to the
most permeable HSG available, except where other considerations
apply, such as in limestone geology.
(6) Any infiltration BMP shall be capable of completely infiltrating the
impounded water within 48 hours.
(7) Extreme caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in
geologically susceptible areas such as:
(a) Strip mines;
(b) Where salt or chloride may be applied in deicing and other
winter applications, causing groundwater pollution since soils
do little to filter this pollutant; and
(c) Limestone areas:
[1] Whenever a basin will be located in an area underlain by
limestone, geological evaluation of the proposed location
shall be conducted to determine susceptibility to sinkhole
formations.
[2] The design of all BMPs over limestone formations shall
include measures to prevent groundwater contamination
and, where necessary, sinkhole formation.
[3] It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to verify whether
the site is underlain by limestone.
[4] The following note shall be attached to all drainage plans
and signed and sealed by the applicant’s licensed
engineer/surveyor or landscape/architect or geologist if a
detention facility is proposed: “I certify that the proposed
facility is/is not underlain by limestone.”
(8) During the period of land disturbance, runoff shall be controlled
prior to entering any proposed infiltration area. Areas proposed for
infiltration BMPs shall be protected from sedimentation and
compaction during the construction phase, so as to maintain their
maximum infiltration capacity.
§ 164-16 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-16
1:198
§ 164-17. Design criteria for stormwater management BMPs.
(9) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
received final stabilization.
A. Applicants may select a combination of runoff control techniques which
are most suitable to control stormwater runoff from the site. All
controls shall be subject to approval of the Municipal Engineer. The
Municipal Engineer may request specific information on design and/or
operating features of the proposed stormwater controls in order to
determine their suitability and adequacy in terms of the standards of
this section.
B. The applicant shall consider the effect of the proposed stormwater
management techniques on any special soil condition or geological
hazards which may exist on the development site. In the event such
conditions are identified on the site, the Municipal Engineer may
require in-depth studies by a competent geotechnical engineer.
C. The stormwater management BMPs shall be selected according to the
following order of preference:
(1) Site planning for locating proposed buildings, impervious areas and
grading which minimizes disruption of the natural site
characteristics.
(2) Minimization of impervious areas and promotion of retentive
grading.
(3) Implementation of innovative nonstructural measures (See
Appendix C.43).
(4) Infiltration of runoff on site.
(5) Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and natural
depressions.
(6) Stormwater detention/retention structures.
D. Any BMP which is a dam, culvert, stream, enclosure or outfall as
defined in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105 shall be designed according to the
requirement in those regulations.
E. Any stormwater BMP, which does not constitute a dam under 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 105, and is designed to store runoff and requiring a berm
or earthen embankment (i.e., detention basin), shall be designed to
satisfy the following:
43.Editor’s Note: Appendix C is on file in the Township offices.
§ 164-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-17
1:199
§ 164-18. Calculation methodology.
(1) Berms and earthen embankments shall be designed to provide an
emergency spillway to handle flow up to and including the onehundred-
year postdevelopment conditions.
(2) Berms and earthen embankments shall be designed to provide a
minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard above the maximum pool elevation
computed when the facility functions for the one-hundred-year
postdevelopment inflow.
(3) Water obstructions shall convey runoff from the twenty-five-year
design storm with a minimum of 1.0 foot of freeboard measured
below the lowest point along the top of the roadway, without
damage to the drainage structure or the roadway.
(4) Roadway crossings located within designated floodplain areas must
be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design storm.
(5) Drainage conveyances must be able to convey, without damage to
the drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year
design storm without surcharging.
(6) Adequate erosion and sediment control protection shall be
provided along all open channels, and at all points of discharge.
(7) All BMP facilities will be sized for the two-, ten- and twenty-fiveyear
storm and release ratings.
A. Stormwater runoff from all development and postdevelopment sites
shall be calculated using either the Rational Method or a Soil Cover
Complex methodology.
B. Any stormwater runoff calculations involving areas greater than 200
acres, including on- and off-site areas, shall use a generally accepted
calculation technique that is based on the NRSC Soil Cover Complex
Method. Table III-144 summarizes acceptable computation methods. All
methods will be selected by the design professional based on the
individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site. These assumptions shall be used in runoff calculations:
(1) Average antecedent moisture conditions.
(2) Type II distribution storm.
(3) Meadow in good condition shall be used in predevelopment runoff
calculations for all areas of existing cultivation.
(4) All areas other than cultivation shall use the land cover condition
which existed during the past 10 consecutive years.
44.Editor’s Note: Table III-1 is included at the end of this section.
§ 164-17 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-18
1:200
(5) All areas to be disturbed during construction and subsequently
returned to open space will be assumed to be reduced one
hydrologic group category level for postdevelopment runoff.
(6) If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land, the land use
shall be considered as “meadow” unless the natural land cover is
proven to generate lower curve numbers or Rational C value, such
as forested lands.
C. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return period storms presented in Table D-1 in Appendix D of
this chapter.45 If a hydrologic computer model such as TR-20, PSRM or
HEC-HMS is used for stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration
of rainfall shall be 24 hours. The NRCS S-curve shown in Figure D-1,
Appendix B,46 shall be used for the rainfall distribution.
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times of concentration for overland flow
and return periods from the design storm curves from PA Department of
Transportation Design Rainfall Curves (1986) (Figure B-2). Times of
concentration for overland flow shall be calculated using the
methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to time
by NRCS). Times of concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be
computed using Manning’s equation.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be obtained from
Appendix A.47
F. Runoff coefficient (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Appendix A.
G. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations, and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning’s roughness
coefficient (n) shall be consistent with those in Appendix A.
H. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using any
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
I. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the Storage-
Indication Method. For drainage areas greater than 20 acres in size, the
design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation method
45.Editor’s Note: Appendix D on file in the Township offices.
46.Editor’s Note: Appendix B is on file in the Township offices.
47.Editor’s Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 164-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-18
1:201
§ 164-19. Stormwater hotspots.
that produces a full hydrograph. The municipality may approve the use
of any generally accepted full hydrograph approximation technique,
which shall use a total runoff volume that is consistent with the volume
from a method that produces a full hydrograph.
J. The municipality may require that computed existing runoff rates be
reconciled with field observations and conditions. If the design
professional can substantiate through actual physical calibration that
more appropriate runoff and time-of-concentration values should be
utilized at a particular site, then appropriate variations may be made
upon review and recommendations of the Municipal Engineer.
Calibration shall require detailed gauge and rainfall data for the
particular site in question.
Table III-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method Developed
By Applicability
TR-20 or commercial
package based on
TR-20
USDA - NRCS When use of full model
is desirable or
necessary
TR-55 or commercial
package based on
TR-55
USDA - NRCS Applicable for plans
within the models
limitations
HEC - 1 U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers
When full model is
desirable or necessary
PSRM Penn State University When full model is
desirable or necessary
Rational Method or
commercial package
based on Rational
Method
Emil Kuiching (1889) For sites less than 200
acres
Other methods Various As approved by the
Municipal Engineer
A. A “stormwater hotspot” is defined as a land use or activity that
generates higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or
toxicants than are found in typical stormwater runoff, based on
monitoring studies. If a site is designated as a “hotspot,” it has
important implications for how stormwater is managed. First and
foremost, stormwater runoff from hotspots cannot be allowed to
infiltrate into groundwater, where it may contaminate water supplies.
Second, a greater level of stormwater treatment is needed at hotspot
sites to prevent pollutant washoff after construction. This treatment
§ 164-18 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-19
1:202
plan typically involves preparing and implementing a stormwater
pollution prevention plan that involves a series of operational practices
at the site that reduces the generation of pollutants from a site or
prevent contact of rainfall with the pollutants. Table 3.2 provides a list
of designated hotspots for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Under EPA’s stormwater NPDES program, some industrial sites are
required to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution prevention
plan. A list of industrial categories that are subject to the pollution
prevention requirement can be found in the commonwealth. In
addition, Pennsylvania requirements for preparing and implementing a
stormwater pollution prevention plan are described in the NPDES
general discharge permit. The stormwater pollution prevention plan
requirement applies to both existing and new industrial sites.
Table 3.2 Classification of Stormwater Hotspots
The following land uses and activities are deemed stormwater
hotspots:
Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities
Vehicle fueling stations
Vehicle service and maintenance facilities
Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities
Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.)
Industrial sites (based on SIC codes)
Marinas (service and maintenance)
Outdoor liquid container storage
Outdoor loading/unloading facilities
Public works storage areas
Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials
Commercial container nursery
Other land uses and activities as designated by an appropriate review
authority
C. The following land uses and activities are not normally considered
hotspots:
(1) Residential streets and rural highways.
(2) Residential development.
(3) Institutional development.
(4) Office developments.
(5) Nonindustrial rooftops.
§ 164-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-19
1:203
§ 164-20. General criteria and possible control methods.
(6) Pervious areas, except golf courses and nurseries [which may need
an integrated pest management (IPM) plan].
D. While large highways [average daily traffic volume (ADT) greater than
30,000] are not designated as a stormwater hotspot, it is important to
ensure that highway stormwater management plans adequately protect
groundwater.
A. Method of computation. Peak discharge and runoff shall be computed
using those methods listed in § 164-18.
B. Rainfall frequency data: as listed in Appendix A.48
C. Maintenance of natural drainageways. All natural streams, channels,
swales, drainage systems and/or areas of surface water concentration
shall be maintained in their existing condition unless an alteration is
approved by the municipality. All encroachment activities shall comply
with the requirements of Chapter 105 (Water Obstructions and
Encroachments) of Title 25, Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources. The applicant must refer to
Rostraver Township Zoning Ordinance, § 195-70, in regard to any
disturbance within 50 feet of a stream.
D. Methods of stormwater runoff detention and control. The following is a
listing of detention and control methods which may be utilized in
stormwater management systems, if appropriate. The choice of control
techniques is not limited to the ones appearing on this list.
(1) Detention basins (extended dry ponds for all Township-owned
facilities).
(2) Rooftop storage.
(3) Parking lots and street ponding.
(4) Seepage pits, seepage trenches or other infiltration structures.
(5) Porous pavement and concrete lattice block surfaces.
(6) Grassed channels and vegetated strips.
(7) Cisterns and underground reservoirs.
(8) Routed flow over grass.
(9) Decreased impervious area coverage.
E. The use of other control methods which meet the criteria in this section
will be permitted when approved by the Township Engineer. Various
combinations of methods should be tailored to suit the particular
48.Editor’s Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 164-19 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-20
1:204
§ 164-21. Stormwater management districts.
requirements of the type of development and the topographic features
of the project area.
A. In order to implement the provisions of the Rostraver Township
Stormwater Management Plan, the municipality is hereby divided into
stormwater management districts which shall be designated as follows:
(1) Water districts.
(a) Speers Run Watershed.
(b) Tyrol Boulevard Watershed.
(c) Unnamed tributary to Monongahela River No. 1 and No. 2
Watershed.
(d) Turkey Hollow Watershed.
(e) Webster Hollow Watershed.
(f) Wilko Hill Watershed.
(g) Beckets Run Watershed.
(h) Long Hollow Run Watershed.
(i) Pollock Run Water.
(j) West Newton Cemetery.
(k) Cedar Creek Watershed.
(l) Concord Watershed.
(m) Port Royal Watershed.
(n) Flack Hollow Watershed.
(o) Darr Road Watershed.
(p) Browneller Run Watershed.
(q) Lutz Run Watershed.
(r) All other watersheds within the Township.
(2) The location and boundaries of the stormwater management
districts are shown on an official map which is on file in the
Township office.
B. When a project or land disturbance activity is located in more than one
stormwater management district, stormwater may not be transferred
from a district with stricter stormwater management criteria to a
district with less strict criteria, unless the need for such a transfer is
§ 164-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-21
1:205
§ 164-22. Stormwater rate and quality.
identified in the county stormwater management plan, the regional
water quality management plan, or the state water plan.
A. Speers Run Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 90% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
B. Tyrol Boulevard Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 95% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
C. Unnamed tributary to Monongahela No. 1 and No. 2 Watersheds. There
shall be no increase in the rate of stormwater discharge from any
activity covered by this chapter than would have occurred from the land
prior to the activity, using the predevelopment as the prior condition.
The peak postdevelopment release rate of the stormwater from
detention facilities shall be 100% of the predevelopment rate. The
water quality discharge standards shall be the removal of 80% of the
total suspended solids load (TSS) for all storage structures that have a
volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for the twenty-five-year storm).
D. Turkey Hollow Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 100% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
E. Webster Hollow Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 95% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
§ 164-21 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-22
1:206
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
F. Wilko Hill Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 100% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
G. Beckets Run Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 100% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
H. Long Hollow Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 95% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
I. Pollack Run Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 90% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
twenty-five-year storm).
J. West Newton Cemetery Watershed. There shall be no increase in the
rate of stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter
than would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 95% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
§ 164-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-22
1:207
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
K. Cedar Creek Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 95% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
L. Concord Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 100% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
M. Port Royal Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 100% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
N. Flack Hollow Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 100% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
O. Darr Road Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 100% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
§ 164-22 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-22
1:208
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
P. Browneller Run Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 100% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
Q. Lutz Run Watershed. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak post development
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 100% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
R. All other watersheds. There shall be no increase in the rate of
stormwater discharge from any activity covered by this chapter than
would have occurred from the land prior to the activity, using the
predevelopment as the prior condition. The peak postdevelopment
release rate of the stormwater from detention facilities shall be 100% of
the predevelopment rate. The water quality discharge standards shall
be the removal of 80% of the total suspended solids load (TSS) for all
storage structures that have a volume greater than 1,000 cubic feet (for
the twenty-five-year storm).
§ 164-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-22
1:209

ARTICLE IV
Project Plan Requirements
§ 164-23. General requirements.
A. No approval of any subdivision or land development plans, or issuance
of any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any earth
disturbance, involving earth disturbance of 5,000 square feet or the
creation of 1,000 square feet of impervious surface or greater at a
project site within the municipality, shall proceed until a written
approval of a project plan is issued by the municipality.
B. The following general project plan requirements apply:
(1) Stormwater management design shall permit unimpeded flow
along natural watercourses, except as modified by stormwater
BMPs consistent with this chapter.
(2) The existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without permission of the
adjacent property owner(s).
(3) Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to
any applicable criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or maintained as
diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise provided by this
chapter. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and
discharged onto adjacent property, the applicant must demonstrate
that the resulting flows will not result in any increased flooding or
risk to human health and safety, and violation of the water quality
requirements herein.
(4) Where a development site is traversed by watercourses, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation,
the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may
adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement. In addition, maintenance, including mowing of
vegetation within the easement, shall be required. All such
easements shall be recorded in the County Recorder’s office.
Minimum easement width is 50 feet.
(5) When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for stormwater
surface drainage, open channels may be constructed conforming
substantially to the line and grade of such natural drainageways.
C. The following items shall be included in the project plan:
(1) General.
(a) General description of project.
§ 164-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-23
1:211
(b) General description of permanent stormwater BMPs, including
construction specifications of the materials to be used for
stormwater BMPs.
(c) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations
for all stormwater BMPs.
(2) Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on twenty-four-inchby-
thirty-six-inch sheets and shall be prepared in a form that meets
the requirements for recording in the offices of the Recorder of
Deeds of Westmoreland County. The contents of the map(s) shall
include, but not be limited to: [Amended 7-7-2004 by Ord. No.
514]
(a) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities
or other identifiable landmarks.
(b) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes greater than 15%, five-foot contour intervals may be
used.
(c) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project area.
(d) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, areas of natural
vegetation to be preserved, and the total extent of the
upstream area draining through the site.
(e) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of property lines.
(f) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
(g) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area that would
be added.
(h) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(i) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(j) Preflow drainage areas and postflow drainage areas with area
noted in acreage.
(3) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(4) The date of submission.
§ 164-23 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-23
1:212
(5) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(6) Additional information.
(a) A North arrow.
(b) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(c) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(d) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(e) Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including
hydraulic capacity.
(f) Overland drainage paths.
(g) A twenty-foot wide access easement around all stormwater
BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress from a public
right-of-way.
(h) The location and responsibility for maintenance of stormwater
management BMPs that would be located off-site. All off-site
facilities shall meet the performance standards and design
criteria specified in this chapter.
(i) Construction detail of any improvements made to sinkholes
and the location of all notes to be posted, as specified in this
chapter.
(j) Statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater BMPs to be fixtures that can be altered or removed
only after approval of a revised plan by the municipality.
(k) The location of all erosion and sediment control BMPs.
(l) The following signature block for the Municipal Engineer:
______________________, on this date (date of signature), have
reviewed and hereby certify that the Drainage Plan meets all
design standards and criteria of the Municipal Ordinance.
D. Supplemental information.
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted.
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this chapter.
§ 164-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-23
1:213
§ 164-24. Coordination with permit requirements.
For any activities that require a PADEP permit under Chapter 102 (Erosion
and Sediment Control), Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway
Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of PADEP
regulations, require a PennDOT highway occupancy permit, or require any
other permit under applicable state or federal regulations, the permit(s)
applications(s) (or confirmation of application by relevant governmental
unit) shall be part of the plan submittal.
§ 164-25. Project plan review.
(c) Stormwater management BMPs to be applied both during and
after development.
(d) Calculations on all storm pipe sizing, inlet grate capacity and
pipe outfall protection.
(e) Expected project time schedule.
(f) Fencing specifications. (See Appendix D.49)
(2) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable,
including all reviews and approvals, as required by PADEP.
(3) A geologic assessment of the effects of runoff on sinkholes as
specified in this chapter.
(4) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows)
on adjacent properties and on any existing municipal stormwater
collection system that may receive runoff from the project site.
(5) A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
PennDOT District Office when utilization of a PennDOT storm
drainage system is proposed.
E. Stormwater management BMPs.
(1) All stormwater BMPs must be located on a plan and described in
detail.
(2) When infiltration methods such as seepage pits, beds or trenches
are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic tanks,
infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater BMPs must be shown.
F. Maintenance. The project plan shall describe the maintenance
provisions as described in Article VII of this chapter.
49.Editor’s Note: Appendix D is on file in the Township offices.
§ 164-23 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-25
1:214
A. The Municipal Engineer shall review the project plan for consistency
with this chapter. The municipality shall require receipt of a complete
plan, as specified in this chapter.
B. The Municipal Engineer shall consider the municipal Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance50 provisions not superseded by this
chapter when reviewing the project plan.
C. For activities governed by this chapter, the Municipal Engineer shall
notify the applicant in writing, within 30 calendar days, whether the
project plan is consistent with this chapter. Should the project plan be
determined to be consistent with this chapter, the Municipal Engineer
will forward an approval letter to the applicant with a copy to the
Municipal Secretary.
D. Should the project plan be determined to be inconsistent with this
chapter, the Municipal Engineer will forward a disapproval letter to the
applicant with a copy to the Municipal Secretary citing the reason(s) for
the disapproval. Any disapproved project plans may be revised by the
applicant and resubmitted consistent with this chapter. There may be
additional charges for engineering reviews.
E. The Municipal Engineer shall notify the Rostraver Township Zoning
Officer in writing, within a timeframe consistent with the Municipal
Building Code and/or Municipal Subdivision Ordinance, whether the
project plan is consistent with this chapter and forward a copy of the
approval/disapproval letter to the applicant. Any disapproved project
plan may be revised by the applicant and resubmitted consistent with
this chapter.
F. For land development activities requiring a PADEP permit or other
approval, the Municipal Engineer shall notify PADEP whether the
project plan is consistent with this chapter and forward a copy of the
review letter to the municipality and the applicant. PADEP may
consider the Municipal Engineer’s review comments in determining
whether to issue a permit
G. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to approval of
the project plan by the municipality.
H. The municipality shall not approve any subdivision or land development
plan, or issue a building or occupancy permit, unless the project plan
complies with the requirements of this chapter as determined by the
Municipal Engineer.
I. The applicant shall be responsible for completing an as-built survey of
all stormwater BMPs included in the approved project plan. The as-built
survey, and an explanation of any discrepancies with the project plan,
shall be submitted to the Municipal Engineer for final approval.
50.Editor’s Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 164-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-25
1:215
§ 164-26. Retention of plans at project site.
A set of design plans approved by the municipality shall be on file at the site
throughout the duration of the development activity. Periodic inspections
may be made by the municipality or designee during development activities.
§ 164-27. Adherence to approved plan.
It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any development activity
on any property except as provided for in the approved project plan and
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to alter or
remove any BMP required by the project plan pursuant to this chapter or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to the
approved project plan.
§ 164-28. Certification of completion.
J. In no case shall the municipality approve the as-built survey until the
municipality receives a copy of an approved declaration of adequacy,
highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT District Office, and any
applicable permits from PADEP.
K. The municipality’s approval of a project plan shall be valid for a period
not to exceed two years. This two-year time period shall commence on
the date that the municipality signs the approved project plan. If
stormwater BMPs included in the approved project plan have not been
constructed, or if an as-built survey of these BMPs has not been
approved with this two-year time period, then the municipality may
consider the project plan disapproved and may revoke any and all
municipal permits and approvals and may result in the bond being
declared in default. Project plans that are considered disapproved by
the municipality shall be resubmitted accordance with § 164-23 of this
chapter.
A. At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee under § 164-43, the owner or his
representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of as-built drawings.
B. After receipt of the certification by the municipality, a final inspection
shall be conducted by the municipality or its designee to certify
compliance with this chapter.
§ 164-25 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-29
1:216
§ 164-29. Occupancy permit.
An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the certification of
completion has been secured or appropriate stormwater facilities bond is
in place. The occupancy permit shall be required for each lot owner and/or
developer for all subdivisions and land development in the municipality.
§ 164-30. Waivers for providing stormwater management.
A. Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required
by this chapter, unless a written request is filed to waive this
requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan
requirements shall be submitted to the Township of Rostraver for
approval.
B. The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be
waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant,
provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
(1) It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely
to impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter.
(2) Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of
stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater
management plan that has been approved by the Township of
Rostraver and the implementation of the plan is required by local
ordinance.
(3) Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility.
The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and
adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is
equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site
practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for
long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice.
C. In instances where one of the conditions above applies, Rostraver
Township may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these
stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation
measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a waiver, the
applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township of
Rostraver that the waiver will not result in the following impacts to
downstream waterways:
(1) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other
structures.
(2) Degradation of biological functions or habitat.
(3) Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation.
(4) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, property.
§ 164-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-30
1:217
§ 164-31. Fee in lieu of stormwater management practices.
Where the Township of Rostraver waives all or part of the minimum
stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver is based on
the provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided downstream of the
proposed development, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an
amount as determined by the Township of Rostraver. When an applicant
obtains a waiver of the required stormwater management, the monetary
contribution required shall be in accordance with a fee schedule (unless
the developer and Rostraver Township agree on a greater alternate
contribution) established by § 164-42, and based on the cubic feet of storage
required for stormwater management of the development in question. All
of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital
improvements program project, and shall be made by the developer prior to
the issuance of any building permit for the development.
§ 164-32. Dedication of land.
In lieu of a monetary contribution, an applicant may obtain a waiver of
the required stormwater management by entering into an agreement with
Rostraver Township for the granting of an easement or the dedication
of land by the applicant, to be used for the construction of an off-site
stormwater management facility. The agreement shall be entered into by
the applicant and Rostraver Township prior to the recording of plats, or, if
no record plat is required, prior to the issuance of the building permit.
D. Furthermore, where compliance with minimum requirements for
stormwater management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the
minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures
selected by Rostraver Township. Mitigation measures may include, but
are not limited to, the following:
(1) The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of
an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation.
These lands should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in
order to provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality
and aquatic habitat.
(2) The creation of a stormwater management facility or other
drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public
or private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities
designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and
standards of this chapter.
(3) Monetary contributions (fee in lieu) to fund stormwater
management activities such as research and studies (e.g., regional
wetland delineation studies, stream monitoring studies for water
quality and macroinvertebrates, stream flow monitoring,
threatened and endangered species studies, hydrologic studies,
and monitoring of stormwater management practices.)
§ 164-30 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-32
1:218
ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 164-33. Notice of commencement of construction; regular
inspections required.
§ 164-34. Right of entry.
A. The applicant must notify the Township in advance before the
commencement of construction.
B. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system
construction shall be conducted by the staff of Rostraver Township or
certified by a professional engineer or his/her designee who has been
approved by Rostraver Township. All inspections shall be documented
and written reports prepared that contain the following information:
(1) The date and location of the inspection.
(2) Whether construction is in compliance with the approved
stormwater management plan.
(3) Variations from the approved construction specifications.
(4) Any violation that exist.
C. If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified, in
writing, of the nature of the violation and the required corrective
actions. No added work shall proceed until any violations are corrected
and all work previously completed has received approval by the
Township of Rostraver.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in
regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the
municipality ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the municipality such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility’s
stormwater discharge.
D. Unreasonable delay in allowing the Director access to a BMP is a
violation of this article.
§ 164-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-35
1:219
§ 164-35. Submission of as-built plans required.
All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any
stormwater management practices located on site after final construction
is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional
engineer. A final inspection by Rostraver Township is required before the
release of any performance securities can occur.
§ 164-36. Landscaping and stabilization requirements.
§ 164-37. Inspection of stormwater facilities.
Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including
but not limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of
contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more
likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal
water or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater permit;
and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental
or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing
maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water,
groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and
evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
treatment practices. The minimum inspection shall be as follows:
A. Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been
either partially or wholly cleared or removed by development activities
shall be revegetated within 10 days from the substantial completion of
such clearing and construction. The following criteria shall apply to
revegetation efforts:
B. Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop
accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient
coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is
established over 70% of the seeded area.
C. Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be
accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient
overage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are
capable of controlling erosion.
A. The Township Engineer or his designee shall inspect all phases of
development of the site including but not limited to:
(1) Completion of preliminary site preparation including stripping of
vegetation, stockpiling of topsoil, and construction of temporary
stormwater management and erosion control facilities.
§ 164-35 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-37
1:220
§ 164-38. Record of installation and maintenance activities.
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater
management facility shall make records of the installation and of all
maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records of the installation and
of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least five
years. These records shall be made available to the Township of Rostraver
during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
§ 164-39. Failure to maintain practices.
If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the
maintenance covenant, the Township of Rostraver, after reasonable notice,
may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs
by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working
condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes
a danger to public safety or public health, the Township of Rostraver
shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater
management facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible
(2) Completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development improvements and
ground covers.
(3) During construction of the permanent stormwater facilities at such
times as specified by the Municipal Engineer.
(4) Upon completion of permanent stormwater management facilities,
including established ground covers and plantings.
(5) Upon completion of any final grading, vegetative control measures
or other site restoration work done in accordance with the
approved plan and permit.
B. No work shall begin on a subsequent stage until the preceding stage
has been inspected and approved by the Township Engineer.
C. It is the responsibility of the permittee to notify the Municipal Engineer
48 hours in advance of the completion of each identified phase of
development.
D. Any portion of the work which does not comply with the approved plan
must be corrected by the permittee within 72 hours. No work may
proceed on any subsequent phase of the stormwater management plan,
the subdivision or land development or building construction until the
required corrections have been made.
E. If at any stage of the work, the Municipal Engineer determines that the
soil or other conditions are not as stated or shown in the approved
application, he may refuse to approve further work and the municipality
may revoke existing permits until a revised plan is submitted and
approved.
§ 164-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-39
1:221
person shall begin remedial action immediately and shall complete within
five days, the maintenance and repair of facility in an approved manner.
After proper notice, Rostraver Township may assess the owner(s) of the
facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the
work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users
of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary
taxes by the county.
§ 164-39 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-39
1:222
ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 164-40. Required fees.
The fees required by this chapter are the municipal project plan review
fee and the municipality inspection fee. The municipal review fee shall
be established by the municipality to defray review costs incurred by the
municipality and the Municipal Engineer. The applicant shall pay all fees.
§ 164-41. Municipality project plan review fee.
The municipality shall establish a project plan review fee schedule by
resolution of the municipal governing body based on the size of the
development project and based on the municipality’s costs for reviewing
project plans. The municipality shall periodically update the project plan
review fee schedule to ensure that review costs are adequately reimbursed.
§ 164-42. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
A. Administrative/clerical costs.
B. The review of the project plan by the municipality and the Municipal
Engineer.
C. The site inspections, including but not limited to preconstruction
meetings, inspections during construction of stormwater BMPs, and
final inspection upon completion of the stormwater BMPs.
D. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 164-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-42
1:223

ARTICLE VII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 164-43. Performance bond/security.
The Township of Rostraver may require the submittal of a letter of credit
or cash bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to insure that the
stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by
the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation
performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the
stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus 10%.
The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure
to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. The
installation performance security shall be released in full only upon
submission of as-built plans and written certification by a registered
professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been installed in
accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this
chapter. The Township of Rostraver will make a final inspection of the
stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved
plan and the provisions of this chapter. Provisions for a partial pro rata
release of the performance security based on the completion of various
development stages can be done by the Township of Rostraver.
§ 164-44. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. The project plan required under § 164-23 shall contain an operation and
maintenance plan prepared by the applicant and approved by the
Municipal Engineer. The operation and maintenance plan shall describe
required routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to
ensure proper operation of the BMPs.
B. The project plan for the development site shall establish responsibilities
for the continuing operation and maintenance of all proposed
residential stormwater BMPs, consistent with the following principals:
(1) If a development project consists of structures or lots which are to
be separately owned and in which streets, sewers and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater
BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality.
(2) If a development project is to be maintained in a single ownership
or if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately
owned and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
stormwater BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner or private
management entity.
C. The governing body, upon recommendation of the Municipal Engineer,
shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the project plan. The
governing body reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and
operating responsibility for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
§ 164-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-45
1:225
§ 164-45. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
BMPs.
§ 164-46. Easements.
§ 164-47. Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund.
A. Prior to final approval of the project plan, the property owner shall sign
a maintenance agreement covering all stormwater BMPs that are to be
privately owned. The agreement shall be recorded as an encumbrance
on the property in the County Recorder’s office within 30 days of
execution of the agreement.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities.
The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Municipal Solicitor and governing body.
A. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for:
(1) Access for facility inspections and maintenance; or
(2) Preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and facilities, including flood routes for the onehundred-
year storm event. The purpose of the easement shall be
specified in the maintenance agreement signed by the property
owner.
B. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Municipal
Engineer.
C. Easements shall be recorded with the County Register of Deeds prior to
issuance of a building permit or land development approval by the
municipality.
D. All stormwater easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width.
A. If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the municipality for dedication,
persons installing stormwater storage BMPs shall be required to pay a
specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund to
help defray costs of periodic inspections and maintenance expenses.
The amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows: For all
stormwater detention/retention facilities that are to be turned over to
Rostraver Township for ownership and maintenance, a one-time cash
bond shall be deposited with the Township in the amount based on the
cubic feet of storage with a minimum bond amount of $5,000 for zero to
8,000 cubic feet and $0.20 for each additional cubic foot of storage
required thereafter. This money will be deposited in a separate account
to be used for perpetual maintenance of the pond. [Amended
4-6-2016 by Ord. No. 674]
§ 164-45 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-47
1:226
§ 164-48. Postconstruction maintenance inspections.
§ 164-49. Maintenance covenants; Township ownership.
B. If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g., ball
field, lake), the municipality may reduce or waive the amount of the
maintenance fund deposit based upon the value of the land for public
recreation purpose.
C. If at some future time a BMP (whether publicly or privately owned) is
eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or another BMP, the
unused portion of the maintenance fund deposit will be applied to the
cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to the storm sewer
system or other facility. Any amount of the deposit remaining after the
costs of abandonment are paid will be returned to the depositor.
A. BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner/developer or responsible
entity (including the Municipal Engineer for dedicated BMPs) on the
following basis:
(1) Annually for the first five years.
(2) Once every three years thereafter.
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a one-hundred-year or
greater storm event.
B. The entity conducting the inspection should be required to submit a
report to the municipality regarding the condition of the BMPs and
recommending necessary repairs, if needed.
A. Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured
through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be
approved by Rostraver Township and recorded into the land record
prior to final plan approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be
developed as per § 164-48 to ensure proper function of the stormwater
management facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic
inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between
scheduled cleanouts.
B. All residential stormwater control facilities that will capture and detain/
retain and process stormwater from public streets and lands must be
dedicated to Rostraver Township. These facilities shall be constructed
in accordance with this chapter. The developer shall provide a
perpetual access by easement or otherwise to such facilities at least 20
feet in width for its entire length. The developer shall fence such
facilities in accordance with this chapter. The developer shall provide a
maintenance escrow fund as detailed in § 164-45 of this chapter.
C. The developer shall provide the Township with a separate deed
dedicating said stormwater facilities property to the Township.
§ 164-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-49
1:227

ARTICLE VIII
Illegal Connections and Discharges
§ 164-50. Prohibited discharges.
A. No person in the municipality shall allow or cause to allow stormwater
discharges into the municipality’s separate storm sewer system which
are not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges allowed
under a state or federal permit.
B. Discharges which may be allowed under the municipality’s NPDES
permit based on a finding by the municipality that the discharge(s) do
not significantly contribute to pollution to surface waters of the
commonwealth by the municipality are:
(1) Springs.
(2) Footing drains.
(3) Lawn watering.
(4) Irrigation water.
(5) Street wash water.
(6) Water line flushing.
(7) Rising groundwaters.
(8) Landscape irrigation.
(9) Diverted stream flows.
(10) Air-conditioning condensation.
(11)Water from crawl space pumps.
(12) Discharges from potable sources.
(13) Individual residential car washing.
(14) Discharges from foundation drains.
(15) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater.
(16) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(17) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(18) Discharges from fire-fighting activities, including training.
C. In the event that the municipality subsequently determines that any of
the discharges identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to
pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the municipality, then the
municipality will notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
§ 164-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-50
1:229
§ 164-51. Prohibited connections.
§ 164-52. Roof drains.
§ 164-53. Waste disposal prohibitions.
No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be
thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private
property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, or other component
of the municipality’s separate storm sewer system, any refuse, rubbish,
garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and
accumulations so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution.
Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of
collection are exempted from this prohibition.
§ 164-54. Alteration of BMPs.
D. Upon notice provided by the municipality under Subsection C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time to cease the discharge
consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the discharge.
A. The following connections are prohibited:
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water to enter the separate storm
sewer system, and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks.
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the separate storm sewer system which has
not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and
approved by the municipality.
B. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection, drain or
conveyance was previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a
government agency, or otherwise permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches, except as provided in § 164-51B.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted on a case-by-case basis by the municipality.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
§ 164-50 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-54
1:230
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, unless part of an approved maintenance program,
without the written approval of the municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement, which would limit or
alter the functioning of the BMP, without the written approval of the
municipality.
§ 164-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-54
1:231

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 164-55. Violations deemed to be public nuisances; separate
violations.
§ 164-56. Enforcement.
§ 164-57. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has prohibited or failed
to meet a requirement of this chapter, the municipality may order
compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice
may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or illegal discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
(6) The implementation of stormwater BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the municipality or designee and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator pursuant to § 164-60 below.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building permit or land development approval issued by the
municipality may be suspended or revoked by the governing body for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 164-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-57
1:233
§ 164-58. Violations and penalties.
§ 164-59. Holds on occupancy permits.
§ 164-60. Appeals.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended permit shall be reinstated by the governing body when:
(1) The Municipal Engineer or designee has inspected and approved
the corrections to the stormwater BMPs, or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance; and/or
(2) The governing body is satisfied that the violation of the chapter,
law, or rule and regulation has been corrected.
C. A permit which has been revoked by the governing body, cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the
procedures outlined in this chapter.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and upon conviction before a District Judge, shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $150 for each violation, recoverable
with costs, or imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or both. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense. [Amended
1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 673]
B. In addition, the municipality, through its Solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
A. All land disturbance permits shall expire 24 months from the date of
issuance unless construction is commenced prior to this date.
B. A renewal of an expired land disturbance permit may be issued by the
municipality following a resubmittal of the permit application form, and
its approval by the Municipal Engineer.
C. The refusal of the municipality to reissue an expired land disturbance
permit shall contain the reasons for such refusal.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the municipal
Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of that action.
§ 164-57 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-60
1:234
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of Zoning Hearing Board,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the County
Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place
within 30 days of the Zoning Hearing Board’s decision.
§ 164-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-60
1:235
Chapter 166
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 101.
Nuisances — See Ch. 124.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Streetlighting — See Ch. 169.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
§ 164-60 ROSTRAVER CODE § 164-60
1:236
ARTICLE I
Openings, Excavations and Occupancy
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 12, Ch. 1, Art. A, of the 1989 Code]
§ 166-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation.
STREET — Any Township street, highway or right-of-way located in the
Township of Rostraver.
§ 166-2. Permit required for certain work.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or make any excavation of
any kind in any street in the Township without first securing a permit as
provided in § 166-3.
§ 166-3. Application for permit.
Any person who desires to make any opening or excavation in any street
in the Township or to construct, reconstruct or repair a driveway, entrance
or approach on any part of a Township street shall make application to
the Township Engineer or his agent. The application shall be made upon
blanks to be furnished by the Township. Each application when executed
and delivered to the Township Engineer or his agent or the Secretary,
together with the permit fee set forth in § 166-4 and after issuance of the
permit by the Township Engineer, shall constitute an agreement between
the permittee and the Township which shall be a binding legal obligation
upon both parties.
§ 166-4. Permit fee; responsibility for certain costs; bond posted by
holder of driveway opening permit.
Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate any street in the
Township or to construct, reconstruct or repair a driveway, entrance or
approach thereon, the applicant shall pay to the Township Engineer a
permit fee in the amount as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners. If the nature of the work to be performed shall
require, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, an inspection of the work
or the site either during or after completion of the work, by the Township
Engineer or his agent, the cost of such inspection and other incidental
services in connection therewith shall be paid by the permittee. Whenever
a property owner requests a driveway opening permit, he shall post a
cash bond in the amount as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners per linear foot of driveway abutting the Township
road. The bond will be to guarantee full compliance with this article and
§ 166-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-4
1:237
shall be reimbursed to the property owner when the installation has been
approved by the Township Engineer. If the installation is not approved,
then the Township Engineer shall give directions to the property owner. If
the same is not fully and properly performed in accordance with Township
specifications, then the Township shall have the work performed and the
bond will be applied to the cost thereof.
§ 166-5. Adherence to official specifications. [Amended 9-21-2011
by Ord. No. 620]
Any person who opens, excavates, paves, cuts, installs driveways over
and across Township rights-of-way or who refills, resurfaces or repaves
Township streets in connection therewith shall perform all such work in
accordance with the General Provisions and Specifications of Rostraver
Township51 regulating occupancy and opening of Township streets, which
are adopted as part of this chapter and Chapter 17552 and are hereby
adopted as the General Provisions and Specifications of Rostraver Township
in connection with the regulations of occupancy of Township streets. Those
General Provisions and Specifications may be amended, modified and
revised from time to time by the Board of Commissioners and shall then be
effective from the date of revision.
§ 166-6. Emergency work.
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, it shall be unlawful for the person owning
or responsible for that pipe, line, construction or apparatus to commence
an excavation to remedy the condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later
than the next business day thereafter, and that all other provisions of this
article are fully complied with. If any such emergency condition shall not
be immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for that
pipe, line, construction or apparatus, the Township Engineer or his agent,
after such notice as he shall deem necessary under the circumstances of
the particular case, shall proceed to do the work necessary and required by
the emergency and charge the same on the basis of costs plus 20% to such
owner or person.
§ 166-7. Requirements for driveway work.
A. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct, reconstruct or
repair a driveway, entrance or approach shall as hereinabove provided
obtain a permit from the Township Engineer or his agent. The Township
Engineer may require submission of detailed plans and specifications
and may refuse to grant the permit, subject, however, to final review by
the Board of Commissioners.
51.Editor's Note: Said General Provisions and Specifications are on file in the Township
offices.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 166-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 166-7
1:238
B. Whenever any driveway is constructed in a public highway of the
Township, the driveway shall be constructed in conformity with the
general provisions and specifications regulating occupancy of Township
streets then in effect and such other requirements and regulations as
may be established from time to time by the Township.
C. In addition to the foregoing, in the opening or construction of
driveways, entrances and approaches, the following provisions and
conditions must be followed and the work performed in a manner
satisfactory to the Township Engineer or his agent:
(1) The work must be so performed that there shall be no obstruction
to the flow of surface water along the boundaries of the streets
maintained by the Township.
(2) If the work necessitates the crossing of any ditch or channel along
the street maintained by the Township, then the driveways,
entrances and approaches shall be so constructed as to supply a
pipe or conduit for the flow of the water along the street, such
material to be furnished by the permittee.
(3) All work done must be in a manner satisfactory to the Township
Engineer or his agent, both of whom shall inspect the work as it
progresses.
(4) All driveways must conform to the requirements of the Rostraver
Township Subdivision Ordinance.53 [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord.
No. 421]
(5) Where more than one driveway on a street front serves a single
parcel of land, there shall be at least one curb parking space
between driveway approaches.
(6) The sides, edges or curbs of driveways shall be at right angles to
the street curb.
(7) No driveway shall interfere with municipal facilities such as
streetlighting poles, traffic signal standards, signs, catch basins,
storm sewer inlets, fire hydrants, crosswalks, bus loading
platforms, utility poles, underground pipes or ducts or other
necessary street structures, and the Township Engineer or his
agent is authorized to order and effect the removal or restoration of
any driveway which now conflicts with any street structures. The
cost of removing or reconstructing or relocating such driveway
shall be at the expense of the abutting property owner.
(8) When construction is started, a notice shall be posted, by the
permittee, at the site, stating that a permit has been issued.
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 166-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-7
1:239
§ 166-8. Time limit for payment for work by Township.
Payment for all work done by the Township under the provisions of this
article shall be made by the person made liable therefor under the
provisions of this article within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to that
person by the Township. Upon failure to pay those charges within that time,
the same shall be collectible by the Township in the manner provided by law
for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 166-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, violating any
provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $50 or more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in
default of payment of fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30
days. Each violation of any provision of this article, and each day the same
is continued shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 166-10. Permit form.
The permit form of the Township shall be that approved by the Board of
Commissioners and shall be a three-part permit with Part A to be issued the
property owner after approval; Part B to be retained by the Township for its
records; and Part C to be issued to the property owner and returned to the
Township after completion of the installation.
(9) Whenever possible, the property owner shall install water tables
rather than drainage pipes. However, should drainage pipes be
installed, they shall not be less than 15 inches in diameter. The
proposed plan for excavation and drainage shall be submitted to
the Township Engineer for approval, prior to the work being
undertaken.
(10) Any driveway or parking area creating over 1,000 square feet of
impervious surface must have an approved stormwater
management plan included with the driveway permit application.
[Added 7-6-2005 by Ord. No. 530]
§ 166-7 ROSTRAVER CODE § 166-10
1:240
ARTICLE II
Occupancy of Township Highway Right-of-Way
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 12, Ch. 1, Art. B, of the 1989 Code]
§ 166-11. General provisions.
A. The work authorized by this permit shall be done at such time and in
such a manner as shall be consistent with the safety of the public and
shall conform to all requirements and standards of the permitter herein
specified. If at any time it shall be found by the permitter that the work
is not being done or has not been properly performed, the permittee,
upon being notified by permitter, in writing, shall immediately take the
necessary steps, at its own expense, toward placing the work in
condition to conform to said requirements or standards.
(1) In the event of willful failure or neglect by said permittee or its
employee to perform and comply with the conditions, restrictions
and regulations, the permitter may revoke and annul this permit
and order and direct said permittee to remove any or all structures
or property belonging to said permittee and covered by this permit
from the legal limits of the highway.
(2) If work is stopped on a project for any reason other than by order of
the Township's representatives and the ditch or trench, in the
opinion of the Township, remains open for an unreasonable period,
the permittee, if so directed, shall refill the ditch or trench and
work shall not be resumed thereon until the permittee is prepared
to proceed with the work until completion. In the event that the
permittee fails to refill the ditch or trench or proceed until
completion of the work upon notice from the Township Engineer to
do so, the Township may perform the necessary and required work
subject to reimbursement by the permittee.
(3) The permittee shall pay all costs and expenses incident to or
growing out of the project, including the prescribed fees for the
same, and the cost of making and maintaining the temporary
restoration of the disturbed areas and make permanent
restoration, and further shall reimburse the Township for any and
all inspection costs which the Township Engineer may deem it
necessary to incur, including both the salaries and expenses of the
inspectors, and the permittee shall reimburse the Township for
costs incurred by the Township within 30 days after receipt of the
statement from the Township Secretary setting forth sums
expended by the Township.
(4) If the permittee, after making an opening in the highway to place or
repair pipe or for any other purpose, fails to restore the roadway
including paved surface, shoulders and ditches to their original
condition, the Township reserves the right to do the work and bill
the permittee for the cost of the restoration. Upon failure to pay the
§ 166-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-11
1:241
sum due, permitter may proceed against the bond hereinafter
required without notice to the permittee.
(5) The applicant shall furnish with said application a performance
bond in double the amount of the estimated cost of restoration of
said highway, conditioned upon the restoring of said highway
according to State Highway Specifications, Form 4080, and subject
to the approval and acceptance thereof by said Township Engineer.
(6) Any opening or impairment of any nature whatsoever of any
improved surface within the Township right-of-way must be
repaired immediately with the temporary two-inch bituminous
material and so maintained for a minimum period of 90 days until
permanent restoration shall be made.
B. All work done under this permit shall be subject to such conditions,
restrictions and regulations as may be herein prescribed and required
by the permitter.
C. The permittee shall use due diligence in the execution of the work
authorized under this permit in order not to obstruct unnecessarily or
endanger travel along the highways. Operation must be conducted at
all times to permit safe and reasonable free travel over the roads within
the limits of the work herein prescribed. All safety provisions for the
free movement of traffic shall be provided by the permittee.
(1) Red lights shall be displayed from sunset to sunrise at any and all
points of the work where there may be danger to any person
lawfully using the highway.
D. If, in the construction work the permittee will be required to use certain
blasting operations in the excavation, the permittee agrees to make,
execute and deliver to the Township a bond in the sum stipulated by the
Township Engineer with surety in the form of a surety company duly
registered and authorized to do business in Pennsylvania, conditioned
that the permittee will save harmless the Township from any damage
whatsoever to its subgrade, special subgrade, subbase, drainage
facilities, road metal and any other installations or matters in, under or
upon the highway right-of-way for a period of two years from the date of
the completion of the last work covered by this agreement, to be
performed under these permits, for or on account of any blasting or any
other matter, cause or thing incidental to or connected with the blasting
operations which may result in apparent or latent damage as may
appear within the period of two years from the date of the completion of
the last work performed. Said bond shall be executed simultaneously
with the execution of an agreement, on a form to be furnished by the
Township.
E. The permittee will submit to the Township Engineer a certificate or
certificates of insurance for public liability and property damage, in
sufficient amount to cover any loss, that may be incurred for or on
account of any matter, cause or thing arising out of the construction,
§ 166-11 ROSTRAVER CODE § 166-11
1:242
reconstruction, repair, relocation or installation of the indicated
facilities.
F. The permission herein granted does not relieve the permittee from
obtaining any consent otherwise required from the owner or owners of
the abutting property and does not confer upon the permittee the right
to cut, remove or destroy trees or shrubbery within the legal limits of
the highway except under such conditions, restrictions and regulations
as the Township may prescribe. If any trees are removed within the
limits of the highway by the consent of the property owner, the stumps
must be cut to the ground level, or removed entirely, if required by the
permitter.
G. Excavation or other material shall be placed or stored on the side of the
operation farthest from the road metal or pavement, unless otherwise
authorized by the permitter, and in such a manner that there will be no
interference with the flow of water in any gutter, drain, pipe, culvert,
ditch, or waterway.
H. All excess excavated material shall be removed and disposed of outside
the legal limits of the highway as the work progresses, unless the
approval of the permitter is obtained for disposal of the material within
the legal limits of the highway. All parts of the highway and various
structures disturbed shall be restored to a condition equal to that which
existed before starting the work. Guard rails shall be replaced to the
present alignment, and any guard posts discolored through the work of
the permittee shall be refinished by washing or repainting.
I. If at any time the structure or facility shall fail from any cause
whatsoever, the permittee shall have the same removed or repaired
within 48 hours after receipt of written notification, except at times of
extraordinary happenings when extension of such time limit may be
given by the permitter.
J. After each and every excavation made by the permittee in any road or
highway covered by this permit incident to the erection, repair,
resetting or removal of any poles, manholes, conduits, water, steam, oil,
gas pipes, sewers or any other obstructions or construction, said
permittee shall, under the supervision and direction of the permitter,
restore such road to as good condition as existed prior to such
excavation unless otherwise herein provided. So long as said permittee
operates and leaves in place such structures and appliances in, upon or
along said highway, the permittee shall maintain and keep in good order
and repair said structures and appliances. The permittee covenants and
agrees to fully indemnify and save harmless the Township and local
authorities of and from all liability for damages or injury occurring to
any person or persons or property at or on said roads through or in
consequence of any act or omission of any contractor, agent, servant,
employee or person engaged or employed in, about or upon the work by,
at the instance or with the approval or consent of the permittee or from
§ 166-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-11
1:243
§ 166-12. Subsurface operations.
the failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions for
maintenance as set forth in these regulations.
K. If at any time in the future the highway is widened or the alignment or
grades changed, the permittee further agrees to the extent now or
hereafter required by statutory or common law to change or relocate, at
its own expense, any part of the structures covered by this permit which
interferes with the improvement of the highway to such location within
the limits of the legal right-of-way of the highway as may be directed by
the permitter or local authorities.
L. During the time when any road or highway covered by this permit is
under process of construction and/or until said road or highway is
accepted by the permitter or local authorities, no permittee will be
authorized to enter upon said road or highway for the purpose of
erecting poles, laying conduits, water, steam, oil or gas pipes or sewers
or doing any other work whatsoever which might interfere with the
construction of the road or highway, unless said permittee shall first file
with the permitter or local authorities a duly attested certificate signed
by the contractor or other authority constructing said road or highway,
which certificate shall contain full consent to such proposed operation
of said permittee within the lines of said road or highway, together with
a satisfactory waiver, release and quit claim to the Township and the
local authorities of all damages and all defenses whatsoever for delays
by reason of such operations and occupation of said roadway by said
permittee or from any cause whatsoever resulting by reason of such
operation and occupation, provided that the provisions of this
subsection shall not apply in case of emergency; in such case, the
permittee shall procure the written consent of the permitter to do such
work as may be deemed necessary to correct the existing emergency
conditions.
M. The conditions, restrictions, and regulations hereinbefore cited shall
also govern all excavations, openings, and trenches for the purpose of
making repairs to any poles, conduits, water, steam, oil, or gas pipes or
sewers or other structures or property and appurtenances thereto
belonging, erected or on in the highway.
N. This permit is issued subject to any rights which the municipality or
other local authority in which the work is to be done may have in such
matters.
O. After a permit is granted by the permitter, it shall not be assigned nor
transferred.
P. All equipment used on said projects shall be equipped with rubber. In
event that other than rubber-equipped machinery is used, the pavement
shall be protected by the use of heavy rubber or similar matting which
shall be at least two inches wider on each side than the equipment used.
§ 166-11 ROSTRAVER CODE § 166-12
1:244
A. Trenches for conduits, water, steam, oil, gas pipe and sewers and other
obstructions, placed parallel with the road or highway, shall be dug so
that the near edge of the trench is at least three feet outside of the edge
of the road metal, unless the permitter shall authorize in writing a
lesser clearance. A greater distance shall be used wherever practicable.
B. In case the road or highway is not improved, the trench shall be placed
so that its near edge is at least 15 feet (the distance shall be greater
than the minimum where practicable) from the general center lines of
the traveled road or highway unless authorized as provided in
Subsection A of this section. The center line shall be determined by the
permitter or local authorities.
C. The trench for such construction shall not be opened for a distance of
more than 500 feet at any one time, unless especially authorized by the
permitter.
D. Where a tile drain or other structures or facility is encountered, it shall
be replaced or restored by the permittee in accordance with the
prevailing standards of the permitter.
E. The backfilling of the trench shall follow as rapidly as possible the
placing of subsurface structures. [Amended 9-21-2011 by Ord. No.
620]
(1) All backfilling shall conform to the original contour of the surface.
(2) All backfilling shall be done with mechanical compaction.
(3) All backfilling shall be restored to 100% stone fill compacted with
top five inches following Chapter 175, Rostraver Township.
Pavement/Underdrain Detail.54
F. All parts of the shoulder disturbed or damaged in the performance of
the work shall be reconstructed and restored in as firm, strong and
durable condition as before the commencement of work by the
permittee, in accordance with the standards of the permitter.
[Amended 9-21-2011 by Ord. No. 620]
(1) All berm areas shall be backfilled completely to the surface with
No. 2 modified stone.
(2) Where a portion of the right-of-way is maintained as a lawn,
backfilling shall consist of No. 2 modified stone stopping 12 inches
below the surface, the remaining 12 inches to the surface to be
backfilled with suitable soil for planting.
G. The permittee shall place the top of manholes to conform to the
elevation and slope of the shoulder, unless a lower elevation shall be
approved.
54.Editor's Note: Said Detail is included at the end of Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land
Development.
§ 166-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-12
1:245
§ 166-13. Surface or overhead operations.
H. The permittee shall restore the ground surface within the limits of the
work covered by the permit to a condition equal to that existing prior to
the opening of the trench, unless otherwise provided in the permit.
After the completion of the work, an inspection shall be done by the
Township Engineer and Road Supervisor. Once the Township Engineer
prepares a satisfactory report, the permittee shall maintain it in such
condition for a period of 12 months and then shall be released; except
where work of a similar character shall be done during said twelvemonth
period within or adjacent to the limits of the work covered by
this permit, or affecting the same, by another permittee, pursuant to a
permit duly issued by the permitter. [Amended 9-21-2011 by Ord.
No. 620]
I. In case it is necessary to cross under any improved road or highway, the
opening for pipe line shall be drilled, bored or driven at a minimum
depth of three feet below the surface of the road or highway or the
structure may be placed by tunneling when approved by the permitter.
Trenching will be authorized by the permitter, in writing, where
tunneling would be attended with danger to life. Where necessary to
cross the improved road or highway by tunneling, the crossing shall be
made, except in solid rock formation, under 1/2 of the improved road
width, and the pipe or structure placed and the hole carefully backfilled
with 1 to 3 to 6 concrete of a dry consistency thoroughly tamped, and
allowed to stand 24 hours before traffic is permitted to use that half of
the road. The second half of the tunneling is to be completed in the
same manner, so at least one-way traffic will be maintained over 1/2 the
improved road or highway while the second half is being tunneled. In
solid rock formation, the crossing may be made by trenching when
approved by the engineer representing the permitter, but not more than
1/2 of the width of the pavement shall be opened, the structure placed
and the trench backfilled and tamped with an approved mechanical
tamper, unless other methods are approved, before disturbing the
remaining 1/2 of the road.
J. Openings made for the purpose of placing pipe lines or other structures
under the improved surface by drilling, boring, driving or tunneling
shall be made at least three feet from the edge of the road metal, unless
the permitter shall otherwise designate in writing.
K. Warning signs shall be placed at a minimum of 300 feet beyond each
end of the actual operation, and special employees shall be assigned by
the permittee to direct traffic when it becomes necessary to limit it to
one way. Advance permission must be obtained from permitter or
authorized agents before directing traffic through one lane. Substantial
barricades shall be provided and maintained between the road and any
open trench or hole when, in the judgment of the representative of the
permitter, it is necessary for the proper protection of the traveling
public.
§ 166-12 ROSTRAVER CODE § 166-13
1:246
A. All poles shall be placed on the outside of the gutter lines, and in all
cases a clear space greater than the width of the berm or shoulder must
be preserved between the near face of the poles and the edge of the
improved or traveled road or highway, unless the permitter shall
otherwise authorize in writing. No poles or other overhead structures
shall be placed where they will obstruct the view of traffic on the
highway, nor within five feet of any warning or direction sign, unless
specifically permitted in writing. Such poles on state or state aide
highways after being erected shall be painted white by the permittee at
its own expense for a height of at least six feet above the ground, when
so required by the permitter.
B. All wires, except power transmission and supply lines, appurtenances
or supports attached to poles which cross the highway shall be placed
or erected so as to provide a minimum vertical clearance of 16 1/2 feet
for a distance of 14 feet on both sides of the highway center line. Where
power transmission and supply lines cross over a highway in urban and
rural areas, vertical clearance and other requirements of the National
Electrical Safety Code must be complied with. All guys shall be placed
so as to avoid interference with traffic of all kinds on the highway and
must present a neat appearance when installed; if for electrical light or
power lines, they must be adequately insulated at a point not less than
10 feet vertical above the ground; if for telephone lines, when in
proximity to electric light or power lines, they must be adequately
insulated at a point not less than eight feet vertical above the ground.
C. Exception. When guys are permanently grounded in conformity with
accepted grounding practice, insulators may be omitted; provided,
however, that the permittee must state in the application for permit the
method whereby such guys, when installed, will be properly grounded
and must, thereafter, maintain the same through periodic inspection of
all ground connections. This exception applies primarily to guys
exposed to circuits carrying more than 14,000 volts and to guys
uniformly permanently grounded throughout in connection with any
grounded supply circuits using continuous ground wires.
D. All poles installed on the right-of-way of a state highway which requires
marking shall be equipped at the time of installation, with three size A
crystal colorless reflector buttons, mounted in a vertical row, spaced six
inches apart, six feet above the grade of the crown of the road. The row
of buttons shall face approaching traffic, forming an axis of five-degree
angle toward the roadway, as indicated by Department of Highways
Standard G-26. When present pole markings are in need of replacement
or repainting, the reflector buttons shall be installed on those poles, in
conformity with said standard.
E. All poles that may be erected shall be numbered, and said number
together with the initials of the permittee shall be plainly designated
thereon by and at the expense of said permittee.
§ 166-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-13
1:247

ARTICLE III
Parking During Snowfall; Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 11-1-2000 by Ord. No. 439]
§ 166-14. Parking prohibited after start of snowfall.
Following the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful to park or
allow to be parked any motor vehicle or other vehicle on any street or road
which is part of the Township system after the start of a snowfall and until
the snow has stopped falling and the snow has been completely plowed for
the full width of the cartway.
§ 166-15. Removal of vehicles in violation; notice; liability for
damages.
Any member of the Rostraver Township Police Department, or any employee
of Rostraver Township engaged in road work, is hereby authorized to
remove any vehicle abandoned or parked upon any public highway or street
in violation of the terms and provisions of this article and to take any said
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. The registered owner
of any said vehicle shall be notified of the fact of the removal and of the
place to which said vehicle has been removed, where he or she may obtain
the same upon payment of any and all towing and storage charges. Neither
the Township nor any of its officers or employees shall be held responsible
for any damage to any vehicle occurring as a result of towing and/or storage
of a vehicle parked in violation of this article.
§ 166-16. Removal and disposal of snow, ice and slush.
A. It shall be unlawful for owners, occupants or tenants of property to
dump, throw, shovel, pile or push any snow or ice removed from
driveways or walkways into any public highway or street.
B. No snow, ice, slush, or a combination thereof shall be pushed or
deposited into any drainage area, stream, river, culvert or catch basin.
C. No snow, ice, slush or combination thereof shall be deposited, pushed
or maintained within a commercial, manufacturing, light industrial or
multiple-family zoning district parking facility, or at or near an
intersection in any zoning district, in a manner or at a location which
creates a traffic hazard by impairing visibility from or of a public
highway.
D. No person shall damage any Township property, including but not
limited to traffic signs, culverts, etc., while removing snow, ice, slush or
a combination thereof. Any damage to Township property shall be
repaired or replaced in accordance with the requirements of the
Township at the expense of the property owner and/or snow removal
agency.
§ 166-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-17
1:249
§ 166-17. Removal of snow and other impediments from fire
hydrants; failure to comply.
§ 166-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
summary conviction before a District Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $50 and not more than $100 and the cost of prosecution,
such fines to be collected as like fines are now collected by law, and in
default shall undergo imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.
A. Fire hydrants shall not be covered. The owner is hereby required to
remove or cause to be removed all snow, ice, slush or any combination
thereof or any accumulation and/or impediment which would limit
access to, from and/or around all of the fire hydrants which are located
on said property, so as to provide immediate access by fire rescue
personnel in cases of emergency. In cases involving a storm, fire
hydrants shall be cleared of all snow, ice, slush or any combination
thereof within 24 hours following the storm. In any event, any
accumulation shall be removed not less than once in every twenty-fourhour
period.
B. In all other cases involving the accumulation of natural and/or manmade
items around fire hydrants the owner is responsible for the
immediate removal of said items. In either case, fire hydrants shall be
cleared sufficiently so emergency personnel have total access to
hydrants. This is necessary to allow for fire hose connections to be
made to access water in the event of a fire. The owner of a property
shall be responsible for conforming to the requirements of this section
where such property is occupied by said owner or is unoccupied or
vacant.
C. In cases where the owner, occupant or tenant as aforesaid shall fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this section of
this article, or within the time period required herein, the Township of
Rostraver, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, may, in its discretion,
proceed immediately to clear the snow, ice, slush or any combination
thereof or accumulation and/or impediment which would limit access
to, from and/or around fire hydrants and to collect the expenses, with
any additional amount allowed by law, from fine or penalty imposed
under § 166-18 of this article. In no case is the Township of Rostraver
liable if it does not exercise the Township option for removal of snow,
ice, slush or any combination thereof or accumulation and/or
impediment which limit access to, from and/or around fire hydrants as
defined within § 166-17.
§ 166-17 ROSTRAVER CODE § 166-18
1:250
Chapter 169
STREETLIGHTING
§ 169-1. Streetlighting assessments established and fixed.
[Amended 12-4-1989 by Ord. No. 222; 5-2-2018 by Ord. No. 699]
All real estate set forth on the list attached hereto and marked Exhibit A55
are to be billed a flat rate of $42 per annum, whether such real estate is
residential, commercial, institutional or industrial. The terms and amount
set forth are retroactive to December 1, 2010, having been assessed by
Resolution No. 899.
§ 169-2. (Reserved)56
§ 169-3. (Reserved)57
Chapter 175
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Agency — See Ch. 51.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 97.
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 101.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 164.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 166.
Streetlighting — See Ch. 169.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 178.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
55.Editor's Note: Exhibit A, which is available in the Township offices, lists all properties in
the Collinsburg, Pricedale, VanMeter and Webster Districts. Section 2 of Ord. No. 52-1975
directed that the assessments shown on Exhibit A be filed with the Township Treasurer in
accordance with law.
56.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, Policy on assessment of seated and unseated land,
was repealed 5-2-2018 by Ord. No. 699.
57.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, Assessment of properties located at intersections,
was repealed 5-2-2018 by Ord. No. 699.
§ 166-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-3
1:251

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 175-1. Authority.
The laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania empower local governments
to regulate the subdivision of land. The authority for this function has
been established by the General Assembly under the provisions of Act 247,
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended by Act 170 of
1988.58
§ 175-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance of the Township of Rostraver, Westmoreland
County, Pennsylvania."
§ 175-3. Purposes.
This chapter has been developed to require basic minimum standards for
the development of land, including the subdivision thereof, into separate
lots; and establishes rules and regulations, definitions, application
procedures and permits by which the standards may be carried out. These
requirements are designed to provide for:
A. The coordinated development of land throughout the Township;
B. Assurance that new subdivisions will be developed consistent with the
maintenance of the health, safety and general welfare of the public;
C. Necessary public facilities in an amount and size commensurate with
the needs of the area to be subdivided and the uses to which the land
will be devoted;
D. Assistance in identification of hazards from flooding, landslides,
subsidence or other dangers, by requirements that land subject to such
dangers will be made safe for its proposed use or be set aside for uses
that will not precipitate dangerous conditions;
E. Protection of the soil, water and other natural environmental resources
of the area from the effects of uncontrolled development practices;
F. Coordination of continuing community growth with respect to overall
development considerations, such as sewage disposal, water supply,
drainage facilities, traffic circulation systems, emergency accessways,
retention of open spaces and related factories; and
G. Equitable administration of all subdivision and development proposals
throughout the municipality.
58.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 175-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-3
1:253

ARTICLE II
Compliance and Application
§ 175-4. Subject properties.
No subdivision, land development or excavation of any lot, tract or parcel
of land shall be effected and no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water
main or other facilities and public utilities in connection therewith shall be
constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel, or for the common
use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in strict conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 175-5. Sale of lot.
A. No lot in a subdivision shall be sold; no permit to erect any building
upon land in a subdivision shall be issued; and no building shall be
erected in a subdivision, unless and until a subdivision plan has been
approved and recorded and until the improvements required by the
governing body in connection therewith have either been constructed
or guaranteed as hereinafter provided.
B. The division of a lot containing more than one principal structure for
the purpose of transferring legal ownership of a structure and the land
on which it is situated, that involves no new land development or new
streets or the realignment of existing streets, may be considered a
minor subdivision by the governing body. In such instances, provided
that all applicable ordinances and criteria established by the
municipality are met, the governing body may waive such procedures
and requirements of this chapter as the body may deem advisable.
§ 175-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-5
1:255

ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 175-6. Interpretation.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted or defined as follows:
§ 175-7. Definitions.59
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless otherwise specifically stated. Words not defined herein
shall be observed and applied according to their generally acceptable
dictionary definitions.
ALLEY — A minor right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the
side or rear of two or more properties.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets, utility, railroads, public facility or
other rights-of-way or easements or other definite barriers.
BUILDING LINE — The line of that face of the building nearest the front line
of the lot at the street right-of-way line. This face includes porches, whether
enclosed or not, patios and similar construction, but excludes steps.
BUILDING or STRUCTURE — An independent and detached structure
having a roof supported by columns or walls or resting on its own
foundation, including but not limited to mobile homes, garages,
greenhouses and other accessory buildings and utilized for housing, shelter
or enclosure of person, animals, chattels or activity sites.
CARTWAY (not "right-of-way") — That portion of the total street right-of-way
surfaced for vehicular use. Width is determined from face of curb to face
of curb, or from one edge of driving surface to the other edge of driving
surface.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular area of unobstructed vision on
corner lots formed by a seventy-five-foot sight line along the center line
of a local street and by a line joining these two sight lines at the greatest
distance from their intersection. This entire area is to remain clear of
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural.
C. Words used in the plural number shall include the singular.
D. The word "person" includes a corporation as well as individual or an
association of individuals.
E. The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory.
F. The word "may" is permissive.
59.Editor's Note: See also § 175-52.
§ 175-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-7
1:257
obstructions to sight above a plane established three feet in elevation from
grade level at the intersection of the street center line.
CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as it may be
amended from time to time. 60
COMMERCIAL — Engaging in a business, enterprise, public service, civic,
religious or other undertaking or activity related to or connected with trade,
commerce, services or traffic in general.61
COVENANT — An obligation defined by law or agreement, the violation of
which can be restrained by court actions.
CUL-DE-SAC — A residential street open to traffic and pedestrian access
with one end permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
DEVELOPER — Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, estate, trust or any other group acting as a unit, who makes or
causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land development.
EASEMENT — The right to use the property of another for a particular
purpose.
ENGINEER — The Engineer of the Township officially designated by the
governing body.
FLOODPLAIN — A flat or low land area subject to inundation from a stream,
river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the rapid accumulation of
surface waters from any source.
FOOTCANDLE — A common unit of light intensity used in the United States
and stated in lumens per square foot. It is measurable with a light meter.
(Note: Lux is the metric equivalent. There are approximately 10.7 lux per
footcandle.)[Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 509]
FULL CUTOFF LUMINAIRE — A lighting unit in its mounted form that
allows no direct light or reflected source image from the lighting unit
above a ninety-degree plane, and no more than 10% of rated lamp output
on an eighty-degree plane, at any lateral angle around the fixture.[Added
4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 509]
FULLY SHIELDED — Providing internal and/or external shield and louvers
to prevent brightness from lamps, reflectors and lenses from causing glare
at normal viewing angles.[Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 509]
GLARE — The sensation produced by direct lighting that causes an
annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance and visibility to the
eye.[Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 509]
GOVERNING BODY — The duly elected Board of Township Commissioners
of the Township of Rostraver, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania.[Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
60.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
61.Editor's Note: The definition of “Commission, Planning,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467.
§ 175-7 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-7
1:258
GROSS ACREAGE — The entire land area of a tract, as distinguished from
net acreage.
HALF STREET — A strip of land equal to or less than 1/2 of the required
rights-of-way reserved or proposed for street purposes along the property
line. (Half streets are prohibited except to complete another half street.)
ILLUMINANCE — The intensity of incident light at a point, measured in
footcandles or lux.[Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 509]
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical changes to the land necessary to
produce usable and desirable lots from raw acreage, including but not
limited to grading, paving, curbs, gutters, storm sewers and drains,
improvements to existing watercourses, sidewalks, crosswalks, street signs,
monuments, water supply facilities, sewage disposal facilities and
stormwater control facilities.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group
of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or
lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure, or the division or
allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features; or a subdivision of land; excluding the conversion
of an existing single-family detached dwelling or single-family semidetached
dwelling into not more than three residential units, unless such units are
intended to be a condominium; and the addition of an accessory building,
including farm buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building.[Added 9-3-1997 by Ord. No. 359]
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition); a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner; or other persons having a
proprietary interest in land.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light emitted by a lighting installation which shines
beyond the boundaries of the property on which the installation is
sited.[Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 509]
LOT — A tract or parcel of land designated for conveyance or transfer of
ownership, improvement or sale, whether immediate or future.
LOT, CORNER — A lot, abutting two or more streets at their intersection,
on which the building line for all streets must be observed.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot that has access to a public right-ofway
from both the front yard and back yard. Double frontage lots may
be permitted only as a variance due to unnecessary hardship or unique
physical circumstances that are not created by an appellant.
§ 175-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-7
1:259
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line contiguous with the street right-of-way
line.[Added 7-2-2003 by Ord. No. 494]
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot abutting a public right-of-way along
both the front and rear yards, having access to only one of the public rightsof-
way.
LOT WIDTH — The total horizontal distance across the lot between the side
lot lines, measured at the building line and the front lot line.[Amended
7-2-2003 by Ord. No. 494]
LUMEN — A unit of measurement of light. One lumen is equal to one
footcandle falling onto one square foot of area.[Added 4-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 509]
LUMINAIRE — A complete luminaire, including a lamp or lamps, together
with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the
lamps and to connect the lamps to the power supply.[Added 4-7-2004 by
Ord. No. 509]
MASTER PLAN — An orderly representation of future development plans
for a parcel which will be developed by phases over a period of time. This
plan is not binding and may be revised periodically as development plans
change.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-family dwelling, as defined,
provided for and controlled by the Mobile Home Park Ordinance of the
Township (see Article XVII of this chapter).
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other single mobile home, which
is developed and maintained consistent with the specific requirements of
the Mobile Home Park Ordinance of the Township. 62
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any contiguous parcel or tract of land under single
ownership, used or intended to be used for the placement of two or more
mobile homes for nontransient use, developed and maintained consistent
with the specific requirements of the Mobile Home Park Ordinance of the
Township. 63
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Rostraver, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania.
NET ACREAGE — The total acreage of a development site minus the areas
utilized for accessways, on-grade utilities and facilities, lakes, ponds or
similar water surfaces and parking facilities.
OFF-SITE SEWER SERVICE — A sanitary sewage collection system in which
sewage is carried from an individual lot or dwelling unit by a system of pipes
to a central treatment and disposal plant which may be publicly or privately
owned and operated.
62.Editor's Note: See Article XVII of this chapter.
63.Editor's Note: See Article XVII of this chapter.
§ 175-7 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-7
1:260
OFF-SITE WATER SERVICE — A potable water distribution system in which
water is carried to individual lots or dwelling units by a system of pipes
from a central water source located beyond the limits of the lot being served
which may be publicly or privately owned and operated.
ON-SITE SEWER SERVICE — A system of piping, tanks or other facilities
serving only a single lot disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the soil.
ON-SITE WATER SERVICE — A single system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving only a single lot and obtaining the water either in whole
or in part from a primary source located within the limits of the lot being
served.
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied space open to the sky.
OWNER — The duly authorized agent, attorney, purchaser, devisee,
fiduciary or any person having vested or equitable interest in the lot in
question.
PARKING SPACE — For purposes of this chapter, "off-street parking and
loading areas" shall be defined as follows:
PATIO — An outside surfaced courtyard or inner area having no roof.
PLAN, COMPREHENSIVE — The Comprehensive Plan - Rostraver Township
2000, and studies, reviews and evaluations subsequent thereto.[Amended
8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467]
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plan, prepared by a
registered professional engineer or registered professional land surveyor
for official recording as required by statute, to delineate boundaries, define
property rights, proposed streets and all other improvements.
PLANNING AGENCY — The Rostraver Township Planning Agency as duly
created by the local governing body.[Added 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467]
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision plan, in lesser detail than a
final plan, showing approximate street and lot layout, on a topographic map,
as a basis for consideration and review prior to preparation of a final plan.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Within the terms of this chapter, "public utility" shall
be defined to include gas, electric, telephone, sewage, water and
communication cable services.
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of land separating a street from adjacent
properties for the purpose of controlling access to the street from adjacent
property.
An off-street parking space shall be a minimum dimension of nine feet
wide by 20 feet long.
A.
A required off-street loading space shall be a minimum dimension of 15
feet by 60 feet.
B.
§ 175-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-7
1:261
RESUBDIVISION or REPLATTING — The modification of a recorded
subdivision in whole or in part, by a redesign of lots, by change of size, area
or by street layout.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for use as street, alley, interior walk or
other public purpose and dedicated for public use; all must be recorded in
the County Recorder of Deeds office. For purposes of this chapter, public
right-of-way lines shall prevail over private parcel lines that are designated
as falling within the public right-of-way. When a lot abuts a right-of-way for
a public thoroughfare or alley, all applicable lot area and front, side and rear
lot requirements shall be computed from the public right-of-way line.
SETBACK — The minimum distance that a structure can be located from
a right-of-way or property line or another structure, thereby creating a
required open space on a lot.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The designated official of the
Township who issues and reviews sewage permit applications and conducts
such investigations and inspections as are necessary to implement the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as amended,64 and the rules and
regulations thereunder.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — A plan to control the increase and
concentration of runoff of stormwater caused by land development or
predeveloped conditions.
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS — The following street classifications shall
apply to all streets in the Township:
STREET MAINTENANCE — The procedure applied to new or existing
streets or streets under construction, including but not limited to
resurfacing, regrading, drainage improvement, pothole repair, dust
prevention practices and snow removal.
SUBDIVIDER — The owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of the
subdivision.
EXPRESSWAY — Expressways are limited access freeways that carry
through traffic between major urban centers and to and from points
outside of a region with no interference.
A.
ARTERIAL — Arterials carry major movements of traffic within or
through the community.
B.
COLLECTOR — Collectors carry the internal traffic movements within
the Township and connect developed areas with the arterial system.
The collector system simultaneously provides abutting property with
road access and accommodates local internal traffic movements.
C.
LOCAL — Local streets provide access to immediately adjacent land but
normally carry a small portion of the total vehicle miles traveled daily.
D.
E. PRIVATE — Any vehicular way that is not dedicated as a public street.
64.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 175-7 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-7
1:262
SUBDIVISION — The division or resudivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of sale, lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or
devisees or other transfer of ownership or building or lot development;
provided, however, that the division by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or
easement of access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map showing ground elevations by contour lines,
and the location of important natural, man-made and other features.
UNIT, DWELLING — A building or portion thereof providing complete
housekeeping facilities for one individual or one family.
USE — The purpose or activity for which the land or building is designed,
arranged or intended; or for which it is occupied or maintained.
UTILITY — Within the terms of this chapter, a "utility" shall be defined to
include public utilities (see "public utility" above) and stormwater facilities.
VARIANCE — Relief from the restrictions set forth in this chapter granted
in accordance with the standards stated in the code. 65
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot,
unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts and
similar improvements, the depth of which is the least distance between the
front lot at the right-of-way line and the building line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the
rear of the principal building and the rear lot line, unoccupied other than by
steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts and similar improvements.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the principal structure and the side lot
line, extending from the front yard, or from the front line where no front
yard is required, to the rear yard. The width of the required side yard is
measured horizontally at 90º with the side lot line, from the nearest part of
the principal building.
65.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 175-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-7
1:263

ARTICLE IV
Preapplication Conferences
§ 175-8. Procedures.
The preapplication conference is provided as an informal session to provide
information prior to preparation of formal application documentation and
shall be optional at the discretion of the subdivider.
§ 175-9. Plans and data.
Submission of the following information at the preapplication conference is
recommended:
A. Prospective subdividers shall arrange a preapplication conference with
the Township Planning Agency to determine the practical and legal
feasibility of the proposed project prior to the development of formal
preliminary preparation. [Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467]
B. Subdividers shall present all information and data, as required by this
chapter, for review and discussion with the Planning Agency. The
Planning Agency shall indicate the general suitability of the proposed
plan for refinement into preliminary plans. [Amended 8-7-2002 by
Ord. No. 467]
C. In assessing the suitability of the plan, the Planning Agency shall
consider the Township's Comprehensive Plan, and any other
appropriate plans, including but not limited to proposed street,
recreation areas, drainage reservations, shopping centers, housing
programs and school sites. [Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467]
D. Consideration shall also be given to possible hazards to health, safety
and welfare. Land shall not be approved for subdivision until such
hazards are properly addressed. Land subject to flooding, slides due to
soil type or slope or excavation, excessive erosion, improper drainage,
mine subsidence problems or land unsuited for on-site sewage disposal
shall be deemed hazardous to an extent which requires a specific
demonstration of measures to remove the identified hazard producing
condition.
A. General information: a general description of existing covenants, land
characteristics, the availability of community facilities and utilities;
also, information relating to the proposed subdivision, such as the
number of lots, typical lot width and depth, commercial areas,
playgrounds, park areas, other public areas, proposed protective
covenants, proposed utility and street improvements.
B. Topographic Map: existing U.S.G.S. Quadrangle Sheet or other
acceptable map in sufficient detail to show topographic features on the
site.
§ 175-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-9
1:265
C. Sketch plan: a simple sketch of the tract boundaries, proposed layout of
streets, lots, significant topographic modifications contemplated and
other features in relation to existing conditions.
D. Timing: a projected timetable for development of the project, including
the anticipated schedule of project phasing.
§ 175-9 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-9
1:266
ARTICLE V
Preliminary Plans
§ 175-10. Procedures.
A. Application. The subdivider shall prepare and submit to the Township
Planning Agency, by delivery to the Township Planner at least 20 days
prior to the Board of Commissioners meeting, the copies of the
preliminary plans of the total land to be [see § 175-11D(8)(k)] ultimately
developed. The number of copies to be filed shall be six. Upon receipt of
the plan, the Township shall forward a copy to the Westmoreland
County Planning Department for review and report, together with a fee
sufficient to cover the cost of the review and report. The applicant shall
pay said fee. The Township shall not approve such application until the
county report is received or until the expiration of 30 days from the date
the application was forwarded to the county. [Amended 2-23-2000 by
Ord. No. 421; 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467]
B. Planning Agency review. The Township Planner shall review the plan
submitted covering the requirements of this chapter point by point and
shall consult with the Township Engineer, Code Enforcement/Zoning
Officer and other officials as appropriate. If the submittal is incomplete
and does not cover all the requirements of this chapter, the submission
will not be placed on the Board of Commissioners agenda, and the
Township Planner will send a letter to the subdivider noting all
incomplete items. [Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467]
C. (Reserved)66
D. Action of the governing body. The governing body shall act on the
preliminary plan and notify the subdivider within 90 days of receiving a
complete submission. The governing body will notify the subdivider of
the place, date, times and agenda of the meeting at which the
preliminary plan will be considered once a complete submission is
received by the Planning Agency. The governing body shall state its
approval, conditional approval or disapproval, giving reasons for each,
and shall notify the subdivider by certified or by registered mail. If
approved or conditionally approved, the authorization to submit a final
plan shall be included with the notification. [Amended 8-7-2002 by
Ord. No. 467]
E. Nature of approval. Approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute
approval of a final plan, but rather an expression of approval of the
layout submitted on the preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation
of the final plan. (See § 175-12A.)
66.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Planning Commission action, was repealed 8-7-2002
by Ord. No. 467.
§ 175-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-11
1:267
§ 175-11. Plans and data. [Amended 3-3-1999 by Ord. No. 397;
2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421; 7-3-2002 by Ord. No. 461; 8-7-2002 by
Ord. No. 467]
All applications for preliminary approval submitted to the Township Planner
shall include, but not be limited to, the following information in both hard
copy and digital (PDF) format:
[Amended 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 701]
A. The preliminary plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100
feet or greater detail.
B. Existing land uses shall be shown for the subject property and adjacent
land areas.
C. A location map shall be included which relates the development site to
contiguous communities, highway systems and other significant
developments.
D. The plan shall show or be accompanied by the following:
(1) Draft of protective covenants, if any.
(2) Title to include:
(a) Name by which the subdivision will be recorded.
(b) Location of municipality, county and state.
(c) Names and addresses of the owner or owners.
(d) Name and seal of the registered professional engineer who
prepared the plan and the registered professional surveyor
who surveyed the property.
(e) North point, date and graphic scale.
(3) Existing easements, their location, width and distance.
(4) Contours at vertical intervals of two feet for land areas with slope
of 5% or less and at five-foot intervals for land areas with a slope of
greater than 5%. Contour lines must extend 10 feet on all sides.
(5) Datum to which contour elevations refer.
(6) Bench marks.
(7) Existing physical features to include:
(a) Watercourses, culverts, bridges and drains.
(b) Buildings, sewers, water mains and fire hydrants, water wells
and septic facilities.
§ 175-11 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-11
1:268
(c) Streets and alleys on or adjacent to the tract, including name,
right-of-way widths and cartway widths.
(d) Telephone conduit line, electric power transmission lines,
petroleum product lines and other significant man-made
features.
(8) Proposed improvements shall include (in scale dimensions):
(a) Location, name and width of all proposed streets and roads and
cartways, showing the courses and distances traversed by the
center line of each.
(b) All rights-of-way, easements and the purposes for which they
are to be established.
(c) Lot lines of all parcels.
(d) Building lines.
(e) A plan showing all areas that meet the standards for
reservations of ground for recreation. (See § 175-26.)
(f) General drainage plan for stormwater to include proposed flow
of stormwater in relation to natural channels.
(g) A plan of the proposed water distribution system or a plan
showing the location of individual wells; any planning modules
necessary to comply with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act.67
(h) A plan of the proposed sanitary sewerage system or a plan,
where required, showing the proposed location and type of onlot
sewage disposal facilities. This plan shall be in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537), as
amended.
(i) Proposed land use of the improvements.
(j) Names and addresses of abutting property owners.
(k) Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the
subdivider's entire holding, a sketch shall be submitted of a
prospective street layout of the remainder of the land.
(l) Certification blocks shall be provided for appropriate
governing and planning bodies. If more than one sheet is used,
designated spaces shall be provided for certification on each
sheet.
E. The subdivider shall provide such additional information as may be
required by the Planning Agency, governing body, Zoning Officer,
67.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 175-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-11
1:269
Township Engineer or other Township agency or organization in order
to more fully evaluate the proposed subdivision and its effect on
adjacent property or the Township as a whole. Such information may
include:
(1) Street profiles showing existing ground elevations and proposed
center-line street grades.
(2) Subsurface condition of the tract.
(3) Typical cross sections of roadways and sidewalks.
(4) Sizes of water pipes and location of valves and fire hydrants.
(5) Location of manholes, invert elevations, grades and sizes of
sanitary sewers.
(6) If the proposed subdivision or a part thereof, is located in a
designated floodplain, base flood elevation data shall be contained
in the plan.
§ 175-11 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-11
1:270
ARTICLE VI
Final Plans
§ 175-12. Procedures.
A. Preliminary approval. An application for approval of a final plan may be
filed with the Township Planner only following approval of a preliminary
plan by the governing body, except that the Planning Agency may
recommend to the governing body final approval to a proposed plan
without preliminary approval, provided that the proposed plan meets
the requirement stated in § 175-14 of this chapter, complies with all the
requirements for final plans and includes all relevant information
required by §§ 175-11 and 175-15 of this chapter. [Amended
2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421; 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467]
B. Application. When filing an application for approval of a final plan, the
subdivider shall submit to the Township Planner, at least 20 days prior
to the Board of Commissioners meeting at which the application is to be
considered complete, an original reproducible (Mylar or linen) of all
plans and information, plus five copies specified by the Planning
Agency. All final plans and other exhibits required for approval shall be
submitted to the Planning Agency within three years after approval of
the preliminary plan. Otherwise, such approval shall become null and
void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the
governing body. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421; 8-7-2002 by
Ord. No. 467]
C. County Planning Commission review. Copies of all final, preliminary
subdivision plans shall be forwarded to Westmoreland County Planning
Commission, along with the appropriate fees, by the developer for
review and report, paid for by the applicant to cover the cost of the
review. The municipality shall not approve an application until the
county report is received or until the expiration of the 30 days from the
date the county application was received.
D. (Reserved)68
E. Action of the governing body. The governing body shall render its
decision on the final plan and communicate its decision to the
subdivider not later than 90 days of receiving a complete submission
that covers all requirements of this chapter. [Amended 2-23-2000 by
Ord. No. 421; 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467]
(1) The decision of the governing body shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant by certified or registered mail at his
last known address not later than five days following the decision.
(2) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
68.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Planning Commission review and action, was repealed
8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467.
§ 175-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-12
1:271
requirements that have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
(3) Failure of the governing body to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
specified shall be deemed art approval of the application, unless
the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or
change in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication
of the decision, in which case, failure to meet the extended time or
change in manner of preservation of communication shall have like
effect.
(4) Procedure.
(a) From the time an application for approval of a preliminary or
final plan is duly filed as provided in this chapter and while
such application is pending approval or disapproval, no change
or amendment of the zoning, subdivision or other governing
ordinance or plan shall affect the decision on such application
adversely to the applicant and the applicant shall be entitled to
a decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing
ordinance or plans as they stood at the time the application
was duly filed. However, if an application is properly and finally
denied, any subsequent application shall be subject to the
intervening change in government regulations.
(b) When an application for approval of a preliminary or final plan
has been approved or approved subject to conditions
acceptable to the applicant, no subsequent change or
amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing
ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect adversely the right
of the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of
the approved development in accordance with the terms of
such approval, within five years from such approval.
(c) Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the
five-year period shall be counted from the date of the
preliminary approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms
of a preliminary approval, the terms shall be constructed in the
light of provisions of the governing ordinance or plans as they
stood at the time when the application for such approval was
duly filed.
(d) Where the landowner has substantially completed the required
improvements as depicted upon the final plat within the
aforesaid five-year limit or any extension thereof as may be
granted by the governing body, no change of any ordinance or
plan enacted subsequent to the date of filing of the preliminary
plat shall modify or revoke any aspect of the approved final plat
pertaining to zoning classification or density, lot, building,
street or utility location.
§ 175-12 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-12
1:272
(e) In the case of a preliminary plat calling for the installation of
improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be
filed by the landowner with the preliminary plat delineating all
proposed sections as well as deadlines within which
applications for final plat approval of each section are intended
to be filed. Such schedule shall be updated annually by the
applicant on or before the anniversary of the preliminary plat
approval, until final plat approval of the final section has been
granted and any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall be
subject to approval of the governing body in its discretion.
(f) Each section in any residential subdivision or land
development, except for the last section, shall contain a
minimum of 25% of the total number of dwelling units as
depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser percentage is
approved by the governing body in its discretion. Provided that
the landowner has not defaulted with regard to or violated any
of the conditions of the preliminary plat approval, including
compliance with landowner's aforesaid schedule of submission
of final plats for the various sections, then the aforesaid
protections afforded by substantially completing the
improvements depicted upon the final plat within five years
shall apply, and for any section or sections, beyond the initial
section, in which the required improvements have not been
substantially completed within said five-year period, the
aforesaid protections shall apply for an additional term or
terms of three years from the date of final plat approval for
each section.
(g) Failure of landowner to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of
submission of final plats for the various sections shall subject
any such section to any and all changes in zoning, subdivision
and other governing ordinance enacted subsequent to the date
of the initial preliminary plan submission.
(5) Before acting on any subdivision plan, the governing body may hold
a public hearing thereon, after public notice and may notify
surrounding property owners of such public hearing.
(6) The governing body shall not give their final approval to a final plan
until the County Planning Commission report is received or until
the expiration of 30 days from the date the final plan application
was forwarded to the county.
(7) The governing body shall not give their final approval to a final plan
prior to approval of required Planning Modules as specified by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
F. Development agreement. The developer may not act in reliance on the
final approval of a final plan by the governing body until the developer
and the municipality enter into a written agreement which sets forth
§ 175-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-12
1:273
§ 175-13. Plans and data.
All applications for final plan approval submitted to the Township Planner
shall include, but not be limited to, the following information in both hard
copy and digital (PDF) format:
[Amended 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 701]
the terms and conditions of final approval and other relevant
obligations of the developer. Upon execution of the agreement, the
developer shall pay a fee to the municipality to reimburse the
municipality for a portion of the costs of inspecting the work being done
pursuant to the final plan. The fee shall be in an amount determined
from time to time by the governing body.69
G. Nature of approval. Approval of a final plan shall not constitute
authorization to commence construction. Prior to construction start, all
necessary permits, approvals, agreements and sureties must be
secured by the developer.
H. Title certificate. No final plan shall be approved by the governing body
unless a certificate of title or other proof of a proprietary interest in the
land on the part of the subdivider is furnished.
A. Shall be drawn on Mylar, linen or other comparable permanent and
reproducible material and shall be on sheets of 18 inches by 24 inches
including a border of 1/2 inch on all sides, except the binding edge
which shall be one inch. More than one sheet may be used for larger
tracts and must be of the same scale and indexed and provide space for
required certifications.
B. Shall be drawn with waterproof black ink and all records, data, entries
and statements thereon shall also be made with the same type of ink or
reproducible typing, except that contour lines, when shown, shall be
drawn with waterproof brown ink or with diluted waterproof black ink,
so that the contour lines will be shown faintly on a print made from the
plan.
C. Shall be drawn to scale of one inch equals 100 feet or such other scale
approved by the Planning Agency and shall be of sufficient size to
clearly show all notations, dimensions and entries. All dimension shall
be drawn in feet and decimals of a foot. [Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord.
No. 467]
D. Shall contain a title block in the lower right corner with the following:
(1) Name under which the subdivision is to be recorded;
69.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the governing body, by resolution, may
change the fee from time to time, provided that the fee in no event shall exceed the cost
to the Township of inspecting the work being done by the developer in accordance with
the final plan.
§ 175-12 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-13
1:274
(2) Date of plan, graphic scale and location of subdivision;
(3) Name of subdivision owner; and
(4) Name, seal and address of the registered professional land
surveyor preparing the plan.
E. All final plans submitted shall be drawn according to the following:
(1) Streets and other ways by heavy solid lines;
(2) Perimetered property lines of subdivision by heavy dashed and two
dotted lines;
(3) Lot lines by medium solid lines;
(4) Restriction of building lines by medium dashed lines; and
(5) Easements or other reserved areas by light dotted lines.
F. The final plan shall show:
(1) Primary control points or benchmarks approved by the Township
Engineer or description and ties to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings and similar data shall be referred, tract closures,
boundaries with bearings, distances, acreage and tax parcel
identification;
(2) Acreage of each lot or parcel;
(3) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and
their purpose and other rights-of-way and property lines of lots and
other sites with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflection angles,
radii, arcs and central angles of all curves;
(4) Name and right-of-way width of each street or right-of-way;
(5) Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements;
(6) Number to identify each lot or site;
(7) Purpose for which sites other than residential are to be used;
(8) Building setback line on all lots and sites;
(9) Location, type, material and size of all survey monuments and lot
markers; [Amended 6-2-2004 by Ord. No. 512]
(10) Names of recorded owners of adjoining land and land use;
(11) Certification of registered surveyor or professional engineer
showing name, address, registration number and seal;
(12) Statement by the owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and sites
for public use;
§ 175-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-13
1:275
(13) Protective covenants, if any, in form for recording;
(14) Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as
may be required in the enforcement of this chapter;
(15) Certification blocks for the appropriate governing and planning
bodies; and
(16) Clear sight triangles and sight distances in both directions at all
street intersections.
(17) Metes, bounds and acreage of grounds being reserved for
recreational facilities. [Added 7-3-2002 by Ord. No. 461]
G. Submitted with the final plan shall be the following additional
information:
(1) Plan and profile sheets for all streets with horizontal and vertical
alignments and existing center-line profiles along with the location
and size of storm sewers inlets and invert elevations.
(2) Typical cross sections of roadways and sidewalks.
(3) A plan showing the size of water pipes and location of valves and
fire hydrants.
(4) A plan showing the location of manholes, invert elevations, grades
and sizes of sanitary sewers.
(5) A final grading plan.
(6) A sedimentation and erosion control plan approved by the County
Conservation District under authority by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection Rules and Regulations,
Title 25, Chapter 102, Erosion Control, if determined necessary by
the Planning Commission.
(7) A sewage disposal plan approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act (Act 537), as amended,70 and all supplemental
documentation which may be required to update the municipality's
sewage facilities plan required under said Act.
(8) A plan for placement of gas, electric, telephone and cable television
service lines, as applicable, pursuant to the rules and regulations of
the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission.
(9) If the proposed subdivision is located in a designated floodplain,
base flood elevation data shall be contained on the plan.
(10) A complete drainage and stormwater drainage plan for the
subdivision and/or land development, which complies with Chapter
70.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 175-13 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-13
1:276
164 of the Code of the Township of Rostraver, to include all storm
sewers and appurtenances, along with the method of disposal of
all stormwater collected and the method of drainage for adjacent
territory; also an approval letter from the Westmoreland County
Conservation District and Rostraver Township Engineer.
[Amended 7-2-2003 by Ord. No. 494]
(11) If water is to be provided by means other than by private wells
owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, evidence shall be presented to the
governing body that the subdivision or development is to be
supplied by a certificated public utility, a bona fide cooperative
association of lot owners or by a municipal corporation, authority
or utility. A copy of a certificate of public convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such
certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or
agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate,
shall be acceptable evidence.
(12) Information submitted with the final plan should have the
certification of a registered land surveyor, professional engineer or
architect showing name, address, registration number and seal.
(13) Plan indicating the location and specifications of all recreational
facilities. [Added 7-3-2002 by Ord. No. 461]
(14) Lighting plans with the following information shall be submitted for
review and approval by the Township Engineer: [Added 4-7-2004
by Ord. No. 509]
(a) Shall include a schematic layout of all proposed exterior fixture
locations, ISO footcandle data, and a plat demonstrating
intensities and uniformities, and manufacturer's description of
the equipment (catalog cuts), glare control devices, lamps,
mounting heights and means, proposed hours of operation of
the lighting, and maintenance schedule. Illumination
intensities shall be plotted on a ten-foot by ten-foot grid.
(b) The applicant shall submit a visual impact photometric plan
that demonstrates both light coverage and light spillage
resulting from the proposed lighting plan and the provision for
adequate measures to mitigate nuisance from light pollution
and disabling glare, both on the use of the development site
and on adjacent properties.
(c) The developer shall provide the Township with a field-certified
as-built for all exterior lighting.
§ 175-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-13
1:277

ARTICLE VII
Subdivisions of Three Lots or Fewer
§ 175-14. Procedures. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421;
8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467]
Upon request of the subdivider for waiver of said requirements, the
governing body may waive the requirements of Articles V and VI relating
to preliminary approval for subdivisions of three lots or fewer requiring no
additional streets or street openings or the combination or recombination
of lots or portions or previously plotted lots, when the resultant lots are
included in street frontage and total area size so that they reach or exceed
the standards of this chapter and the street pattern is in conformity to
the Township Comprehensive Plan. Along with the request of a waiver, an
application for final plan approval shall be filed with the Planning Agency
along with the plans and data required in § 175-15 and shall be processed
according to Article VI, § 175-12.
§ 175-15. Plans and data.
Plans approved for waiver under § 175-14 of this chapter shall include, but
not be limited to, the following information which shall be submitted to the
Township Planner in both hard copy and digital (PDF) format:
[Amended 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 701]
A. The proposed plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet
or greater.
B. The proposed plan shall be legibly drawn on Mylar, linen or comparable
permanent material of at least 18 inches by 24 inches.
C. Location map.
D. The plan shall show or be accompanied by the following:
(1) Description of covenants;
(2) Title to include:
(a) Location by municipality, county and state.
(b) Names and addresses of the owner or owners.
(c) Name and seal of a registered surveyor who surveyed the
property and/or prepared the plan.
(d) North point, date and graphic scale.
(3) Proposed use of the land;
(4) Lot lines, dimensions and land area of proposed lot;
§ 175-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-15
1:279
(5) Existing and proposed streets, alleys and/or easements adjacent to
the tract;
(6) Available utilities (if public sewer and water, source and sewage
disposal system should be indicated);
(7) Planning modules specified by PADEP;
(8) Names of abutting property owners;
(9) Statement by the owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and sites
for public use;
(10) Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as
may be required in the enforcement of this chapter; and
(11) Location, type, material and size of all survey monuments and lot
markers. [Added 6-2-2004 by Ord. No. 512]
E. The following additional data shall be submitted upon the request by
the Planning Agency or governing body: [Amended 2-23-2000 by
Ord. No. 421; 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467]
(1) Subsurfaces and drainage conditions of the tract; and
(2) Any other data pertinent to the plan.71
71.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 702, Resubdividing or replatting, which immediately followed
this subsection, was deleted 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421.
§ 175-15 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-15
1:280
ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards
§ 175-16. Application of standards.
The following minimum subdivision principles, standards and requirements
will be applied by Township officials in evaluating the plans for a proposed
subdivision.
§ 175-17. Land requirements.
§ 175-18. Street requirements.
A. Land shall be suited for the purpose for which it is to be subdivided.
B. Land subject to hazards of life, health and safety, such as strip-mine
land, quarry land, open ditches and land subject to flooding or
subsidence, shall not be subdivided for residential purposes. All such
hazards shall be identified and eliminated by the owner or developer
and guaranties shall be provided to the Township that adequate
safeguards against such hazards have been provided.
A. Proposed streets shall be properly related to Township, county and
state road and highway plans that have been prepared and officially
adopted and/or filed as prescribed by law.
B. Streets shall be logically related to the topography to achieve usable
lots and reasonable grades.
C. Internal subdivision streets shall be laid out to discourage unnecessary
through traffic, but provisions to coordinate adjacent area streets will
be generally required.
D. Where a subdivision plan abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the governing body may require local access streets,
reverse frontage lots or such other treatment that will provide
protection for abutting properties, reduction in the number of
intersections with arterial streets and separation of local and through
traffic.
E. New half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where essential
to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other
requirements and standards of this chapter and where, in addition,
satisfactory assurances for dedication of the remaining part of the
street is secured.
F. Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial
street, the other part of the street shall be plotted within such tract.
G. Cul-de-sac streets may be permitted when it is clear that through traffic
at such a street end is not essential to the existing or future street
§ 175-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-18
1:281
system in that district or to the development of adjacent properties in
the area.
(1) Such streets, where permitted, shall not exceed 500 feet, including
the turnaround at the closed end. A request for a waiver can be
made to the Board of Commissioners, with a narrative explaining
how additional length improves the subdivision design, results in a
better relationship of the proposed development to the existing
topography and does not create any hardships for the subdivision's
residents or the Township's. [Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No.
467]
(2) The turnaround shall have an outside pavement radius of not less
than 40 feet and a right-of-way radius of not less than 50 feet.
(3) The minimum grade of the turnaround portion of the cul-de-sac
shall be 1%.
(4) The maximum grade of the turnaround portion of the cul-de-sac
shall be 5%.
(5) All culs-de-sac must have a minimum of two drainage structures or
as required by the Township Engineer.
H. If lots resulting from original subdivision are large enough to permit
additional subdivision or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided,
adequate street rights-of-way shall be provided as necessary to allow
for future development activity.
I. Reserve strips, restricting or controlling access to adjacent streets or
properties, shall be prohibited.
J. The maximum allowable center-line grades are shown in Table 1.72
Short sections of roadway in excess of those shown in Table 1 may be
approved by the governing body where it is clear that no traffic hazards
or maintenance problem will be created.
K. Minimum grades on all streets shall not be less than 1%.
L. Vertical alignment. Vertical curves shall be installed on all street grade
changes to provide for minimum sight distances of 150 feet.
M. Horizontal alignment. Minimum center-line radii for horizontal curves
shall be 150 feet.
N. Widths. Minimum cartway paving and right-of-way widths are shown in
Table 1.73
(1) Except additional right-of-way and cartway width may be required
by the governing body for the following purposes:
72.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
73.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 175-18 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-18
1:282
(a) To promote public safety and convenience where anticipated
traffic flows warrant or where drainage easements should
reasonably parallel thoroughfares.
(b) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of
inadequate right-of-way.
(2) Where a subdivision abuts a state right-of-way less than the
standards in Table 174 for a particular roadway classification, the
building setback shall be increased by an amount equal to 1/2 the
difference between the existing right-of-way width and the
standard right-of-way width in Table 1.
O. Street intersections.
(1) All curbs at intersections shall be rounded by a minimum radius
shown in Table 1.75
(2) Grades approaching intersections shall not exceed 3% for a
distance of not less than 25 feet from the nearest right-of-way line
of the intersection.
(3) Multiple intersection of more than four streets shall be prohibited.
(4) Minimum street intersection angles shall be 90° unless approved
by the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No.
467]
(5) A clear sight triangle shall be maintained at all intersections within
an area formed by the intersecting street lines and a line joining
points on the street lines 75 feet from the corner.
(6) Intersections of local streets with collector and arterial streets
shall be kept to a minimum, consistent with topography and other
local conditions. Intersections of less than 150 feet shall be
avoided.
P. Alleys shall not be permitted in any subdivision.
Q. Private streets (vehicular rights-of-way not dedicated for public use)
shall not be approved nor shall layout or improvements for lots abutting
private streets be approved.
R. Streets proposed for commercial or industrial land development
purposes shall, if possible, be laid out to intersect directly with arterial
and collector streets. Insofar as possible, traffic circulation systems for
commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be designed in a manner to
eliminate or discourage traffic flow through residential areas.
S. Driveways (site ingress and egress).
74.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
75.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 175-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-18
1:283
§ 175-19. Land development requirements.
(1) Driveways shall conform to the values shown in Table 2.76
(2) Commercial and industrial ingress and egress (driveways) shall be
designed to provide optimum visibility and to minimize traffic
congestion in the vicinity of the development parcel. Traffic access
design shall conform to the following requirements:
(a) In addition to the information and data required by §§ 175-11
and 175-13 of this chapter, all applications for preliminary and
final plan approvals of subdivisions for commercial and
industrial land development shall contain a traffic circulation
plan showing:
[1] Locations and dimensions of vehicular ingress and egress
for each development parcel.
[2] Location and access provisions for parking and loading for
each development parcel.
[3] Available sight distances at all driveways.
(b) Defined ingress and egress points shall be required for all
commercial and industrial development parcels.
(c) Driveway widths shall have a minimum width as shown in Table
2.77
(3) All driveways shall be constructed so as not to interfere with
roadway drainage. Cross drains shall be constructed beneath the
driveway where required to provide adequate drainage.
T. General requirements. All streets minimum right-of-way widths, paving
widths, angle of intersection and maximum grades shall be in
accordance with Table 1.78
A. The following general provisions shall apply to all subdivisions of land:
(1) All lot area requirements and specified minimum yard and setback
designations shall be dimensioned from public rights-of-way where
applicable. No lot area requirement or setback shall be computed
from within public right-of-way.
(2) The frontage width of lots abutting a cul-de-sac shall be determined
as the width at the building line. The side yard and setback
requirements will be calculated from the midpoint of the structure
along the average length of both sides and the rear of the structure.
76.Editor's Note: Table 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
77.Editor's Note: Table 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
78.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 175-18 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-19
1:284
(3) All lot lines shall be set perpendicular or radial to the center line of
the street whenever possible.
(4) Lots abutting local streets shall front upon the streets that parallel
the long dimension of the block, if possible.
(5) All lots shall abut by their full frontage on a publicly dedicated
street or on a street that has received the legal status of such. Lots
abutting on a private street or easement shall not be approved,
except that lots developed on private streets in existence prior to
the enactment of this chapter may be approved. Private streets
shall not be extended to permit additional lot development.
(6) The grading of any earth in excess of 5,000 square feet by cut or fill
shall comply with the following standards: [Amended 3-1-2006
by Ord. No. 543]
(a) Any toe of slope for a cut or fill with a height of greater than six
feet shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from the property
line.
(b) All cut/fill slopes shall be benched at the minimum
requirements listed below in Table No. 1.
Table No. 1
Type of Cut/Fill
Maximum
Height Between
Benches
(feet)
Minimum Width
of Benches
(feet)
Earth 15 10
Fill 15 10
Major cuts in shale 15 10
Major cuts in
sandstone
30 15
Major cuts in
limestone
35 15
(c) The grading of any earth by cut or fill shall not exceed a slope
of 3:1.
[1] Should a slope in excess of 3:1 and greater than six feet in
height be necessary, the property owner shall prepare and
file a soils report with all boring logs prepared by a
registered professional engineer certifying to the slope's
stability or, in the alternative, a retaining structure with a
minimum of a four-foot chain link fence shall be designed
and certified by a registered professional engineer in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 175-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-19
1:285
[2] Any cut or fill greater than six feet in height and in excess
of a 3:1 slope shall have a minimum four-foot chain link
fence erected from at the top of the slope through its
entire length.
(7) The literal application of front yard setback requirements for
single-family dwellings, as set forth in the Township Zoning
Ordinance,79 may be relaxed by the governing body in
predominantly developed areas, provided that:
(a) Seventy-five percent or more of the established structures on
the same side of the street in the immediate vicinity have front
yard areas less than required by the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) For purposes of this setback relaxation, immediate vicinity
shall be interpreted as a block area not exceeding 800 linear
feet which is between either two intersecting streets or an
intersecting street and a cul-de-sac.
(c) In the absence of typical block development in open or rural
areas, the immediate vicinity shall be determined as developed
parcels within 500 linear feet of the subject property.
(d) Where setback relaxations are granted, the front yard setback
requirements shall be established as the average setback of all
existing structures in the immediate vicinity.
(e) The relaxation of setback requirements under this section shall
require a variance from the Zoning Hearing Board and shall be
employed only to achieve orderly development and not to
circumvent the purpose and intent of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance or of the Zoning Ordinance.
B. Lots laid out for residential purposes shall be subdivided in accordance
with the provisions of the Township Zoning Ordinance with respect to
lot area, lot width, setbacks, yard requirements and other applicable
requisites and requirements.
C. Nonresidential purposes.
(1) Lots and tracts of land laid out for nonresidential purposes shall be
subdivided in accordance with the provisions of the Township
Zoning Ordinance80 with respect to lot area, lot width, setbacks,
yard requirements and other applicable requisites and
requirements.
(2) The location of areas designated for structures, internal site
accessways, off-street parking and loading areas and generalized
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 175-19 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-19
1:286
§ 175-19.1. Traffic impact studies. [Added 7-2-2008 by Ord. No.
574]
land use proposals shall be included as a part of all final plan
applications for nonresidential purposes.
(3) The Planning Agency may recommend and the Board of
Commissioners may authorize block platting in place of lot platting
for nonresidential purposes to provide the developer maximum
flexibility, provided that no block shall be subdivided in such a way
that any subsequent lots would be smaller than the minimum size
authorized by this chapter for residential uses. [Amended
8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467]
(4) The developer shall demonstrate every effort to protect adjacent
existing or potential residential development sites through the
provision of guaranties or other appropriate procedures or
amenities designed and established for the purpose of mitigating
adverse influences resulting from business activities.
A. Purpose:
(1) To allow the Township to determine the safety and congestion
impacts, and related costs, of proposed major traffic-generating
uses.
(2) To require that applicants respond with reasonable proposals to
resolve the negative traffic impacts that their proposed uses will
cause on the public.
(3) To recognize that sufficient federal, state, and Township funds are
not available to resolve traffic problems caused by private
development.
(4) To assist in carrying out Sections 503(2)(ii) and 503(3) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.81
(5) To ensure that streets bordering a subdivision or land development
are coordinated and of such widths and grades and in such
locations as deemed necessary to accommodate prospective traffic
and to facilitate fire protection.
(6) To ensure that the access into and out of subdivisions and land
developments is reasonably safe.
B. Administration.
(1) The Rostraver Township Planning Agency may require a full or
abbreviated traffic study as a part of its review process for
subdivisions and land developments consistent with the standards
of this section.
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(2)(ii) and (3).
§ 175-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-19.1
1:287
(2) The full cost of the traffic study shall be borne by the applicant. Any
costs associated with professional review of the traffic study by the
Township's professional consultants shall also be borne by the
applicant. The applicant shall provide the appropriate escrow to
ensure the payment of the costs of such traffic study review.
(3) Traffic impact studies shall be prepared by a qualified traffic
engineer and/or transportation planner with previous traffic study
experience. To be considered as qualified, the engineer or planner
shall have completed at least three comparable studies and shall
make copies of same available to the Township. The Township
reserves the right to review and approve the qualifications of any
proposed consultant.
(4) The Township shall require such on-site traffic improvements to be
provided by the applicant, as the Township deems appropriate, in
light of the traffic impact study as a specific condition of
preliminary plan approval for all land developments and/or
subdivisions for which a study has been required. The study shall
identify improvements/facilities to be installed or actions to be
undertaken by the applicant.
(5) Joint traffic studies between different applicants are acceptable
and are strongly encouraged.
(6) The Township will ensure that its own selected consulting traffic
engineer or other professional consultants for any project do not
have a current professional relationship with the applicant of the
land development or subdivision plan or a current professional
relationship with the traffic engineer that prepared the traffic study
for the applicant. The Township reserves the right to review the
qualifications of any proposed consultant.
C. Determination of the level of traffic study required. The Planning
Agency shall make a determination on the level of traffic study
required, based upon two factors: the location of the proposed
development, and the projected traffic generation of the proposed
development.
(1) Location factors. The Township has identified the following as
stressed roads and intersections in its Comprehensive Plan:
(a) Stressed roads:
[1] PA Route 51.
[2] PA Route 201.
[3] Finley Road.
(b) Stressed intersections:
[1] Route 51 and Airport Road.
§ 175-19.1 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-19.1
1:288
[2] Route 51 and Webster Hollow Road/Salem Church
Crossover.
[3] Route 51 and Fells Church Road/Fells Church Crossover.
[4] Route 51 and Vernon Drive.
[5] Route 51 and McKenery Drive/Snyder Lane.
[6] Route 51 and Port Royal Road.
[7] Finely Road and SR 201.
[8] SR 201 and SR 3031 (Vance DeiCas Highway).
(2) As deemed necessary by changes in information gathering and new
land developments, the Township may remove or add new stressed
roads and intersections as necessary by a resolution of the majority
of Commissioners.
(3) Determination of peak hour trips. As a general guide, the Planning
Agency shall utilize Table 3.2 and the second edition of
Transportation and Land Development, as published by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), and adapted below for
reference. However, the Planning Agency may utilize alternative
information provided by the developer for more specific land uses,
if consistent with the ITE trip generation manual.
Land Use Thresholds (Based Upon Trip Generation
Characteristics)
Peak
Hour Trips
Land Use 25 or More 50 or More 100 or More
Single-family dwellings 22 45 90
(dwelling units)
Apartments 37 75 150
(dwelling units)
Townhouses or
condominiums 45 90 180
(dwelling units)
Mobile home parks 45 90 180
(dwelling units)
Retail/shopping
centers
1,500 3,000 6,000
(square feet gross
floor area)
§ 175-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-19.1
1:289
Land Use Thresholds (Based Upon Trip Generation
Characteristics)
Peak
Hour Trips
Land Use 25 or More 50 or More 100 or More
Convenience store/gas
stations
1 3 7
(pumps)
Banks with drive-in 500 1,000 2,000
(square feet gross
floor area)
Professional offices 16,750 33,500 67,000
(square feet gross
floor area)
Medical/dental offices 7,500 15,000 30,000
(square feet gross
floor area)
Research and
development/
corporate offices
17,750 35,500 71,000
(square feet gross
floor area)
Light Industrial/
warehousing
distribution centers
24,500 49,000 98,000
(square feet gross
floor area)
Heavy industry 36,375 72,750 145,500
(square feet gross
floor area)
(4) Traffic study level requirements. Based upon the location and trip
generation characteristics, the Planning Agency shall use the
following table as a guide for the level of traffic study required.
Trip Generation at
Peak Hours
Location Accessing
a Stressed Road or
Within 800 Feet of
a Stressed
Intersection Other Locations
At least 25 trips Abbreviated study Not required
At least 50 trips Full study Abbreviated study
§ 175-19.1 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-19.1
1:290
Trip Generation at
Peak Hours
Location Accessing
a Stressed Road or
Within 800 Feet of
a Stressed
Intersection Other Locations
At least 100 trips Full study Full study
(5) The Township Board of Commissioners may still, at its discretion,
require any other subdivision or land development application to be
accompanied by a traffic impact study. In such circumstances, the
Commissioners will notify the applicant within 60 days following
the Planning Agency's first meeting with the applicant. Such a
notification shall specify the reason for the requirement, citing the
proposal's particular location or existing problems or type of use
(i.e., generation of heavy truck traffic).
D. Abbreviated study requirements.
(1) The following abbreviated traffic impact study shall be required as
part of the preliminary plan submission. Development of a project
in stages, or on a piecemeal basis, will not avoid this requirement.
The trips expected to be produced by the ultimate build out of the
development will be the basis for such a study. However, even if a
development generates less than the required peak hour trips, it is
not totally excluded from the adequacy requirements of these
guidelines, unless site traffic generation is anticipated to be de
minimus (less than five peak hour trips).
(2) A written, abbreviated traffic study, where appropriate, and a
traffic calming and access management analysis shall be submitted
at the time of the preliminary plan application and shall include:
(a) Projected peak a.m., p.m., and/or Saturday traffic volumes of
the development.
(b) Projected ADT (average daily trips) of the development.
(c) Current ADT and peak hour volumes of streets adjacent to any
access drives.
(d) LOS (level of service) of existing and proposed access drives.
(e) Modal split of services (categories of vehicles) entering the
site.
(f) Proposed sight distances at access drives.
(g) Existing and proposed pedestrian paths from streets and
within the site to entrances of all buildings.
§ 175-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-19.1
1:291
(h) The study shall identify improvements/facilities to be installed
or actions to be undertaken by the applicant to ensure the
following:
[1] LOS C or higher overall for all new access drives.
[2] No reduction in the levels of service for existing access
drives, except that LOS D shall be permitted during the
a.m. and p.m. peak hours. If an applicant cannot meet this
requirement, an analysis shall be completed to show that
all reasonable options have been considered to create the
most efficient access possible.
[3] Sight distances for all access drives intersecting with all
streets shall meet Township and/or PennDOT
requirements, as applicable.
E. Full traffic impact study requirements.
(1) A written, full traffic study, and, where appropriate, traffic calming
and access management measures shall be submitted at the time of
preliminary plan application. The study area shall include all public
streets and intersections within a radius of 1,600 feet of an access
drive to the site, unless the Township's consulting traffic engineer
determines that another study area shall be more appropriate. The
full traffic study shall include, at a minimum, the following:
(a) Current ADT and peak hour volumes of all streets.
(b) Current LOS of all intersections.
(c) Projected ADT and peak hour volumes of all streets without the
development.
(d) Projected LOS of all intersections without the development.
(e) Site traffic generation, including projected ADT and peak hour
volumes of the development. Development of a project in
stages, or on a piecemeal basis, must create a realistic
assumption expected to be produced by the ultimate build out
of the development.
(f) Site traffic distribution.
(g) Site traffic assignment.
(h) Projected ADT and peak hour volumes of all streets and
intersections within the development.
(i) Projected LOS of all intersections within the development,
including all existing and proposed access drives.
(j) An assessment of the change in roadway operating conditions
resulting from the development traffic.
§ 175-19.1 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-19.1
1:292
§ 175-20. Blocks.
(k) Modal split of vehicles entering the site.
(l) Proposed sight distances at access drives.
(m) Existing and proposed pedestrian paths from streets and
within the site to entrances of all buildings.
(2) The study shall identify improvements/facilities to be installed or
actions to be undertaken by the applicant to ensure the following:
(a) LOC C or higher overall for all new access driveways.
(b) No reduction in the levels of service for existing access
driveways, except that LOS D shall be permitted during the
a.m. and p.m. peak hours. If an applicant cannot meet this
requirement, an analysis shall be completed to show that all
reasonable options have been considered to create the most
efficient access possible.
(c) No reduction in the levels of service of intersections within the
study area as a result of the development; however, if the
intersection already has an LOS, no reduction in the
intersection delay shall occur.
(d) Sight distances for all access drives intersecting with all rightsof-
way shall meet Township and/or PennDOT requirements, as
applicable.
F. Implementation. The Commissioners shall review the traffic impact
study to analyze its adequacy in solving any traffic problems that will
occur due to the land development or subdivision. The Township's
traffic engineer shall review the study and submit their review
comments to the Commissioners. These review comments shall be part
of the Township's official review and approval process. The
Commissioners may decide that certain improvements contained on
and/or adjacent to the site and within the study area are necessary for
land development or subdivision plan approval and may attach these
conditions to the approval. If the municipality concludes that additional
improvements are necessary, the developer shall have the opportunity
to resubmit alternative improvement designs to obtain plan approval.
A. Block length shall not ordinarily exceed 1,800 feet nor be less than 500
feet depending on topography, adjacent road configurations and other
related criteria.
B. Blocks shall be at least two lots in depth except for reverse frontage
lots.
C. The depth to width ratio of usable lot length shall be a maximum of 2 1/
2 to 1.
§ 175-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-21
1:293
§ 175-21. Easements.
§ 175-22. Sidewalks. [Amended 7-5-2006 by Ord. No. 550]
A. Utility and public utility easements shall have a minimum width of 20
feet and be placed at the side or rear of lots and underground whenever
possible. When the governing body determines that conditions are
suitable for utilities and/or public utilities, an easement reservation will
be required.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially
with the line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate
to preserve natural drainage and provide sufficient width for
maintenance purposes, but not less than 20 feet. Where available,
federal, state and local flood maps and data shall be employed to
determine the location of easements or rights-of-way required by this
chapter.
A. Sidewalks shall be required to be constructed in all subdivisions and
land developments involving the construction of new public streets,
unless otherwise waived by the Board of Commissioners under the
provisions of § 175-22C of this chapter.
B. Unless an alternative installation plan is proposed by the developer, and
approved by the Board of Commissioners as part of the development
agreement, sidewalks within residential subdivisions and land
developments shall be installed at the time of initial roadway
construction. The developer shall be responsible for bonding all
sidewalks pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.82
C. When one of the following conditions exists making the installation of
sidewalks unnecessary or impractical, the developer shall so
demonstrate those condition(s) and request, in writing, to the Board of
Commissioners that this requirement be waived in whole or in part.
Approval or denial of the request shall be made, in writing, by the Board
of Commissioners. Financial consideration of the costs of construction
of the proposed sidewalks shall not be considered by the Board as a
reason for waiving this requirement.
(1) Ninety percent of the lots within all phases of the plan are greater
than one acre.
(2) The subdivision plan has only one street which is a cul-de-sac.
(3) The subdivision plan is less than 10 acres, including all phases of
the plan.
82.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 175-21 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-23
1:294
§ 175-23. Reserved areas.
Reserve strips surrounding property or areas reserved for any purpose
that shall make any area unprofitable for regular or special assessments or
that may revert to an untended nuisance area will not be approved by the
governing body.
§ 175-24. Street names and numbering. [Amended 12-6-2006 by
Ord. No. 556]
A. The following provisions shall apply to the assigning of all street
name(s) public/private:
(1) At the time of filing an application for a preliminary subdivision and
or land development, the property owner shall submit to the
Township a written request of at least five proposed new street
names for each new street being proposed. The proposed names
will be reviewed with the Westmoreland County Department of
Public Safety and approved to avoid possible duplication.
(2) Street name(s) become final upon recording of the final subdivision
plan and/or approval of a final land development plan.
(3) Street name(s) may be reserved for three years. If final recording of
the preliminary subdivision does not occur and/or construction
does not begin on a land development within three years, a written
request for a two-year extension of the street name(s) reservation
shall be submitted to the Township and the Westmoreland County
Department of Public Safety. If such a request is not received, the
name(s) will no longer be reserved.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the landowner of each dwelling,
apartment building, mobile home, business, industry and/or all other
principal buildings to purchase, post and maintain proper identification
of such structures within 60 days of the enactment of this section and of
all future owners of such structures to post proper identification prior
to occupancy.
C. Proper identification shall consist of the address number posted in
numerals and/or letters at least three inches in height with a minimum
of a one-fourth-inch-wide stroke, contrasting color with the background
on which they are affixed, and reflective. [Amended 4-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 561]
D. The placement of proper identification must be posted in at least one of
the following manners:
(1) Address numbers placed on or within three feet of either side of the
door facing the street to which the structure/building is addressed,
wherever most visible. If such placement is not possible or visible
due to features of the structure, said address may be posted on an
alternative location, as determined by the Rostraver Township
§ 175-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-24
1:295
§ 175-25. Access.
Subdividing land shall be done in a manner that will not bar adjacent
property owners from access to streets and ways of alignment or otherwise
preclude the development of surrounding land areas.
Emergency Management Coordinator, in similar proximity to the
door, such as a porch post.
(2) Address number posted on both sides of the mailbox or both sides
of the mailbox post, only if the mailbox is located on the same side
of the street as the structure it serves.
(3) Private lanes and long driveways. If any structure/building is
located so that the address number is not clearly visible from the
street, an additional address number shall be posted at the
intersection of the driveway with the public street along with the
posting requirements of Subsection D(1).
(4) Structures/buildings that contain units or multiple addresses in one
structure/building, including but not limited to apartment
buildings, condominiums, and office buildings, shall post an
additional address sign at the main entrance facing the street to
which the units are addressed along with the posting requirements
of Subsection D(1).
E. The Township is hereby authorized and directed to give notice, by
United States mail, to the landowner, of any structure/building that
remains in violation of the provisions of this section, directing and
requiring such landowner to conform to the requirement of this section
with five days after issuance of such notice.
F. Violations and penalties.
(1) In case any person, firm or corporation shall neglect, fail or refuse
to comply with such notice within the period of time stated therein,
the Township authorities may post or have posted said
identification, as aforesaid; the cost thereof, together with any
additional payment authorized by law, may be collected by the
Township from such person, firm or corporation in the manner
provided by law for the collection of municipal claims or by an
action of assumpsit.
(2) In addition to the other powers herein set forth for the violation of
this chapter, the Township may institute proceedings in courts of
equity.
§ 175-24 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-26
1:296
§ 175-26. Recreation dedication; fee in lieu of land. [Amended
7-3-2002 by Ord. No. 461; 7-5-2006 by Ord. No. 550; 7-2-2008 by
Ord. No. 573]
In order to implement Section 503(11) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,83 Rostraver Township has adopted an Official Recreation
Plan. This section applies to new residential subdivisions or new residential
land developments (including planned residential developments or new
mobile home parks or new mobile home lots). All residential subdivisions
and residential land developments of at least 20 lots or at least 20 dwelling
units shall provide the reservation of suitable grounds for recreation, or pay
a fee in lieu of such land, or construct public recreation facilities, or present
a combination of dedicated land, facilities construction and fees. All such
requirements shall conform to the authority conferred in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.), and constitute a
condition precedent to preliminary or final plan approval. The applicant and
developer shall hereinafter collectively be referred to as either "applicant"
or "developer." In the case of a multiphase plan, wherein less than 20 lots
are created, this section shall apply to all lots created from the parent
tract or dwelling units erected upon the tract for a period of five years
from the date of initial application. The Commissioners may also require the
dedication of land or fees in lieu for subdivisions of less than 20 lots, where
it is obvious that additional lands remain available for subdivision from the
parent tract.
A. An applicant for preliminary plat approval on an applicable multiphase
plan or single phase final plan approval of a residential land
development or subdivision shall dedicate to the Township for public
use a portion of such site as a recreation area. The total amount of land
to be deeded to the Township shall be equivalent to at least 3,400
square feet per dwelling unit. The Township may enter into an
agreement with the developer to satisfy the recreational use and open
space/green area public dedication requirements prescribed in this
section upon payment to the Township of the sum of not less than $700
for each dwelling unit in a residential land development plan or each lot
in a residential subdivision or mobile home park. The above fee may be
adjusted from time to time for inflation, and the current applicable fee
shall be indicated in the Township schedule of fees, adopted by
resolution. Alternative land, fee, facility or construction combinations
shall be an agreed amount based upon the value of any land, fees, items
purchased and services provided. The Township Planning Agency and
Rostraver Township Recreation Commission shall review such
alternatives for consistency with the Official Recreation Plan, prior to
acceptance by the Board of Commissioners.
B. Criteria for site selection of land for recreational use.
(1) The land proposed shall be accessible to the residents of the
development and citizens of the Township. At least one side of the
83.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(11).
§ 175-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-26
1:297
proposed site shall abut a public street, for a minimum distance of
50 feet, unless an easement at least 50 feet in width and dedicated
for access to the recreational land is provided. However, no public
roadways shall transverse the site.
(2) At least 75% of land for parks, playgrounds and sports fields shall
be free of slopes greater than 5%, as determined by mapping
prepared for the Township Comprehensive Plan.
(3) At least 75% of the site shall be free from wetland restrictions or
floodplain.
(4) The soil conditions shall be suitable for recreation use, as
determined by reference to the Westmoreland County Soil Survey.
(5) For phased plans, all land to be set aside shall be situated in the
first phase, unless otherwise approved by the Township Board of
Commissioners. Delivery of deed describing land proposed for
dedication to the Township shall be completed prior to plan
recording.
(6) The site shall be easily accessible to all essential utilities, including
water, sewage, and power.
(7) The site and any proposed improvements shall be consistent with
the recommendations of the Rostraver Township Official
Recreation Plan and the Rostraver Township Comprehensive Plan.
C. Fee in lieu of required recreational land.
(1) If land offered to meet the criteria of sites for parks, playgrounds or
other recreational use is not consistent with the recommendations
of the Recreation Commission and the Planning Agency, or if the
Comprehensive Plan or Official Recreation Plan for the Township of
Rostraver indicates that such land offered cannot be properly
located in the proposed development or subdivision because the
future inhabitants of the development and surrounding area are to
be served by recreational land/facilities established or to be
established by the Township in the subject locality, or if the
conditions to render the site suitable for the use intended cannot be
agreed upon, then, upon agreement with the applicant or
developer, the payment of fees in lieu of the land offered or a
combination of fees and land shall be required as a condition
precedent to preliminary or final plan approval. The applicant or
developer may also pay the fee in lieu of land at his discretion.
(2) The fee in lieu of required land shall be paid to the Township prior
to release of the plan for recording or as specified in a schedule of
payment agreed upon by the Township Commissioners.
(3) All fee payments received pursuant to this section shall be used
solely and exclusively for the acquisition of land for parks,
§ 175-26 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-26
1:298
§ 175-27. Parking lots. [Added 6-2-1999 by Ord. No. 409; amended
8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467; 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 602]
All parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with Chapter 195.84
playgrounds or other recreational sites and the construction of
improvements thereon, and for costs incidental and ancillary to
such purposes, including but not necessarily limited to site
planning, engineering and design of recreational space and
improvements, utility relocation, grading and site preparation,
provision of pedestrian and/or vehicular access and purchase of
park equipment. Unless otherwise agreed to by the Township and
the developer, payments received pursuant to this section shall be
used only for land or improvements specifically included in the
Official Recreation Plan for the Township of Rostraver, as amended,
and as supplemented by the list of needed park improvements
developed by the Recreation Commission. Such park and
recreational facilities shall be accessible to the subject
development or subdivision.
D. Where the development or construction of recreation facilities is
offered as a part of the land or fees-in-lieu options, recreation facilities
shall be bonded and have improvement guarantees posted or deposited
as with any other subdivision improvements, such as streets, sidewalks,
curbs, and drainage facilities.
E. All fees in lieu paid to the Township shall be placed in a capital reserve
fund established as provided by law, which shall clearly identify the
facility or area for which the fee was collected. Interest earned on the
capital reserve fund shall become part of the capital reserve fund. Fees
collected shall be expended only for the purpose of providing park or
recreational facilities accessible to the residents of the development.
F. If the Township has failed to utilize the fee paid for the purposes set
forth in this section within three years from the date such fee was paid,
any person who paid such a fee may request a refund. The Township
shall refund said fee plus interest accumulated thereon from the date of
payment.
84.Editor's Note: See § 195-64D.
§ 175-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-27
1:299

ARTICLE IX
Improvements
§ 175-28. Grading.
§ 175-29. Underdrainage.
§ 175-30. Curbing.
A. Streets shall be constructed to grades and cross sections as cited on
and presented with the preliminary plans and street profiles, in
conformance with Township specifications.
B. Street shoulders shall be graded to the full width of the street right-ofway
in accordance with Township construction standards and
thoroughly compacted by rolling all shoulders.
C. The subgrade of a street shall be brought to the proper grade and
contour and shall be rolled and cross rolled. All soft spots shall be
removed. These soft spots shall be recompacted with a suitable firm
material, approved by the Township Engineer, before the placing of any
base material.
A. In areas where springs, poor soil drainage conditions, wet weather
springs or where conditions exist that underground drainage is
necessary to properly protect the proposed street pavement, there shall
be constructed pipe underdrain, stone underdrain or subgrade drains
according to current Township specifications, subject to approval of
drawings and design by the Township Engineer.
B. If, during construction, unknown poor drainage conditions are
encountered by the owner, he shall notify the Township Engineer and
correct such conditions encountered to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer.
A. The type of curbs used, when specified by the developer or when
required by the governing body, are to be determined by the Township
Engineer and subject to the Engineer's approval before installation.
B. The requirements of curbs or curbs and gutters will vary in accordance
with the character of area and density of development involved. The
governing body may require curbs and gutters to be installed on
arterial, collector or local streets if such construction is deemed
necessary for public safety, control of water runoff or clearly defined
driving and parking areas. Curbs shall ordinarily be required where:
(1) Streets are designed to serve areas in which the net residential
density of the area surrounding the proposed subdivision equals or
exceeds three families per acre.
(2) Commercial development or other similar intensive urban uses
exist.
§ 175-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-30
1:301
§ 175-31. Street base course.
The base course and subbase course shall be constructed to the lines,
grades and cross sections as approved. The base course shall be
constructed in accordance with Township specifications. (See the Pavement/
Underdrain Detail, included at the end of this chapter.)
§ 175-32. Street pavement specifications.
§ 175-33. Sidewalks.
§ 175-34. Street signs.
Street name signs shall be installed at each street intersection in
accordance with the type of materials, designs and standards established by
the governing body for use throughout the Township.
§ 175-35. Storm drainage and facilities.
All storm drainage facilities shall be adequately designed for the anticipated
runoff when the area is fully developed, using criteria or other methods
approved by the Township Engineer. Storm drainage facilities shall comply
with but are not limited to the following:
(3) Curbs exist on abutting property.
A. All street construction, including subbase and wearing course, shall be
constructed in accordance with Township specifications. (See the
Pavement/Underdrain Detail, included at the end of this chapter.)
B. The governing body may authorize an alternate pavement design where
the drainage of the subgrade, the size of the development and the
nature of the traffic warrants.
A. Sidewalks, when required by the governing body, shall be constructed
in conformity with Township specifications approved by the Township
Engineer.
B. All sidewalks shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
federal specifications for handicapped accessibility. [Amended
7-5-2006 by Ord. No. 550]
C. Sidewalks installed along county or state roads shall be to the
specifications established by the county or state. [Added 7-5-2006 by
Ord. No. 550]
D. The alignment and gradient of sidewalks shall be coordinated with the
grading plan to prevent the passage of concentrated surface water on
or across the walk; limit excessive slopes; and prevent the pocketing of
surface water. [Added 7-5-2006 by Ord. No. 550]
§ 175-30 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-35
1:302
A. Storm sewers shall be located in the street right-of-way or in designated
drainage easements.
B. All pipe used in the construction of slope sewers shall comply with
standards set by the governing body.
C. Inlets shall be spaced in accordance with the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation Design Manual No. 2, but the spacing shall not
exceed 300 feet.
D. Manholes or inlets are required at all changes in alignment and grade.
E. All storm sewer inlets, manholes, pipes, etc., shall be PennDOTapproved
material, except corrugated metal pipe, and all catch basins
will be cast-iron frames with cast-iron bicycle-safe cast-iron grates.
Concrete riser tops and structural steel grates are not permitted.
[Amended 10-2-2002 by Ord. No. 471]
F. All roof drains shall be extended to the paved gutters of streets and
connected to the storm sewer system where accessible. At no time will
roof drains or foundation drains be allowed to be connected to the
sanitary sewer system.
G. Any springs encountered during construction shall be piped and
connected to the storm sewer system or extended to a natural
watercourse as may be approved by the Township Engineer.
H. Concrete headwall and splash aprons shall be constructed at the outfall
of all storm sewers. Where watercourses are piped and filled, concrete
headwalls and splash aprons shall be constructed at both ends of the
pipe.
I. Whenever construction stops or concentrates the natural flow of
surface drainage in such a way as to affect adjoining properties, written
approval must be obtained from the adjoining property owners. Where
storm drainage is piped onto adjoining properties other than natural
watercourses, written permission, a release of damages and right-ofway
must be obtained from the adjoining property owners before the
storm sewers are taken over by the Township. Approval of plans by the
Township does not authorize or sanction drainage affecting adjoining
properties.
J. (Reserved)85
K. The developer must first submit the stormwater design to the
Westmoreland County Conservation District for approval.
L. (Reserved)86
85.Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, which required the developer to design a stormwater
management system, was repealed 7-2-2003 by Ord. No. 494.
86.Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, which contained provisions for stormwater
management designs in the Pollack Run watershed, was repealed 7-2-2003 by Ord. No.
494.
§ 175-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-35.1
1:303
§ 175-35.1. Monuments and markers. [Added 6-2-2004 by Ord. No.
512]
A. Concrete monuments shall be a minimum size of four inches by four
inches by 30 inches or four-inch diameter by thirty-inch plastic pipe
filled with concrete using an iron rod in the center or a brass or copper
plate on the top for marking the exact point. Concrete survey
monuments shall be required at such points as deemed necessary by
the Planning Agency.
B. Iron markers shall be a minimum size of 1/2 inch diameter pipe or No. 4
rebar and should have a minimum length of 24 inches. Iron markers
shall be set at all points where lot lines intersect curves, at all angles in
lot lines and tract boundary lines, at all lot corners and at the beginning
and ending of all curves.
§ 175-35.1 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-35.1
1:304
ARTICLE X
Conditions of Acceptance
§ 175-36. Performance requirements.
Before approving any subdivision plan, the governing body shall require
a written agreement that necessary grading, paving and street
improvements, sidewalks, streetlights, fire hydrants, water mains, storm
sewers and sanitary sewers, as may be required by the Township, shall be
installed by the subdivider in strict accordance with the design standards
and specifications of the Township, within a specified time period.
§ 175-37. Performance guaranty.
The governing body shall ensure, through receipt of certificates of
compliance submitted and attested by the Township Engineer, that the
required improvements have been installed according to the specifications
of the final plan or alternately require the posting of adequate surety to
cover the cost for such improvements. The governing body shall specify
one of the following alternatives, or such other alternative as may be
acceptable, for guaranteeing compliance with the requirements of this
section. Decision of which alternative shall be required is that of the
governing body. Final approval of a plan may not be granted until the
surety required is fully approved. In any event, the required surety shall
be secured along with the written agreement prior to any construction or
related activity.
A. Completion of improvements prior to final approval. Prior to final plan
approval, the subdivider shall complete, in a manner satisfactory to the
governing body and the Township Engineer, all improvements required
in these regulations as specified in the final subdivision plan and as
approved by the governing body and shall dedicate the same to the
Township in accordance with these regulations. Final plan approval
shall not be granted until the dedication of said improvements has been
accepted by the governing body.
B. Guaranty of future performance. In lieu of requiring the completion of
all improvements prior to final plan approval, the Township may, at its
discretion, require that the development agreement described in
§ 175-12F of this chapter contain provisions whereby the subdivider
shall guarantee to complete all improvements required by this chapter
or otherwise specified by the governing body, in a manner satisfactory
to the governing body. When requested by the subdivider in order to
facilitate financing, the governing body shall furnish the subdivider
with a signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final plat
contingent upon the subdivider obtaining a satisfactory financial
security. The final plat or record plan shall not be signed nor recorded
until the development agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of
contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the
development agreement is not executed within 90 days, unless a
§ 175-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-37
1:305
§ 175-38. Release from improvement bond.
written extension is granted by the governing body; such extension
shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at
the request of the subdivider. To secure the obligation to complete the
improvements, the subdivider shall provide, subject to the approval of
the governing body, one of the following guaranties:
(1) Surety bond. The subdivider shall obtain a security bond from a
surety bonding company authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The bond shall be payable to the
Township. The amount of the bond shall be equal to 110% of the
cost of the required improvements as estimated by the subdivider
and approved by the Township Engineer. The duration of the bond
shall be until such time as the improvements are accepted by the
Township in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Escrow account. The subdivider shall deposit cash or other
instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, either with
the Township or in escrow with a bank. The use of any instrument
other than cash and, in the case of an escrow account, the bank
with which the funds are to be deposited shall be subject to the
approval of the governing body. The amount of financial security
shall be equal to 110% of the cost of the required improvements as
estimated by the subdivider and approved by the Township
Engineer. In case of an escrow account, the subdivider shall file
with the governing body an agreement between the financial bank
and himself guaranteeing the following:
(a) That the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust
until released by the governing body and may not be used or
pledged by the subdivider as security in any other matter
during the period; and
(b) That in the case of a failure on the part of the subdivider to
complete said improvements in a timely manner, the bank shall
immediately make the funds in said account available by the
Township for use in the completion of those improvements.
(3) (Reserved)87
(4) Extension of guaranties. If the developer requires more than two
years from the date of posting financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of security may be increased in
accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as reenacted and amended
December 21, 1988.88 [Amended 6-2-2004 by Ord. No. 512]
87.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), Property escrow, was repealed 12-4-2002 by Ord.
No. 474.
88.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 175-37 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-38
1:306
§ 175-39. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
A. Procedure.
(1) When the developer has completed all of the required
improvements and 90% of the lots are developed for residential
purposes, the developer shall notify the governing body, in writing,
by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the required
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township
Engineer. [Amended 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 474]
(2) The governing body shall, within 10 days after receipt of such
notice, direct and authorize the Township Engineer to inspect all of
the aforesaid improvements. The Township Engineer shall
thereupon file a report, in writing, with the governing body and
shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified
or registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 45
days after receipt by the Township Engineer of the aforesaid
authorization from the governing body. Said report shall be
detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said
improvements. If any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Township Engineer, said report shall contain a
statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection. Said report
shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said
improvements. If any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Township Engineer, said report shall contain a
statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
(3) The governing body shall notify the developer within 15 days, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the action of the
governing body with relation thereto.
(4) If the governing body or the Township Engineer fails to comply with
the time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements
will be deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be
released from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty
bond.
(5) If any portion of the required improvements shall not be approved
or shall be rejected by the governing body, the developer shall
proceed to complete the same, and upon completion, the same
procedure of notification as outlined herein shall be followed.
(6) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
subdivider's or developer's right to contest or question by legal
proceedings, or otherwise, any determination of the governing
body or the Township Engineer.
A. In the event that any improvements that may be required have not been
constructed and installed as provided for in the written agreement, this
chapter, the requirements of the governing body or in accordance with
§ 175-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-39
1:307
§ 175-40. Maintenance bond.
§ 175-41. Higher standards.
the approved final plan, the governing body shall enforce any corporate
bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies.
B. If the proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the
cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the governing body may, at its
option, install part of such improvements and may institute appropriate
legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to complete
the remainder of the improvements.
C. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any
legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be
used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such
security and not for any other municipal purpose.
A. Before the Township Engineer shall issue to the governing body a
written certification that all improvements specified and required have
been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the development
agreement and in compliance with the specifications, standards,
ordinances and requirements of the Township, the subdivider or
developer shall be required to post a maintenance bond to insure
structural integrity of the improvements as well as the functioning of
said improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as
depicted on the final plat for a term to not exceed 18 months from the
date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial security shall not
exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements. Said
maintenance bond is to guarantee the repairs and maintenance by the
subdivider or developer of the streets, roads, pavements, sidewalks,
curbs, gutter, storm drains and facilities, sewage treatment plant and
facilities and other public improvements. [Amended 2-4-2004 by Ord.
No. 507]
B. The repairs and maintenance required to be performed by the
subdivider or developer shall extend only to making good any inherent
defects which become manifested in the materials and workmanship
under ordinary conditions and shall not be held to cover any breakage
or damage caused by improper use or by accident resulting from
circumstance over which the subdivider or developer has no control.
A. No road, street, land, way or related improvement shall be accepted as
a part of the highway system of the Township or for maintenance unless
opened, laid out, graded and improved in strict accordance with the
standards and regulations of the Township. The requirements,
specifications and standards of construction, material and
appurtenances as designated herein are considered as minimum, and
the governing body may, as it deems advisable, revise said
§ 175-39 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-41
1:308
§ 175-42. Recording.
§ 175-43. No responsibility of Township where plan not approved.
If any road or any drainage facility in connection therewith shall be opened,
constructed or dedicated for public use or travel, except in strict
accordance with plans approved and recorded as herein provided, neither
the governing body nor any public authority shall place, construct or
operate any sewer, drain, water pipe or other facility or do any work of
specifications and requirements to secure a higher standard of
improvements and community development.
B. No stormwater drainage facilities, sanitary sewer and sewage
treatment facilities, water supply and water distribution system and
facilities or any other facilities or improvements will be accepted as a
part of the Township's facilities for operation and maintenance unless
designed and constructed in strict compliance with all the standards,
specifications, rules, regulations, ordinances and requirements of the
Township.
A. Within 90 days after the date of approval of the final plan, the
subdivider shall record an approved duplicate copy of the plan in the
office of the County Recorder of Deeds and file with the Secretary of the
Township a Recorder's Certificate that the approved plan has been
recorded, with the plan book and page numbers indicated, and approval
shall not become final and effective until such certificate has been filed.
The subdivider shall provide a duplicate tracing of the officially
recorded plan to the Township Secretary for Township files. The
duplicate tracing may be of Mylar, linen or some other durable material.
B. After an approved subdivision plan shall have been officially recorded,
the streets, parks and other public improvements shown thereon shall
be so considered to be a part of the official plan of the Township.
C. Streets, parks and other public improvements shown on a subdivision
plan to be recorded shall be offered for dedication to the Township by
formal notation thereof on the plan or the owner shall note on such plan
that any improvements have not been offered for dedication to the
Township.
D. Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision plan
shall be deemed to be a private street, park or improvement until such
time as the same shall have been offered for dedication to the Township
and accepted by ordinance or resolution or until it shall have been
condemned for use as a public street, park or other improvement.
E. In the event that an approved subdivision plan is not recorded within
the required ninety-day period, said approval shall be deemed voided
and rescinded and the plan must be resubmitted if approval is sought
by the developer.
§ 175-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-43
1:309
any kind in or upon such road; and neither the governing body nor any
other public authority shall have responsibility of any kind with respect to
any such road or drainage facility, notwithstanding any use of the same by
the public; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prevent
the laying of trunk sewers, drains, water or gas mains, if required, by
engineering necessity for the accommodating of other territory.
§ 175-44. Standards for location and management of open space.
A. Common open spaces, when provided, shall be located so as to be
consistent with accepted design principles. Where possible, it shall be
designed as a contiguous area easily accessible to the residents and
preserving natural features.
B. There shall be provisions that ensure that the common open space shall
continue as such and be properly maintained.
(1) The developer shall either:
(a) Dedicate such land to public use if the Township or another
public agency has indicated it will accept such dedications;
(b) Retain ownership and responsibility for maintenance of such
open space; or
(c) Provide for and establish one or more organizations for the
ownership and maintenance of all common open space.
(2) In the case of Subsection B(1)(b) and (c) above, each organization
shall be a nonprofit homeowners' corporation, unless the developer
demonstrates that a community open space trust is a more
appropriate form of organization.
C. If a homeowners' association or open space trust is formed, it shall be
governed according to the following regulations:
(1) The organization is organized by the developer and operated with
financial subsidization by the developer (if necessary) before the
sale of any lots within the development.
(2) Membership in the organization is mandatory for all purchasers of
homes therein and their successors.
(3) The organization shall be responsible for maintenance, insurance
and taxes on common open space.
(4) The members of the organization shall share equitably the costs of
maintaining and developing common open space, in accordance
with procedures established by them.
(5) The organization shall have to hire adequate staff to administer
facilities and maintain the common open space.
§ 175-43 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-44
1:310
(a) In the event that the organization established to own and
maintain common open space or any successor organization
shall at any time after establishment of the development fail to
maintain the common open space in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the development plan, the
Township may serve written notice upon such organization or
upon the residents of the development setting forth the
manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the
common open space in reasonable condition.
(b) Said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of
maintenance be corrected within 30 days thereof and shall
state the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be
held within 14 days of the notice. At such hearing, the
Township may modify the terms of the original notice as to the
deficiencies and may give an extension of time within which
they shall be corrected.
(c) If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modifications thereof shall not be corrected within said 30 days
or any extension thereof, the Township may enter upon said
common space and maintain the same for a period of one year.
(d) Said maintenance by the Township shall not constitute a
taking, nor vest in the public any rights of use.
(e) Before the expiration of said year, the Township shall, upon its
initiative or upon the request of the organization theretofore
responsible for maintenance, call a public hearing, upon notice
to such organization or to the residents of the development. At
the hearing, such organization or the residents of the
development shall show cause why such maintenance by the
Township shall not, at the option of the Township, continue for
a succeeding year.
(f) If the governing body determines that such organization is
ready and able to maintain said common space in reasonable
condition, the Township shall cease maintenance at the end of
said year.
(g) If the governing body shall determine that such organization is
not ready and able to maintain said common open space in a
reasonable condition, the Township may, at its discretion,
continue maintenance during the next succeeding year and,
subject to a similar hearing and determination, in each year
thereafter.
(h) The cost of maintenance by the Township shall be assessed
against the properties within the development that have a right
of enjoyment of the common open space and shall become a
lien on said properties. The Township, at the time of entering
upon said common open space for the purpose of maintenance,
§ 175-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-44
1:311
shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the Prothonotary
of the county, upon the properties affected by such lien within
the development.
§ 175-44 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-44
1:312
ARTICLE XI
Modifications
§ 175-45. Modifications.
The governing body may grant a modification of the requirements of one or
more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will exact undue
hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question,
provided that such modification will not be contrary to the public interest
and the purpose and intent of this chapter is observed.
A. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved
and the minimum modification necessary.
B. The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning Agency
for advisory comments. [Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467]
C. The governing body and the Planning Agency shall keep a written
record of all action on all requests for modifications. [Amended
8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467]
§ 175-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-45
1:313

ARTICLE XII
Amendments
§ 175-46. Alterations and changes.
The governing body may from time to time amend this chapter.
Amendments to the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall
become effective only after a public hearing held pursuant to public notice.
Each such amendment to the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
shall be submitted to the County Planning Commission 30 days prior to
the scheduled public hearing for a review and report, together with a fee
sufficient to cover the costs of the review and report, which fee shall be
paid by the person or entity requesting the amendment. The governing body
shall not approve an amendment to this chapter until the county report is
received or until the expiration of 30 days from the date the amendment
was forwarded to the county.
§ 175-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-46
1:315

ARTICLE XIII
Appeals
§ 175-47. Reconsideration.
Any person aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of the
governing body may present additional relevant information and request
reconsideration of the original findings, decision or recommendation, upon
written request, within 30 days of notification of the governing body's
decision.
§ 175-48. Approval refused by Board.
A. In a case where the governing body shall refuse to approve any plans
submitted to them, in accordance with this Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, any person aggrieved by the action of the
governing body may, within 30 days after such action, appeal therefrom
by petition to the County Court of Common Pleas, which court shall
hear the matter de novo and, after hearing, may enter a decree
affirming, reversing or modifying the action of the governing body as
may appear just on the premises. The court shall designate the manner
in which notices of the hearing of any such appeal shall be given to all
parties interested. The decision of the court shall be final.
B. The action of the governing body or of the Court of Common Pleas in
approving any such plans and an approved duplicate copy of such plans,
shall be recorded by the person applying for such approval in the office
of the County Recorder of Deeds.
§ 175-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-48
1:317

ARTICLE XIV
Fees
§ 175-49. Fees to accompany application for review and approval of
plans.
A. All applications of plans of subdivision and plans of land development
submitted for review and approval shall be accompanied by a fee, in
accordance with a schedule of fees and charges established or to be
established and adopted by resolution of the governing body. Such fee
will be used to help defray any costs that may be incurred by the
Township in viewing and inspecting the site of the subdivision or land
development and reviewing the application data and the plans
submitted relative to the same.
B. The schedule of fees and charges established or to be established shall
vary and be regulated in accordance with the scope and complexity of
the plan of subdivision and land development project, such as number
of parcels of lots in plans, site development plans, utility development
plans, applicant's plan of construction and development of the land,
structures and facilities thereon and appurtenant thereto, and the
number of times that a plan is submitted or resubmitted for review and
a request for approval of the same.
C. Where a plan of subdivision or land development has for any reason
been rejected by the governing body, the applicant, when resubmitting
plans and applications for review and approval of the same, shall be
required to pay a fee as set forth in the Township's schedule of fees and
charges for such submittals.
D. All fees shall be made payable to the Secretary of the Township. All fees
submitted are nonrefundable, and the approval or rejection for any
reason of any plan of subdivision or land development will not be reason
or cause for the return of any fee submitted.
§ 175-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-49
1:319

ARTICLE XV
Certificates, Affidavits, Approvals
§ 175-50. Form of certificates, affidavits and approvals.
The certificates quoted below shall be inscribed on the plan as quoted
and shall be properly signed and attested when the plan is submitted to
the governing body. All certificates shall be placed on the final plan in an
arrangement suitable for placement of all required seals.
A. Owner's Adoption (Individual).
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, THAT
(I or We)
of the (Name of Owner or Owners)
(City, Borough, Township) of _________________________, County
of___________________ State of
_____________________for (myself, ourselves), (my, our) heirs, executors,
administrators and assigns, do hereby adopt this as (my, our) Plan of
Subdivision of (my, our) property, situate in the Township of Rostraver,
County of Westmoreland and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and for
divers advantages accruing to (me, us), hereby dedicate forever, for
public use for highway, drainage, sewage and utility purposes, all
drives, roads, streets, lands, rights-of-way, easements, ways and other
public highways shown upon the Plan, with the same force and effect
as if the same had been opened through legal proceedings and in
consideration of the approval of said plan and any future acceptance
of said public highways, rights-of-way and easements by said County of
Westmoreland and Township of Rostraver.
(I or We),
(Name of Owner or Owners)
hereby agree to and by these presents do release and forever
discharge said County of Westmoreland and said Township of
Rostraver, their successors or assigns, from any liability for damages
arising and to arise from the appropriation of said ground for public
highways and other public uses and the physical grading thereof to any
grades that may be established. This dedication and release shall be
binding upon
(my, our) heirs,
(Name of Owner or Owners)
executors, administrators and assigns and purchasers of lots in this
plan.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, (I or We) hereunto set (my, our) hand(s) and
seal(s) this __________________ day of _____________________, A.D., ______.
Attest:
§ 175-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-50
1:321
(SEAL)
(Owner or Owners)
(SEAL)
Notary
Public
(Owner or owners)
My Commission Expires the ___________________day of
__________________, A.D., ______.
The foregoing adoption and dedication is made by
(Name of individual Owner)
with the full understanding and agreement that the approval of the
governing body of the Township of Rostraver, if hereto attached, will
become null and void unless this plan is recorded in the Recorder
of Deeds Office of Westmoreland County, County Court House,
Greensburg, Pennsylvania, within 90 days of date of said approval.
B. Individual Acknowledgment.
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
SS
COUNTY OF WESTMORELAND:
Before me, the subscriber, a Notary Public in and for said State and
County, personally appeared the above named
(Owner)
and acknowledged the foregoing Release and Dedication and Plan to
be (his, her, their) act and deed and desired the same to be recorded
as such:
WITNESS MY HAND AND NOTARIAL SEAL this _____________ day of
______________________, _______.
(SEAL)
Notary Public
C. Owner's Adoption (Corporation).
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that
(Name of Corporation)
§ 175-50 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-50
1:322
a corporation, by virtue of a resolution of the Board of Directors
thereof, does hereby adopt this as its plan of lots of its property situate
in the Township of Rostraver, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, and
for divers advantages accruing to it does hereby dedicate forever,
for public use for highway purposes, all drives, roads, streets, lanes
and ways and other public highways shown upon the plan with the
same force and effect as if the same has been opened through legal
proceedings and, in consideration of the approval of said plan and any
future acceptance of said public highways by the said Township of
Rostraver, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, hereby covenants and
agrees to and by these presents does release and forever discharge
said Township of Rostraver, its successors or assigns from any liability
for damages arising and to arise from the appropriation of said ground
for public highways and the physical grading thereof to any grades
that may be established. This dedication and release shall be binding
upon
(Name of Corporation)
its successors and assigns and purchasers of lots in this plan.
ATTEST
(Name of Corporation)
By
Secretary President
The foregoing adoption and dedication is made by
(Name of Corporate Owner)
with the full understanding and agreement that the approval of the
governing body of the Township of Rostraver, if hereto attached, will
become null and void unless this plan is recorded in the Recorder
of Deeds Office of Westmoreland County, County Court House,
Greensburg, Pennsylvania, within 90 days of said approval.
D. Corporation Acknowledgment.
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
SS
COUNTY OF WESTMORELAND:
On this ____________ day of ______________________, A.D. ______, before
me, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, personally
appeared
(Name and Title of Officers)
§ 175-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-50
1:323
(Name of Corporation)
who, being duly sworn, deposeth and saith that he was personally
present at the execution of the adoption, release and dedication and
saw the common and corporate seal of the said corporation duly
affixed and that the above release and dedication was duly signed and
sealed by and as for the act and deed of the said corporation, for
the uses and purposes therein mentioned and that the name of the
deponent subscribed to the said release and dedication as
of said corporation,
(Title of Officer)
attestation of the due execution and delivery of said release and
dedication of this deponent's own proper and respective handwriting.
(SEAL)
(Name of Officer)
(SEAL)
(Title of Officer)
Sworn to and subscribed before me the day and date written.
WITNESS MY HAND AND NOTARIAL SEAL this _______________ day of
__________________, ______.
(SEAL)
Notary Public
My Commission Expires the ______________________________ day of
_________________, A.D., ______.
E. Westmoreland County Planning Commission Review. [Amended
6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 701]
Reviewed and/or approved by the Westmoreland County Department
of Planning and Development this _____ day of __________, _____.
Letter to the Rostraver Township Board of Commissioners dated
________________________________________, ______.
F. Proof of Recording.
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
SS
COUNTY OF WESTMORELAND:
Recorded in the Office for the Recording of Deeds, Plats, etc., in said
County, in Plan Book Volume ________________, page _______________.
Given under my hand and seal this ___________________ day of
_____________________, ______.
Recorder of Deeds
§ 175-50 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-50
1:324
G. Owner's Acceptance of Responsibility for Providing Stormwater
Drainage Facilities and Control of Stormwater Drainage.
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, THAT
(I or We)
, of the Township of Rostraver,
County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for
ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators and assigns and for
our grantees and their subsequent purchasers, do hereby accept full
and complete responsibility, liability, expense and provision of facilities
for the control of stormwater drainage over, across and through this
subdivision of land until such time as (I or We), our heirs, executors,
administrators and assigns construct stormwater drainage facilities in
accordance with Township specifications and requirements and the
same is officially accepted by action of the governing body and until
such formal acceptance (I or We) for ourselves, our heirs, executors,
administrators and assigns do hereby release the Township of
Rostraver from any responsibility in connection therewith. This
acceptance of responsibility shall be binding upon
____________________________
our heirs, executors, administrators and assigns and all purchases of
lots in this plan of subdivision.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we hereunto set our hands and seals this
________ day of _____________________, A.D., ______
ATTEST
(SEAL)
(Owner or Owners)
(SEAL)
(Owner or Owners)
WITNESS My hand and notarial seal this _________ day of
________________________, ______.
SEAL)
Notary Public
My Commission Expires the ____________day of
______________________, A.D., ______.
H. Surveyor's Certificate.
I, ___________________________, a registered surveyor of the State of
Pennsylvania, do hereby certify that this plan correctly represents the
lots, lands, streets and highways as surveyed and plotted by me for the
owners or agents.
(SEAL)
§ 175-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-50
1:325
(Engineer)
Registration No.
Date
I. Highway Occupancy Permit Requirement. [Amended 8-7-2002 by
Ord. No. 467]
This plat requires a highway occupancy permit pursuant to Section
42G of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242 , No. 428), known as the
"State Highway Law." Approval of the Rostraver Township Board of
Commissioner is conditional, subject to action of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation pursuant to application for a highway
occupancy permit.
J. Approval by Board of Commissioners of Rostraver Township.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Rostraver,
Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, hereby approves this plan of
subdivision for recording purposes only. This approval by the Township
of Rostraver does not constitute an acceptance of the roads, streets,
storm and sanitary drainage facilities, easements or rights-of-way,
water mains or any other services or improvements shown on this plan,
nor an assumption of maintenance responsibility, nor will the same
be accepted or maintained until constructed in accordance with all
Township specifications and requirements and officially accepted by
action of the governing body. This approval shall in no way be deemed
an authorization to commence construction or related activities. This
plan of subdivision approved by resolution of the governing body of the
Township of Rostraver, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, on this
_____________day of__________________, ______.
ATTEST:
Secretary Chairman
SEAL:
§ 175-50 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-50
1:326
ARTICLE XVI
Violation and Penalty
§ 175-51. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefore in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. The
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice, determining that there
has been a violation, further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to
have believe that there was no such violation, in which event there shall
be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice, and thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment. Nothing contained in this
section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or
entity other than the Township the right to commence any action for
enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 175-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-51
1:327

ARTICLE XVII
Mobile Home Parks
[Added 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
§ 175-52. Definitions.89
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-family dwelling, which may be
towed on its own running gear and which may be temporarily or
permanently affixed to real estate, used for nontransient residential
purposes and constructed with the same or similar electrical, plumbing and
sanitary facilities as immobile housing.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile
home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land, five acres or more, upon which
has been or is to be placed two or more mobile homes for nontransient
residential use and which is operated or to be operated by one individual.
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of an individual mobile home lot that
is reserved for the placement of a mobile home, appurtenant structures or
additions.
OFFICER — The individual designated by the Board of Commissioners to
enforce this article.
PERMIT — Written approval, in whatever form, as issued by the Township in
conformance with this article, authorizing a person to operate a designated
mobile home park.
SERVICE OR RECREATIONAL BUILDING — A structure housing
operational, office, recreational, park maintenance and other facilities built
to conform to required state and local standards.
SEWER CONNECTION — All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the
drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser
pipe.
SEWER RISER PIPE — That portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home
space.
WATER CONNECTION — All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the
water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the
mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE — That portion of the water service pipe which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at
each mobile home lot.
89.Editor's Note: See also § 175-7.
§ 175-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-52
1:329
WATER SERVICE PIPE — All pipes, fittings, valves and appurtenances from
the water main of the park distribution system to the water outlet of the
distribution system within the mobile home.
§ 175-53. Permits.
A. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, alter or
extend any mobile home park within the limits of the Township unless
he holds a valid permit issued from the Township.
B. License from Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection a
prerequisite for issuance of permit. As a prerequisite to the issuance of
the permit referred to in Subsection A of this section, the applicant
must have already been issued a valid license from the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
C. Conditions for granting permits for new mobile home parks. No permit
shall be issued by the Township for a new mobile home park until all the
requirements of the Township Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances and
any other applicable ordinances and resolutions of the Township have
been conformed to and until the Township Planning Agency has
reviewed the plan for the proposed new mobile home park. The
Township subdivision regulations apply except where this article
specifically prescribes different requirements applicable to mobile
home parks. [Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 467]
D. Application to the Township. The applicant for the Township permit
shall concurrently file with the officer a copy of the license from the
Department of Environmental Protection and the application for the
Township permit to operate a mobile home park, the latter application
to be made upon the official form issued by the Township.
E. Inspection of park and issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the
application referred to in Subsection D of this section, the officer shall
forthwith inspect the park for which the permit is sought, in order to
determine whether the park is in compliance with the provisions of this
article. Upon favorable determination of compliance, and having been
furnished with a copy of the license issued by the Department of
Environmental Protection and receipt of the fee prescribed in
Subsection H of this section, the officer shall issue a mobile home
permit to the applicant, which shall be valid for a period of one year
after issuance.
F. Transfer of permit. Within 10 days after a mobile home park has been
sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of, interest or
control of a mobile home park, the person to whom transfer was made
shall notify the officer and furnish him with proof that the license from
the Department of Environmental Protection has been transferred.
G. Renewal permits. The officer shall issue renewal permits for successive
one-year periods after application by the permit holder and after the
§ 175-52 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-53
1:330
§ 175-54. Inspections.
§ 175-55. Environmental, open space and access requirements.
permit holder has furnished proof that the park continues to meet
the standards of the Department of Environmental Protection and this
article.
H. Fees. A fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners shall be paid for the issuance of an original or renewal
permit, and a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners for each mobile home on a mobile home lot shall be paid
for each renewal permit. These fees shall accompany the application.
I. Limited application to existing parks. Mobile homes in existence on the
effective date of Ordinance No. 109-196990 shall be required to meet
only the standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection as a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit, and all other
minimum standards set forth in this article shall be applicable only to
those parks which are constructed or expanded after the effective date
of Ordinance No. 109-1969. The fees established in Subsection H of this
section shall apply to mobile parks in existence upon the effective date
of Ordinance No. 109-1969 and also to mobile home parks established
after that time.
A. Authority to inspect. The officer may inspect any mobile home park at
reasonable intervals and at reasonable times, to determine compliance
with this article.
B. Effect of failure to meet standards. Whenever, upon inspection of any
mobile home park, it is determined that conditions or practices exist
which are in violation of any provision of this article or of any
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the officer shall give notice, in
writing, to the person to whom the permit was issued, his agent and/or
person in charge, advising them that unless those conditions or
practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in
the notice, the permit to operate in the Township shall be suspended. At
the end of that period, that mobile home park shall be reinspected, and
if those conditions or practices have not been corrected, the officer
shall suspend the permit and give notice, in writing, of the suspension
to the person to whom the permit was issued, his agent and/or person in
charge.
A. Site location. The location of all mobile home parks shall comply with
the following minimum requirements:
(1) Free from adverse influence by swamps, marshes, garbage or
rubbish disposal areas or other potential breeding places for
insects or rodents;
90.Editor's Note: Said ordinance was adopted 12-1-1969.
§ 175-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-55
1:331
(2) Not subject to flooding; and
(3) Not subject to any hazard or nuisance, such as excessive noise,
vibration, smoke, toxic matter, radiation, heat, odor or glare.
B. Site drainage requirements.
(1) The ground surface in all parts of every park shall be graded and
equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner.
(2) Surface water collectors and other bodies of standing water
capable of breeding mosquitoes and other insects shall be
eliminated or controlled in a manner approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) Wastewater from any plumbing fixture or sanitary sewer line shall
not be deposited upon the ground surface in any part of a mobile
home park.
C. Soil and ground cover requirements.
(1) Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park shall be paved or
covered with stone screenings or other solid material or protected
with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion
and the emanation of dust during dry weather.
(2) Park grounds shall be maintained free of vegetative growth which
is poisonous or which may harbor rodents, insects or other pests
harmful to man.
D. Park areas for nonresidential uses. No part of any park shall be used for
nonresidential purposes, except for those uses that are required for the
direct servicing and well-being of park residents and for the
management and maintenance of the park.
E. Required setbacks, buffer strips and screening.
(1) All mobile homes shall be located at least 35 feet from any park
property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway
and at least 30 feet from other park property boundary lines.
(2) There shall be a minimum distance of 15 feet between an individual
mobile home, including accessory structures attached thereto and
adjoining pavement of a park street or common parking area or
other common areas and structures.
(3) All mobile home parks located adjacent to nonresidential uses may
be required to provide screening such as fences or natural growth
along the property boundary line separating park and such
adjacent nonresidential uses.
F. Required separation between mobile homes.
§ 175-55 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-55
1:332
(1) Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other
buildings and structures by at least 15 feet, provided that mobile
homes placed end-to-end may have a clearance of 10 feet where
opposing rear walls are staggered.
(2) An accessory structure which has a horizontal area extending 25
square feet, is attached to a mobile home and/or located within 10
feet of its window and has an opaque or translucent top or roof that
is higher than such window shall, for purposes of this separation
requirement, be considered to be part of the mobile home.
G. Park street system.
(1) General requirements. A safe and convenient vehicular access shall
be provided from abutting public streets or roads.
(2) Access. The entrance road connecting the park streets with a
public street or road shall have a minimum pavement width of 34
feet.
(3) Internal streets. Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to
accommodate anticipated traffic and in any case shall meet the
following minimum requirements:
(a) Where parking is permitted on both sides, a minimum width of
34 feet will be required.
(b) A minimum road pavement width of 28 feet will be required.
(c) Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end and with a
turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 60
feet.
(4) Required illumination of park street systems. All parks shall be
furnished with lighting units so spaced and equipped with
luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide average
levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and
vehicles at night.
(5) Street construction and design standards.
(a) Streets. All streets shall be provided with a smooth, hard and
dust-free surface which will be durable and well drained under
normal use and weather conditions.
(b) Grades. Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure
adequate surface drainage, but shall be not more than 8%.
Short runs with a maximum grade of 12% may be permitted,
provided that traffic safety is assured by appropriate surfacing,
adequate leveling areas and avoidance of lateral curves.
(c) Intersections. Within 100 feet of an intersection, street shall be
at approximately right angles. A distance of at least 150 feet
§ 175-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-55
1:333
shall be maintained between center lines of offset intersecting
streets. Intersections of more than two streets at one point
shall be avoided.
H. Off-street parking areas.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home parks
for the use of park occupants and guests at the minimum rate of
two per mobile home stand.
(2) Required car parking spaces shall be so located as to provide
convenient access to the mobile home, but shall not exceed a
distance of 200 feet from the mobile home that it is intended to
serve.
I. Walks.
(1) General requirements. All parks shall provide safe, convenient, allseason
pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use,
durable and convenient to maintain, between individual mobile
homes, the park streets and all community facilities provided for
park residents. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be
avoided.
(2) Common walk system. Where a common walk system is provided
and maintained between locations and where pedestrian traffic is
concentrated, those common walks shall have a minimum width of
four feet.
(3) Individual walks. All mobile home stands shall be connected to
common walks or to streets or to driveways or parking spaces
connecting to a paved street. Such individual walks shall have a
minimum width of 3 1/2 feet.
J. Mobile home stands: construction.
(1) The area of the mobile home stand shall be improved to provide a
adequate foundation for the placement of the mobile home and in
such a position to allow a minimum of 15 feet between the mobile
home and the adjoining pavement of a park street or common
parking area or other common areas and structures. Mobile home
stands will be provided with devices for anchoring the stands to
prevent overturning or uplift.
(2) The mobile home stand shall be designed so as not to heave, shift or
settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile home because of
frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting
on the superstructure.
K. Mobile home lots: minimum area. A mobile home park shall have an
average gross area per mobile home stand of not less than 4,000 square
feet. The minimum frontage shall be 40 feet.
§ 175-55 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-56
1:334
§ 175-56. Water supply.
A. General requirements. An adequate water supply shall be provided for
mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory facilities as
required by this article. Where a public water supply system of
satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall
be made thereto and its supply shall be used exclusively. Where a
satisfactory public water supply system is not available, the
development of a private water supply system shall be approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or other
authorities having jurisdiction.
B. Source of supply.
(1) The water supply shall be capable of supplying a minimum of 150
gallons per day per mobile home.
(2) The well or suction line of the water supply system shall be located
and constructed in such a manner that neither underground nor
surface contamination will reach the water supply from any source.
(3) No well casings, pumps, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall
be placed in any pit, room or space extending below ground level
nor in any room or space above ground which is walled in or
otherwise enclosed, unless such rooms, whether above or below
ground, have free drainage by gravity to the surface of the ground.
(4) Water supply treatment, if necessary, shall be in accordance with
the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
C. Water storage facilities. All water storage reservoirs shall be covered,
watertight and constructed of impervious material. Overflows and vents
of such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Manholes shall be
constructed with overlapping covers, so as to prevent the entrance of
contaminated material. Reservoir overflow pipes shall discharge
through an acceptable air gap.
D. Water distribution system.
(1) All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed
and maintained in accordance with state and local regulations.
(2) The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or
questionable water supplies and shall be protected against the
hazards of backflow or backsiphonage.
(3) The system shall be designed and maintained so as to provide a
pressure of not less than 20 pounds per square inch, under normal
operating conditions, at service buildings and other locations
requiring potable water supply.
E. Individual water-riser pipes and connections.
§ 175-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-56
1:335
§ 175-57. Sewage disposal.
(1) Individual water-riser pipes shall be located within the confined
area of the mobile home stand at a point where the water
connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby ensuring
the shortest water connection possible and decreasing
susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
(2) The water-riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of 3/4 of
an inch and terminate at least four inches above the ground
surface. The water outlet shall be provided with a cap when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot.
(3) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves and riser pipe and to protect risers from heaving and
thawing actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface
drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
(4) A shutoff valve below the front line shall be provided near the
water-riser pipe on each mobile home lot. Underground stop-andwaste
valves are prohibited unless their type of manufacture and
their method of installation are approved.
A. General requirements. An adequate and safe sewage system shall be
provided in all parks for conveying and disposing of sewage from
mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory facilities. The
system shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and
local health regulations.
B. Individual sewer connections.
(1) Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a four-inch
diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located
on each stand that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain
outlet will approximate a vertical position.
(2) The sewer connection (as defined in § 175-52), shall have a normal
inside diameter of not less than three inches, and the slope of any
portion thereof shall be at least 1/4 inch per foot. All joints shall be
watertight.
(3) All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid,
corrosion-resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface
shall be smooth.
(4) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be
diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend
at least 1/2 inch above ground elevation.
§ 175-56 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-57
1:336
§ 175-58. Electrical distribution system.
C. Sewer lines. All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of sufficient
depth to be free of breakage from traffic or other movements and shall
be separated from the park water supply system. All sewer lines shall
be constructed of materials approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection and the Township and shall have
watertight joints. All sewer lines shall be inspected by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer before they are covered.
D. Sewage treatment and/or discharge. Where the sewer lines of the
mobile home park are not connected to a public sewer, all proposed
sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the Township prior to
construction.
A. General requirements. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring
system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances
which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with local
electric power company's specifications regulating such systems.
B. Power distribution lines.
(1) Main power lines not located underground shall be suspended at
least 18 feet above the ground. There shall be a minimum
horizontal clearance of three feet between overhead wiring and any
mobile home, service building or other structure.
(2) All direct burial conductors or cable shall be buried at least 18
inches below the ground surface and shall be insulated and
specially designed for the purposes. Such conductors shall be
located not less than one foot radial distance from water, sewer, gas
or communications lines.
C. Individual electrical connections.
(1) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with an approved
disconnecting device and overcurrent protective equipment. The
minimum service per outlet shall be 120/240 volts AC, 50 amperes.
(2) The mobile home shall be connected to the outlet receptacle by an
approved type of flexible cable with connections and a male
attachment plug.
(3) Where the calculated load of the mobile home is more than 50
amperes, either a second outlet receptacle shall be installed or
electrical service shall be provided by means of permanently
installed conductors.
D. Required grounding. All exposed non-current-carrying metal parts of
mobile homes and all other equipment shall be grounded by means of
an approved grounding conductor run with branch circuit conductors
§ 175-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-58
1:337
§ 175-59. Service buildings, recreational buildings and other
community service facilities.
§ 175-60. Storage, collection and disposal of refuse.
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall
be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect
breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution and shall comply
or other approved method of grounded metallic wiring. The natural
conductor shall not be used as an equipment ground for mobile homes
or other equipment.
A. The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings,
recreation buildings and other community service facilities when
constructed, such as:
(1) Management offices, repair shops and storage areas.
(2) Laundry facilities.
(3) Indoor recreation areas.
(4) Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the
exclusive use of park occupants.
B. Structural requirements for buildings.
(1) All portions of the structures shall be properly protected from
damage by ordinary uses and by decay, corrosion, termites and
other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such
materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent
entrance or penetration of moisture and weather.
(2) All rooms containing laundry facilities shall:
(a) Have sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between
male and female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions in
lavatories and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of
dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof material or covered with
moisture-resistant material.
(b) Have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the
outdoors. The minimum aggregate gross area of windows for
each required room shall be not less than 10% of the floor area
served by them.
(c) Have at least one window which can be easily opened or a
mechanical device which will adequately ventilate the room.
(3) Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with
self-closing doors.
§ 175-58 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-60
1:338
with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection regulations
governing mobile home parks.
§ 175-61. Insect and rodent control.
Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and
rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other
measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
regulations governing mobile home parks.
§ 175-62. Fuel supply and storage.
A. Natural gas system.
(1) Natural gas piping systems when installed in mobile home parks
shall be maintained in conformity with accepted engineering
practices.
(2) Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an
approved shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet. The
outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent
accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use.
B. Liquefied petroleum gas systems.
(1) Liquefied petroleum gas systems provided for mobile homes
service buildings or other structures when installed shall be
maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the
authority having jurisdiction and shall include the following:
(a) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve
excessive pressures and shall be arranged so that the
discharge terminates at a safe location.
(b) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting
off gas. Such means shall be located outside the mobile home
and shall be maintained in effective operating condition.
(c) All LPG piping outside of the mobile home shall be well
supported and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted
liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed
through piping equipment and systems in mobile homes.
(d) Vessels of more than 12 and less than 60 U.S. gallons gross
capacity may be installed on a mobile home lot and shall be
securely but not permanently fastened to prevent accidental
overturning.
(2) No LPG vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any
storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or any other structure
unless such installations are specially approved by the authority
having jurisdiction.
§ 175-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-62
1:339
§ 175-63. Fire prevention and fire protection.
§ 175-64. Responsibilities of park management.
C. Fuel oil supply systems.
(1) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings and other structures shall be installed and maintained in
conformity with the rules and regulations of the authority having
jurisdiction when provided.
(2) All piping from outside storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes
shall be securely, but not permanently, fastened in place.
(3) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings and other structures shall have shutoff valves located
within five inches of storage tanks.
(4) All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely placed and shall
not be less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
(5) Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected
against physical damage.
A. The mobile home park area shall be subject to the rules and regulations
of the Township fire prevention authority where provided.
B. Mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other
flammable materials.
C. Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention
authority shall be kept in public buildings under park control.
D. Fire hydrants.
(1) Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with national
standards and in no case less than the following:
(a) The water supply source shall permit the operation of a
minimum of two one-and-one-half-inch hose streams.
(b) Each of two nozzles, held four inches above the ground, shall
deliver at least 75 gallons of water per minute as a flowing
pressure of at least 30 pounds per square inch at the highest
point of the park.
(2) Fire hydrants, if provided, shall be located within 600 feet of any
mobile home, service building or other structure in the park.
A. The person to whom a permit for a mobile home is issued shall operate
the park in compliance with this article and shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good
repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 175-62 ROSTRAVER CODE § 175-64
1:340
§ 175-65. Violations and penalties; revocation or suspension of
permit.
B. The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile
home on its mobile home stand, which includes securing its stability
and installing all utility connections.
C. The park management shall give the officer free access to all mobile
home lots, service buildings and other community facilities for the
purpose of inspection.
D. The management shall maintain a register containing the names of all
park occupants. The register shall be available to any authorized person
inspecting the park.
E. The management shall notify the appropriate state or local health
agency of any suspected communicable or contagious diseases within
the park.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction for every such violation, be sentenced to pay a fine of nor
less than $100 or more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in
default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not
more than 30 days. Each violation of any provision of this article is an
offense, and each day on which a violation is continued shall be deemed
a separate offense.
B. Upon repeated violations by a permit holder, his right to the permit or
to continued operation under the permit may be suspended or
permanently revoked after notice from the Board of Commissioners
and, if requested by the permit holder within 10 days after the notice, a
hearing before the Board of Commissioners, subject to the right of
appeal to the Court of Common Pleas.
§ 175-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-65
1:341
Chapter 178
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 178-1. Findings.
It is determined and declared that the maintenance of private swimming
pools without appropriate precautionary measures constitutes a hazard to
the safety of the inhabitants of the Township.
§ 178-2. Certain swimming pools to be provided with physical
barriers.
§ 178-3. Applicability and enforcement.
A. Every person, firm or corporation in possession of land within the
Township, either as an owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant
or licensee, in which there is situated an excavated swimming pool
containing or capable of containing water 18 inches or more in depth at
a point, shall erect and maintain on the lot or premises upon which that
pool is located an adequate physical barrier sufficient to make the pool
inaccessible to unsupervised small children. Nothing in this chapter
shall apply to what are referred to as "aboveground pools."
B. Such physical barrier shall completely surround the pool and shall
extend not less than four feet above the adjacent ground level;
provided, however, that a dwelling house or accessory building may be
used as part of that enclosure.
C. Such physical barrier shall be constructed in such a way as to prevent
access under the lower edge by small children.
D. All accessways, gates or doors through such enclosure, except the door
of any dwelling occupied by human beings and forming any part of the
enclosure required above, shall be self-closing and equipped with a selflatching
device designed to keep and capable of keeping that door or
gate securely closed at all times when not in actual use. No such
enclosing wall or fence shall be constructed nearer than five feet to the
outer walls of the pool.
A. The primary method for enforcement of this chapter shall be by
discovery or the filing of a complaint with the Township.
§ 175-65 ROSTRAVER CODE § 178-3
1:342
§ 178-4. Modifications.
§ 178-5. Certain acts constitute trespass.
If a person enters and remains unlawfully in or upon said premises, that
person shall be charged with the offense of trespass.
§ 178-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of the terms of this
chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $100 or more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment
for not more than 30 days. Any person, firm or corporation continuing,
committing or permitting any violation of this chapter for more than one
week shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each week of violation.
Chapter 182
TAXATION
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to swimming pools which
are owned, operated and maintained by a legally constituted public
jurisdiction or to the so-called "aboveground pools."
C. All new swimming pools erected after the adoption of Ordinance No.
142-198191 shall meet the conditions set forth herein.
D. A person, firm or corporation in possession of land within the Township,
either as an owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or
licensee, in which there is situated an excavated or portable swimming
pool shall erect some sort of fencing within 120 days of adoption of
Ordinance No. 142-198192 and be in full compliance with the
requirements contained herein by the 15th day of May 1982.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer may allow slight or minor modifications
for good cause shown in individual cases with respect to nature or
location of fences, walls, gates or latches or the necessity therefor,
provided that the degree of protection is not reduced thereby.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer, upon application of a person, firm or
corporation, may grant an extension of time for compliance in
individual cases upon showing of good cause. Such extension of time
shall not exceed 30 days.
91.Editor's Note: Said ordinance was adopted 12-7-1981.
92.Editor's Note: Said ordinance was adopted 12-7-1981.
§ 178-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-6
1:343

ARTICLE I
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 3, Ch. 2, Art. B, of the 1989 Code]
§ 182-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Business Privilege Tax
Ordinance."
§ 182-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context indicates clearly a different
meaning, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth
below:
BUSINESS —
COLLECTOR — That person appointed by the Board of Commissioners to
administer and enforce this article.
FINANCIAL BUSINESS — The services and transactions of banks and
bankers, trust, credit and investment companies, holding companies,
dealers and brokers in money, credits, commercial paper, bonds, notes,
securities and stocks, monetary metals, factors and commission merchants,
upon which the herein imposed tax is not prohibited by law.
GROSS RECEIPTS —
Carrying on or exercising, whether for gain or profit or otherwise,
within the Township any trade, business, including but not limited
to financial business, as defined in this section, profession, vocation,
service, construction, communication or commercial activity, or making
sales to persons or rendering services from or attributable to a
Township office or place of business.
A.
"Business" shall not include the following: any business which is subject
to the Township of Rostraver mercantile tax; any employment for a
wage or salary; or any business upon which the power to levy a tax is
withheld by law.
B.
Includes:
Cash, credits, property of any kind or nature received in or
allocable or attributable to the confines of the Township from any
business or by reason of any sale made, including resales of goods,
wares or merchandise taken by a dealer as a trade-in or as part
payment for other goods, wares or merchandise or services
rendered or commercial or business transactions had within the
Township, without deduction therefrom on account of the cost of
property sold, materials used, labor, service or other cost, interest
or discount paid or any other expense;
(1)
(2) Both cash and credit transactions.
A.
§ 182-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-2
1:345
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, unincorporated association
or corporation, nonprofit or otherwise. Whenever used in any provision
prescribing a fine or a penalty, the word "person" as applied to partnerships
shall mean the partners thereof and as applied to corporations and
unincorporated associations shall mean the officers thereof.
TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period from January 1 to December 31.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar days.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Rostraver.
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS — This tax shall not apply to transient
merchants who shall be covered by the Township ordinance dealing with
such transient merchants, peddlers and solicitors. Further, transient
merchants shall have the same definition herein as set out in the Township
ordinance dealing with those classifications. 93
Excludes:
The amount of any allowance made for goods, wares or
merchandise taken by a dealer as a trade-in or as part payment
for other goods, wares and merchandise in the usual and ordinary
course of his business.
(1)
In the case of a financial business, the cost of securities and other
property sold, exchanged, paid at maturity or redeemed; moneys or
credits received in repayment of advances, credits and loans, but
not to exceed the principal amount of such advances, credits and
loans; and deposits.
(2)
In the case of a broker, any commission paid by him to another
broker on account of a purchase or sales contract initiated,
executed or cleared in conjunction with such other broker.
(3)
In the case of a dealer, receipts from sales to other dealers in the
same line where the dealer transfers title or possession at the same
price for which he acquired the goods, wares or merchandise, as
long as said dealers are not the parent or subsidiary organization of
the vendor or have no other affiliation or cooperative arrangement
with the vendor.
(4)
In the case of interstate business, receipts or that portion thereof
attributable to interstate or foreign commerce or to an office or
place of business regularly maintained by the taxpayer, outside the
limits of the Township and not for the purpose of evading payment
of this tax and those receipts which the Township is prohibited from
taxing by law. Such receipts shall be segregated as set forth in
§ 182-4C.
(5)
B.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 141, Peddling and Soliciting.
§ 182-2 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-3
1:346
§ 182-3. Imposition and rate of tax.
Every person engaging in any business in the Township beginning with the
tax year 1980, and annually thereafter, shall pay an annual tax at the rate of
1/2 of a mill on each dollar of volume of the gross annual receipts thereof.
§ 182-4. Computation of gross annual receipts.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article
who has commenced his business at least one full year prior to the
beginning of any tax year shall compute his annual gross receipts upon
the actual receipts received by him during the preceding calendar year.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article
who has commenced or who commences his business less than one full
year prior to the beginning of any tax year shall compute his annual
gross receipts for such tax year upon the gross receipts generated by
the business transaction within the Township during the first month he
engages in such business activity, multiplied by 12.
C. Where a receipt in its entirety cannot be subject to the tax imposed by
this article by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the United
States or any other provisions of law, including the exemptions within
this article, the Collector shall establish rules and regulations and
methods of allocation and evaluation so that only that part of such
receipt which is properly attributable and allowable to the doing of
business in the Township shall be taxed hereunder. The Collector may
make such allocation with due regard to the nature of the business
concerned on the basis of mileage division of the receipts according to
the number of jurisdiction in which it may be taxed, the ratio of the
value or values of the property or assets of the taxpayer owned and
situated in the Township to the total property or assets of the taxpayer
wherever owned and situated or any other method or methods of
calculation in addition to the foregoing, calculated to effect a fair and
proper allocation.
D. Every person who ceases to carry on a business during any tax year
after having paid the business privilege tax for the entire year shall,
upon making proper application to the Collector, be entitled to receive a
refund of the pro rata amount of the tax paid based upon the period of
time he was not in business during the license year. In the event that a
person who discontinues business during any tax year does so before
payment of his tax becomes due for such tax year, he shall be permitted
to apportion his tax for such tax year and shall pay an amount to be
computed by multiplying his gross receipts for the preceding full
calendar year by a fraction whose numerator shall be the number of
months such person was in business during the tax year and whose
denominator shall be 12.
E. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article
who engages in a business, temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
§ 182-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-4
1:347
§ 182-5. Returns and registration.
§ 182-6. Payments made at time of filing return.
The person making the return shall, at the time of filing the return, pay the
amount of the tax shown as due thereon to the Collector.
§ 182-7. Powers and duties of Collector.
nature shall compute his annual gross receipts upon the actual gross
receipts received by him during such tax year.
A. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall forthwith
register with the Collector and set forth his name, address, business
address and the nature of the business activity in which he is engaged.
B. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Collector.
Every person making a return shall certify the correctness thereof.
C. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of
any tax year shall, on or before April 15, 1981, and annually thereafter,
file with the Collector a return setting forth his name, his business and
business address and such other information as may be necessary in
arriving at the annual gross volume of business transacted by him
during the preceding year and the amount of the tax due.
D. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business less than one full year prior to the beginning
of the tax year shall, on or before the following May 15, file with the
Collector a return setting forth his name, his business, business address
and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the
actual volume of business transacted by him during the period of
operation prior to January 1 of that tax year and the amount of the tax
due.
E. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of the tax year shall, within 40
days from the date of commencing such business, file a return with the
Collector setting forth his name, his business, business address and
such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual
volume of business transacted by him during his first month of business
and the amount of the tax due.
F. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article
who engages in a business, temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature shall, within seven days from the day he completes such
business, file a return with the Collector setting forth his name, his
business, his business address and such other information as may be
necessary in arriving at the actual gross volume of business during the
tax period and the amount of the tax due.
§ 182-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-7
1:348
§ 182-8. Suit for recovery of taxes; penalty added to unpaid taxes.
§ 182-9. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on his return or who refuses
to permit inspection of the books, records or accounts of any business in his
custody or control when the right to make such inspection by the Collector
is requested and whoever fails or refuses to file a return required by this
article shall, upon conviction before the District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than $50 or more than $600 for each offense and, in default
A. It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each person paying
the tax and the date of such receipts.
B. The Collector is charged with the administration and enforcement of
the provisions of this article and is hereby empowered to prescribe,
adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the examination, reexamination and correction
of returns and payments alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which
an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred and to make
refunds where necessary. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
Collector shall have the right to appeal to court as in other cases
provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to issue subpoenas, if necessary, to
compel the production of books, papers and records and the attendance
of all persons before him, whether as parties or witnesses, whom he
believes to have knowledge of such receipts.
D. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and
records of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to verify the
accuracy of any return made or, if no return was made, to ascertain the
tax due. Every such taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed
and required to give to the Collector the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
A. The Collector may sue for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under
this article.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due at each collection period,
there shall be added interest at a rate of 6% per annum plus an
additional penalty of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month
or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor
shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest
and penalties herein imposed.
§ 182-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-9
1:349
of payment of fines and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than
30 days for each offense.
§ 182-10. Saving clauses.
§ 182-11. Payment under protest; refund of overpayments.
The Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest of the
amount of business privilege tax claimed by the Township in any case where
the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of the Township's claim for tax.
If it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction
that the Township has been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall
be refunded to the taxpayer.
§ 182-12. Effective date and duration.
The provisions of this article shall become effective January 19, 1980, and
shall remain in effect thereafter, from year to year, on a calendar-year basis.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Township to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person or
any business or any portion of any business not within the taxing power
of the Township under the Constitution of the United States or the laws
and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax or any portion thereof imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the decision of the court shall
not affect or impair the right to impose the taxes or the validity of the
taxes so imposed upon other persons as herein provided.
C. If a final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction holds any
provision of this article or the application of any provision to any
circumstances to be illegal or unconstitutional, the other provisions of
this article or the application of such provision to other circumstances
shall remain in full force and effect. The intention of the Board of
Commissioners is that the provisions of this article shall be severable
and that this article would have been adopted if any such illegal or
unconstitutional provisions had not been included herein.
§ 182-9 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-12
1:350
ARTICLE II
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 3, Ch. 2, Art. C, of the 1989 Code]
§ 182-13. Title; effective date.
This article shall be known as the "Net Profits and Earned Income Tax
Ordinance," and the provisions of this article shall become effective January
1, 1972.
§ 182-14. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, for the purpose of this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners in and for
Rostraver Township, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature, conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of abode
which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than transitory.
Domicile is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed the habitation
of himself and his family, not for a mere special or limited purpose, but
with the present intention of making a permanent home, until some event
occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home. In case of
businesses or association, the domicile is that place considered as the
center of business affairs and the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent and whether in cash or in property; not including, however,
wages or compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic
payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received
during a period of sickness, disability or payments arising under workmen's
compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar legislation or
payments commonly recognized as old age benefits, retirement pay or
pensions paid to persons retired from service after reaching a specific
§ 182-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-14
1:351
age or after a stated period of employment or payments commonly known
as "public assistance" or unemployment compensation payments made by
any governmental agency or payments to reimburse expenses or payments
made by employers or labor unions for wage and supplemental salary
programs, including but not limited to programs covering hospitalization,
sickness, disability or death, supplemental unemployment benefits, strike
benefits, social security and retirement.
INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — Person, public employee or private
agency designated by the Board of Commissioners to collect and administer
the tax on earned income and net profits.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business
profession or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs
and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash
or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such
business, profession or other activity, but without deduction of taxes based
on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the taxing district.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the taxing district.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity
required under this article to file a return of earned income or net profits or
to pay a tax thereon.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Rostraver, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 182-15. Interpretation; word usage.
The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.
§ 182-16. Imposition of tax; rate.
A tax for general revenue purposes of 1% is hereby imposed upon the
earned income and net profits of each resident and of each nonresident
who or which receives the principal part of such income and/or profits from
employment, a business or other activity conducted within the Township or
having its base of operations within the Township.
§ 182-14 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-17
1:352
§ 182-17. Allowance of credits or deductions.
There shall be allowed as a credit or deduction from the tax imposed by
§ 182-16 upon a nonresident the amount of any like tax, respectively, on
earned income and net profits imposed by any other political subdivision to
the extent that such credit or deduction is required as provided in Section
14 of the Local Tax Enabling Act,94 but not in excess of the amount of the
tax imposed by this article for the applicable tax period.
§ 182-18. Permanent nature of tax.
The tax levied under this article shall be applicable to earned income
received and to net profits earned during the period beginning January 1,
1972, and thereafter on a calendar-year or taxpayer-fiscal-year basis.
§ 182-19. Annual declaration of estimated net profits; quarterly
payment of tax.
Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the current
year, make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or approved by
the Officer a declaration of his estimated net profits during the period
beginning January 1 and ending December 31, of the current year and pay
to the Officer in four equal quarterly installments the tax due thereon as
follows: the first installment at the time of filing the declaration and the
other installments on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15
of the current year and January 15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
§ 182-20. Report of net profits estimated after April 15 of current
year.
Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of the current
year shall make and file the declaration required by § 182-19 on or before
June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current year or December
31 of the current year, whichever of these dates next follows the date
on which the taxpayer first anticipates such net profits, and pay to the
Officer in equal installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly
payment dates which remain after the filing of the declaration.
§ 182-21. Final return of net profits; accompanied by amount due.
A. Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year, make
and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer
a final return showing the amount of net profits earned during the
period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December
31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due thereon and the total
amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of filing the final return, the
taxpayer shall pay to the Officer the balance of tax due or shall made
demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
94.Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.317.
§ 182-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-21
1:353
§ 182-22. Adjusted declarations of estimated net profits and tax
payments.
The Officer shall provide by regulation for the making and filing of adjusted
declarations of estimated net profits and for the payments of the estimated
tax in cases where a taxpayer who has filed the declaration required in
§ 182-21 anticipates additional net profits not previously declared or finds
that he has overestimated his anticipated net profits.
§ 182-23. Returns and payment of tax on net profits by taxpayer
discontinuing business during year.
Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business, file
his final return as required in § 182-21 and pay the tax due.
§ 182-24. Taxpayer's return of earned income not withheld.
Every taxpayer who is employed for a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation and who receives any earned income not subject to the
provisions of §§ 182-27 through 182-31 relative to collection at source shall
make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the
Officer a quarterly return on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31
of the current year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the
succeeding year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding during the three-month periods ending March 31 of
the current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the current
year and December 31 of the current year, respectively, and subject to the
tax, together with such other information as the Officer may require. Every
taxpayer making such return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the
Officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
§ 182-25. Taxpayer's final return and payment of earned income tax.
Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15, 1973, make and file with the
Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer a final return
showing the amount of earned income received during the period beginning
January 1, 1972, and ending December 31, 1972, the total amount of tax
due thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon
that has been withheld pursuant to the provisions of §§ 182-27 through
182-31 relative to collection at source and the balance of the tax due; and
thereafter, every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding
year, make and file with the Officer a similar final return with respect to
the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December
31 of the current year; provided, however, that no such final return shall
B. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of
his estimated tax, elect to make and file with the Officer on or before
January 31 of the succeeding year the final return as hereinabove
required.
§ 182-21 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-25
1:354
be required to be filed by a taxpayer who receives no earned income other
than income subject to the provisions of this article relating to the collection
at source. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the
balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case
of overpayment.
§ 182-26. Employers register with Income Tax Officer.
Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse or
other place of business within the Township, who employs one or more
persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage, commission or
other compensation, who has not previously registered shall, within 15 days
after becoming an employer, register with the Officer his name and address
and such other information as the Officer may require.
§ 182-27. Employers deduct earned income tax from employees,
make returns and pay over tax due.
§ 182-28. Employers' annual returns and withholding statements.
On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall file
with the Officer:
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Township who employs one or
more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation shall deduct, at the time of payment
thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his
employee or employees and shall, on or before April 30 of the current
year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and
January 31 of the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the Officer
the amount of tax deducted during the preceding three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current year,
respectively. That return, unless otherwise agreed upon between the
Officer and employer, shall show the name and social security number
of each employee, the earned income of that employee during such
preceding three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax upon that employee, the total earned
income of all such employees during that preceding three-month period
and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the return.
B. Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly periods has
failed to deduct the proper tax or any part thereof or has failed to pay
over the proper amount of tax to the taxing authority may be required
by the Officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases,
payments of tax shall be made to the Officer on or before the last day of
the month succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
A. A final or an annual return showing the total amount of earned income
paid, the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of tax paid
§ 182-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-28
1:355
§ 182-29. Employers discontinuing business before end of year.
Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business, file
the returns and withholding statements required by § 182-28 and pay the
tax due.
§ 182-30. Liability of employers.
Every employer who willfully or negligently fails to make the deductions
required by § 182-27 shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he was
required to withhold to the extent that those taxes have not been recovered
from the employee.
§ 182-31. Liability of employees when employer fails to deduct tax
or file declarations and returns.
The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions required
by § 182-27 shall not relieve any employee from the payment of the tax or
from complying with the requirements of this article relating to the filing of
declarations and returns.
§ 182-32. Duties of Income Tax Officer.
It shall be the duty of the Officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines and
penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a record
showing the amount received by him from each person or business paying
the tax and the date of such receipt.
§ 182-33. Bond of Income Tax Officer.
to the Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year and
ending December 31 of the current year.
B. A return withholding statement for each employee employed during all
or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the current year and
ending December 31 of the current year, setting forth the employee's
name, address and social security number, the amount of earned
income paid to the employee during said period, the amount of tax
deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such
employees and the amount of tax paid to the Officer. Every employer
shall furnish two copies of the individual return to the employee for
whom it is filed.
A. The Officer, before entering upon his official duties under this article,
shall give and acknowledge a bond in the principal amount of $5,000,
which bond shall remain in the custody of the Secretary of the Board of
Commissioners, shall be joint and several with one or more corporate
sureties which shall be surety companies authorized to do business in
this commonwealth and duly licensed by the Insurance Commissioner
of this commonwealth; shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge
§ 182-28 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-33
1:356
§ 182-34. Administration and enforcement; rules and regulations.
The Officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this article is empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate
and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
reexamination and correction of declarations and returns and of payments
alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which an overpayment is claimed
or found to have occurred and to make refunds in cases of overpayment, for
any period of time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment
of the sum involved and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
of the article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable unless
it has been approved by ordinance of the Board of Commissioners. A copy
of such rules and regulations currently in force shall be available for public
inspection.
§ 182-35. Refund of earned income tax paid on business expenses.
The Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer, earned
income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary business
expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the taxpayer's
employer.
§ 182-36. Access to books and records of taxpayers and employers.
The Officer and agents designated by him are authorized to examine the
books, papers and records of any employer or of any taxpayer or of any
person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer,
by the Officer, his clerks, assistants and appointees of all trusts confided
in him by virtue of his office, upon the just and faithful accounting or
payment over, according to law, of all moneys and all balances thereof
paid to, received or held by him by virtue of his office and upon the
delivery to his successor or successors in office of all books, papers,
documents or other official things held in right of his office shall be
taken in the name of the Board of Commissioners; and shall be for the
use of the Township and for the use of such other person or persons for
whom money shall be collected or received or as his or her interest shall
otherwise appear, in case of a breach of any of the conditions thereof
by the acts or neglect of the principal of the bond.
B. The Township or any person may sue upon said bond in its or his own
name for its or his own use; and such bond shall contain the name or
names of the surety company or companies bound thereon.
C. The Township shall have the right upon cause shown and due notice to
the Officer and his surety or sureties to require or allow the substitution
or the addition of a surety company acceptable to the Township for the
purpose of making the bond sufficient in amount, without releasing the
surety or sureties first approved from any accrued liability or previous
action on such bond.
§ 182-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-36
1:357
in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration or return or, if no
declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every employer
and every taxpayer and every person whom the Officer reasonably believes
to be an employer or taxpayer is directed and required to give to the Officer
or to any agent designated by him the means, facilities and opportunity for
such examination and investigations as are hereby authorized.
§ 182-37. Confidential nature of information gained.
Any information gained by the Officer, his agents or by any other official
or agent of the taxing district as a result of any declarations, returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
article shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law.
§ 182-38. Adjustments for taxpayers with different fiscal year.
The Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and payment
dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the calendar
year.
§ 182-39. Appointment and compensation of Income Tax Officer.
Until the further action of the Board of Commissioners, Don Wilkinson
Agency (Note: Central Tax of Pennsylvania, Inc. is now the Income Tax
Officer.) is appointed as the Officer to collect and administer the tax levied
by this article, and the Officer's compensation for services rendered and
expenses incurred hereunder shall be an amount equal to 1% of the net
amount of taxes levied by this article which are collected and paid over to
the Township.
§ 182-40. Suit for recovery of unpaid taxes.
The Officer may sue in the name of the Township for the recovery of taxes
due and unpaid under this article.
§ 182-41. Limitations on suits.
Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be begun
within three years after the tax is due or within three years after the
declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later; provided,
however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution of a suit for the
collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the following cases:
A. Where no declaration or return was filed, although a declaration or
return was required to be filed under provisions of this article, there
shall be no limitation.
B. Where an examination of the declaration or return filed or of other
evidence relating to such declaration or return in the possession of the
§ 182-36 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-41
1:358
§ 182-42. Suit for erroneous refund.
The Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund provided that
suit is begun two years after making the refund, except that the suit may
be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the refund was
induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
§ 182-43. Interest added to unpaid tax.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties
herein imposed.
§ 182-44. Violations and penalties.
Officer reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes, there shall be no
limitation.
C. In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or more
and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
D. Where any employer has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Officer or
where any employer has willfully failed or omitted to make the
deductions required by this article, there shall be no limitation.
E. This section shall not be construed to limit the Township from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by law.
A. Penalty for certain violations. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses
to make any declaration or return required by this article, any employer
who fails, neglects or refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from
his employees or fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax
from his employees, any person who refuses to permit the Officer or any
agent designated by him to examine his books, records and papers and
any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent
return or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full
disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income in order to
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
article shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice or court
of competent jurisdiction in Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 dollars for each offense
and costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Penalty for divulging confidential information. Any person who divulges
any information which is confidential under the provisions of this article
§ 182-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-44
1:359
§ 182-45. Failure to receive or procure declaration or return forms.
The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for making
the declaration or returns required by this article shall not excuse him from
making that declaration or return.
shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice or court of
competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$500 dollars for each offense and costs and, in default of payment of
said fines and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30
days.
C. Penalties in addition to those imposed by other sections of article. The
penalties imposed under Subsections A and B shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
§ 182-44 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-45
1:360
ARTICLE III
Mercantile Tax
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 3, Ch. 2, Art. D, of the 1989 Code]
§ 182-46. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for the
purpose of this article, the meanings herein indicated:
GROSS SALES — The moneys received and/or credit extended by a vendor
in or by reason of all sales of tangible real and personal property, including
cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction
therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold; the cost of materials,
labor or service used; interest, discount or other expenses.
PERSON — Includes natural person, firm, association, copartnership or
corporation.
RETAIL VENDOR — A vendor who is not classed as wholesale vendor.
VENDOR — Any person who, from a store, warehouse or any other place
or places located in the Township of Rostraver, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania, sells tangible, real and personal property, including but not
limited to goods, wares, merchandise, food, drink and refreshments
previously purchased by or for such vendor or, if manufactured by him,
being sold from a store or warehouse apart from the manufactory. This
section includes sales from motor vehicles, wagons and carts at any place
or places in said Township.
WHOLESALE VENDOR — A vendor who sells to other vendors or dealers,
wherever such vendors or dealers shall be located.
§ 182-47. Imposition and rate of tax.
A. Annual taxes for general revenue purposes are hereby imposed on:
(1) Gross sales of every wholesale vendor, tax limited to sales of
products handled through the facility and elimination of sale of
products to out of state areas, at the rate of 1/4 mill of a dollar on
the first $200,000,000 of sale; 1/8 mill on the second $200,000,000
of sales; and 1/12 mill on the dollar on all sales in excess of
$400,000,000.
(2) Gross sales of every retail vendor at the rate of 1 1/2 mill on the
dollar.
B. These taxes shall be construed as annually continuing ones, carrying
over from year to year, unless specifically amended, changed or
repealed.
§ 182-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-48
1:361
§ 182-48. Vendor returns.
Every vendor subject to this tax shall, on or before the last day of April,
July, October and January of each year, commencing April 30, 1980, file a
return with the Secretary and shall indicate the gross sales of such vendor
taxable under this article during the preceding three-month period, ending
respectively on the last days of March, June, September and December,
provided that if any vendor, during the preceding quarterly period, shall
have acquired the assets or business of or shall have merged with another
person, the vendor subject to such tax shall be liable for and shall include
in his return the gross sales of such other person taxable under this article
for the first portion of such quarterly period; provided, further, that it shall
be presumed that all sales are a proper measure of this tax until established
otherwise and the burden of proving that any payment or consideration
received in or by reason of a sale made in the Township shall be upon the
person who received such payment or consideration.
§ 182-49. When due and payable; receipts for tax paid; penalty
added to unpaid taxes.
§ 182-50. Assessment by special Tax Assessor.
A. This tax shall be due and payable on or before the last day of the month
following the last day of each quarterly period, regardless of whether a
return is filed or whether the return that is filed indicated correctly the
amount of the tax due. Upon payment of this tax by any vendor, the
Secretary shall indicate such payment upon a numbered duplicate. The
duplicate receipt shall be kept among the records of the Secretary. The
original receipt shall be given to the person paying the tax.
B. If any tax imposed under this article shall not be paid when due, a
penalty of 10% of the amount due and unpaid shall be added thereto. If
any return required under this article shall not be filed when due, the
vendor responsible for such return shall, in addition to the tax due and
any penalty for nonpayment of the tax, pay a penalty of $1 for each day
beyond the date on which such return was due, until such return shall
have been filed.
A. If any return required by this article shall not be filed when due or if a
return when filed seems to be incorrect or insufficient, the amount of
tax due shall be assessed by a special Tax Assessor who shall be
appointed by the Board of Commissioners and who shall receive for
such services such compensation as shall be determined by the Board
of Commissioners. In assessing the amount of tax due from any vendor,
that Assessor shall use such information as may be obtainable, and if
necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indices,
such as a number of employees of such vendor, the assessment for such
vendor for previous quarterly periods, rental paid by the vendor, stock
on hand and other factors; provided, however, that if any vendor shall
submit to such Assessor his financial records of the previous year, such
§ 182-48 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-50
1:362
§ 182-51. Recovery of unpaid taxes and penalties.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with all penalties imposed under
this article, shall be recoverable by the Solicitor as provided by law.
§ 182-52. Confidential nature of information gained.
Any information gained by the Secretary or any other official or agent
of the Township as a result of any returns, investigations, hearings or
verifications required or authorized by this article shall be confidential,
except for official purposes and except in accordance with proper judicial
order or as otherwise provided by law. Any disclosure of any information,
contrary to the provisions of this section, shall constitute a violation of this
section.
§ 182-53. Violations and penalties.
Any person charged with violating any provision or requirement of this
article or of failing, neglecting or refusing to pay any tax or penalties
imposed under this article shall be prosecuted before a District Justice
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be liable to a fine or penalty of not less
than $50 or more than $600 and costs of prosecution for every offense
and, in default of payment thereof, to undergo imprisonment for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Such fine or penalty shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article. In a case where
the alleged violation shall involve a firm, association, copartnership or
corporation, each and every copartner or official thereof shall be liable,
together with the vendor or party making the return or liable for payment
of the tax, and may be prosecuted hereunder.
§ 182-54. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to any person or property as to whom or which it
is beyond the legal power of the Board of Commissioners to impose the tax
or duties provided for in this article.
as accounts, cash register tape and other such materials, such
assessment, insofar as possible, shall be based upon such records
rather than upon external indices.
B. To any tax based upon any assessment made by such special Assessor
shall be added the penalty due for nonpayment of the tax when due and
the amount of tax due to the special Assessor to compensate him for his
work of assessing the amount of tax due from such vendor. After such
assessment, the special Tax Assessor shall give written notice of such
assessment to the vendor concerned. Such assessment shall finally and
irrevocably fix and determine the tax due unless the vendor shall
appeal, in writing, to the Board of Commissioners of the Township for a
hearing within 30 days of the date of such notice. Such hearing shall be
held within 30 days of the request for hearing.
§ 182-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-54
1:363

ARTICLE IV
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 3, Ch. 2, Art. E, of the 1989 Code,
amended in its entirety 12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 571]
§ 182-55. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Rostraver
Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 182-56. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended by Act No. 7 of 2007.
§ 182-57. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide revenue for police, fire and
emergency services; road construction and maintenance; the reduction of
property taxes and for such other purposes as may be specified for such tax
from time to time by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 182-58. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as determined under Section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No.2), known as the "Tax Reform Code
of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I, Subpt. B, Art. V (relating to
personal income tax) not including, however, wages or compensation paid
to individuals on active military service. Employee business expenses are
allowable deductions as determined under Article III of the "Tax Reform
Code of 1971." Any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy
shall not be taxable as earned income.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
§ 182-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-58
1:365
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, (except from corporations), determined under
Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I, Subpt. B, Art. V
(relating to personal income tax). The term does not include income which
is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from
an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity
of farming the term shall not include:
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Township of Rostraver.
RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force
Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air
National Guard.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 182-59 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 182-59. Levy of tax.
The Township of Rostraver hereby levies and imposes on every individual
engaging in an occupation with the jurisdictional limits of the Township of
Rostraver a tax in the amount of $52 per annum, beginning the first day of
January 2008 and continuing on a calendar basis annually thereafter, until
modified or repealed by subsequent ordinance. This tax may be used solely
for the following purposes as the same may be allocated by the Township
of Rostraver from time to time: (1) emergency services, which shall include
emergency medical services, police services and/or fire services; (2) road
construction and/or maintenance; (3) reduction of property taxes; or (4)
property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and farmstead
exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 85, Subch. F (relating to
homestead property exclusion). The political subdivision shall use no less
than 25% of the funds derived from the tax for emergency services. This tax
Any interest generated from monetary accounts or investment
instrument of the farming business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farming machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
C.
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
§ 182-58 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-59
1:366
is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by
the political subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person
for each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
§ 182-60. Exemption and refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
§ 182-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-60
1:367
§ 182-61. Duty of employers to collect.
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of 12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Township of Rostraver, in consultation with the Collector
and DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund
claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption,
which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general
municipal law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on
overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75
days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the
last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject
to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a
calendar year that do not exceed $1. The Township of Rostraver or the
Collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds
to exempt persons.
§ 182-60 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-61
1:368
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 182-60B of
§ 182-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-61
1:369
§ 182-62. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 182-63. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
Each employer shall use his employment and payroll records from the
first day of January to March 31 each year for determining the number
of employees from whom said tax shall be deducted and paid over to the
collector on or before April 30 of the same calendar year. Supplemental
reports shall be made by each employer on July 30, October 30 and January
31 for new employees as reflected on his employment and payroll records
from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to September 30 and October 1 to December
31, and payments on these supplemental reports shall be made on July 30,
October 30 and January 31, respectively.
§ 182-64. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who has earned income or realizes net profit,
as those terms are defined herein, within the political subdivision shall be
required to comply with this article and pay the tax due to the Collector on
or before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 182-65. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
§ 182-61 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-65
1:370
§ 182-66. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 182-67. Administration of tax.
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him
from each employer or self-employed person, together with the date the
tax was received. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and keep
a record of the information submitted by employers relating to the
number of employees subject to the tax, the number of employees
exempt from the tax, the employee exemption certificates and refunds
of the tax paid to individuals and employers.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
to the Court of Common Pleas of Westmoreland County as in other
cases provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
§ 182-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-68
1:371
§ 182-68. Suits for collection.
§ 182-68.1. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 182-68.2. Interpretation.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 182-68 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-68.2
1:372
ARTICLE V
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 3, Ch. 2, Art. F, of the 1989 Code]
§ 182-69. Levy of tax.
A per capita tax of $10, for general Township purposes, is hereby levied
and assessed under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965,
approved December 31, 1965, Act No. 511, effective January 1, 1966, its
amendments and supplements,95 upon each resident or inhabitant of the
Township of Rostraver over the age of 18 years, which per capita tax
shall be in addition to all other taxes levied and assessed by the Township
pursuant to any other laws of the commonwealth.
§ 182-70. Collection by Township Treasurer.
The per capita tax shall be collected by the Township Treasurer in his
capacity as Tax Collector,96 in the same manner and at the same time as
other Township taxes are collected, as provided by the Local Tax Collection
Law of 1945, as amended and supplemented.97
§ 182-71. Treasurer's bond.
The Treasurer shall give bond secured and conditioned for the collection
and payment of the per capita tax as provided by law for other Township
taxes.
§ 182-72. Warrant for collection.
The entry of the per capita tax in the tax duplicate and the issuance of the
duplicate to the Treasurer as Tax Collector98 shall constitute his warrant for
the collection of the per capita tax levied and assessed in this article.
§ 182-73. Collector's compensation and expenses.
The expense for collection and compensation of the Collector shall be
paid and allowed as provided in the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as
amended and supplemented,99 which compensation shall be the same as
shall be fixed from time to time for the collection of other Township taxes.
95.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
96.Editor’s Note: Pursuant to Act 188 of 2012, the positions of Treasurer and Tax Collector
have been separated. See §§ 62-2 and 62-3.
97.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
98.Editor’s Note: Pursuant to Act 188 of 2012, the positions of Treasurer and Tax Collector
have been separated. See §§ 62-2 and 62-3.
99.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 182-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-74
1:373
§ 182-74. Notice to taxpayers.
The Treasurer as Tax Collector100 shall give notice to the taxpayers of the
amount of the per capita tax due under this article, at the same time and in
the same manner as provided by the Local Tax Collection Law, as amended
and supplemented.101
§ 182-75. Addition of names to tax duplicate.
The Treasurer as Tax Collector102 shall add to the tax duplicate the names of
individuals over the age of 18 years which have been certified to him by the
Board of Township Commissioners, following the procedure in Section 16
of the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as amended and supplemented,103
and shall then proceed to collect the per capita tax from those individuals.
§ 182-76. Powers and duties of Treasurer as Collector.
The Treasurer, as Tax Collector,104 shall give notice to the taxpayers, shall
have the power to collect the per capita tax by distress, shall have the power
and authority to demand and receive that tax from the employer of any
person owing any per capita tax or whose spouse owes any per capita tax,
shall remit those taxes to the Township by separate statement at the same
time as other taxes are remitted to the Township, shall allow discounts and
add penalties, shall generally be subject to all the duties and shall have all
the rights and authority conferred upon him by the Local Tax Collection
Law of 1945, as amended and supplemented. 105It is declared to be the
intent of the Board of Commissioners in the collection of this per capita tax
that the Tax Collector have all the powers, together with all the duties and
obligations, to the same extent and as fully provided for in the Local Tax
Collection Law of 1945, as amended and supplemented.
§ 182-77. Effective date and duration.
This article shall go into effect on the first day of January 1980 and shall
remain in effect from year to year, without annual reenactment, unless the
rate of the tax is subsequently changed.
§ 182-78. Persons entitled to exoneration.
A. Any person who has attained the age of 18 as of January 1 of the
previous fiscal year, whose total income from all sources is $5,000 or
more for the calendar year, is subject to the per capita tax.
100. Editor’s Note: Pursuant to Act 188 of 2012, the positions of Treasurer and Tax Collector
have been separated. See §§ 62-2 and 62-3.
101. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
102. Editor’s Note: Pursuant to Act 188 of 2012, the positions of Treasurer and Tax Collector
have been separated. See §§ 62-2 and 62-3.
103. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
104. Editor’s Note: Pursuant to Act 188 of 2012, the positions of Treasurer and Tax Collector
have been separated. See §§ 62-2 and 62-3.
105. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 182-74 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-78
1:374
§ 182-79. "Income" defined.
"Income" is defined as wages, social security, pensions, interest, rent,
dividends, public assistance, etc., and income from any and all other
sources.
§ 182-80. Request for exoneration.
All persons requesting exoneration from the payment of the per capita tax
must complete and execute a per capita tax exoneration request form for
the current tax year.
B. Married persons whose combined total income is $10,000 or more are
subject to the per capita tax. If the combined total income of a married
couple is more than $5,000, but less than $10,000, only one person is
subject to the per capita tax. If the combined total income of the
married couple is less than $5,000, neither person is subject to the per
capita tax.
C. Any person in active military service of our country as of January 1 of
the previous fiscal year is not subject to the per capita tax.
§ 182-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-80
1:375

ARTICLE VI
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 9-5-1989 as Part 3, Ch. 2, Art. G, of the 1989 Code;
amended in its entirety 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421]
§ 182-81. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Township of Rostraver."
§ 182-82. Statutory authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Township of Rostraver regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI-D, the Local Real
Estate Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 182-83. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
devises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or devise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 182-88 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
§ 182-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-83
1:377
FAMILY FARM PARTNERSHIP — A partnership of which at least 75% of
its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of
the interests in the partnership are continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment or both,
the term "person" as applied to associations shall include the responsible
members or general partners thereof and as applied to corporations the
officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
Raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish, cats,
dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or recreational
activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
Raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish, cats,
dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or recreational
activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Township, including
without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
§ 182-83 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-83
1:378
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Rostraver.
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings, exclusive of tangible assets,
which are freely transferable and actively traded as an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple or perpetual
leasehold.
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof, where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
B.
§ 182-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-83
1:379
§ 182-84. Imposition of tax; interest.
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations as established by the State Tax
Equalization Board.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest.
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principle of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, the amount of the tax and
the signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,106 so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer then levied by the governing body under the
authority of that Act shall during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate and
such one-half rate shall become effective without any action on the part
of the Township; provided, however, that the Township and any other
political subdivision which imposes such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
106. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 182-83 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-84
1:380
§ 182-85. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 182-86. Excluded transactions.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 182-84 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Township is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at Sheriff sale or Tax
Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take share greater in value
than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
§ 182-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-86
1:381
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer:
(a) For no or nominal actual consideration between principal and
agent or straw party.
(b) From or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or straw
party were his principal, no tax would be imposed under this
article.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property, conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing research and development,
§ 182-86 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-86
1:382
§ 182-87. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 182-86, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or devise of title to real estate between
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture.
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, [68A
Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural
or open space opportunities or a transfer from such conservancy to
the United States, the commonwealth or to any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the
partnership.
(21) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate.
(22) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(23) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 182-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-87
1:383
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 182-88. Acquired company.
§ 182-89. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
partnership or when, because of transfer of partnership interests or
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm partnership under this article.
D. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings or the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
§ 182-87 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-89
1:384
§ 182-90. Determinations by Department of Revenue.
Whenever the amount of tax due to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
pursuant to 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., upon final determination,
redetermination or review by the Department of Revenue, is more than
the amount actually paid to the commonwealth on account thereof, such
amount, including all interest or penalties thereon, shall be deemed to
be the amount due and payable to the Township pursuant to this article
and shall be collectible by the Recorder of Deeds upon rerecording as
hereinafter provided. If the amount of such tax as finally determined is
less than the amount actually paid, then upon application to the Township
together with proof of payment and final determination by the Department
of Revenue, the Township shall refund such portion of the overpayment
that the Township actually received. All applications for refunds must be
received by the Township within two years of the date of payment for which
a refund is requested.
§ 182-91. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 182-92. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax and the Sheriff or other
Officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 182-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-93
1:385
§ 182-93. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 182-94. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 182-95. Interest and penalty for nonpayment.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Township
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer
Tax, without compensation from the Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax. The two-percent commission shall be
paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
§ 182-93 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-95
1:386
§ 182-96. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Township, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein, are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable and continue until discharge by
payment or in accordance with the law and the solicitor is authorized to file
a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Monroe County,
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 182-97. Recovery of taxes.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 182-98. Enforcement; incorporation of statutory regulations.
The designee of the Township Manager of the Township is charged with
enforcement and collection of said tax and is empowered to promulgate
and enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the
tax. The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into
and made a part of this article.
§ 182-99. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of
not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's
fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No
judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of this
violation by the District Justice and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers
or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief,
including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month of fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 182-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-99
1:387

ARTICLE VII
Local Taxpayer Bill of Rights
[Adopted 1-6-1999 by Ord. No. 395]
§ 182-100. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the Local Taxpayer Bill of Rights as
well as all exhibits attached hereto:
ASSESSMENT — The determination by a local taxing authority of the
amount of underpayment by a taxpayer.
ELIGIBLE TAXES — Includes all taxes levied under the Local Tax Enabling
Act (Act 511),107 as well as any per capita, occupation, occupation
assessment, occupational privilege, income, gross receipts, privilege,
amusement, admissions, earned income or net profits tax authorized under
any Act. The term does not apply to real property taxes.
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY — The Township, as well as any officer, agent,
agency, clerk, income tax officer, collector, employee or other person to
whom the Township has assigned responsibility for the audit, assessment,
determination or administration of an eligible tax.
OVERPAYMENT — Any payment of an eligible tax which is determined in
the manner provided by law not to be legally due.
TAXPAYER — A individual, corporation, partnership, association, limited
liability company, estate, trust, trustee, fiduciary or any other entity subject
to or claiming exemption from any eligible tax.
UNDERPAYMENT — The amount or portion of any eligible tax determined
to be legally due in the manner provided by law for which payment or
remittance has not been made.
§ 182-101. Local Taxpayer Bill of Rights Disclosure Statement.
The Township hereby adopts the Local Taxpayer Bill of Rights Disclosure
Statement ("Disclosure Statement") attached hereto as Exhibit A.108 Any
taxpayer contacted regarding an assessment, audit, determination, review,
collection of an eligible tax or receiving an assessment notice for an eligible
tax shall simultaneously receive a Notice of Availability of Local Taxpayer
Bill of Rights. The requisite notice is attached hereto as Exhibit B.109 If a
taxpayer requests the Disclosure Statement, a copy shall be mailed to the
taxpayer at Township expense.
§ 182-102. Confidentiality of information.
Any information obtained by the local taxing authority as a result of an
audit, return, report, investigation, hearing or verification shall be
107. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
108. Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
109. Editor's Note: Said Exhibit B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 182-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-102
1:389
confidential except as otherwise provided by law, or for official purposes.
If an officer, employee or agent of the Township divulges in any manner
confidential information gained as a result of the foregoing, he/she shall be
subject to dismissal from office or discharge from employment.
§ 182-103. Time limits for response to information requests.
Taxpayers shall have at least 30 days to respond to a request for information
from the local taxing authority. When the local taxing authority requests
information from a taxpayer, it shall simultaneously provide the taxpayer
with an Information Request Time Extension Procedure Notice. The form
for such notice is attached hereto as Exhibit C.110 If the taxpayer requests
a reasonable extension of time to respond to an information request, and
states good cause, the request will be granted. The local taxing authority
will not take any action against a taxpayer for the tax year in question until
the expiration of the applicable response period, including extensions.
§ 182-104. Tax appeals.
Act 50 of 1998111 requires the Township to adopt regulations concerning
the form and content of petitions, as well as practice and procedure for tax
appeal petitions. The required regulations as adopted by the Township are
attached hereto as Exhibit D.112
110. Editor's Note: Said Exhibit C is on file in the Township offices.
111. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8431, Petitions.
112. Editor's Note: Said Exhibit D is on file in the Township offices.
§ 182-102 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-104
1:390
ARTICLE VIII
Tax Increment Financing
[Adopted 6-2-1999 by Ord. No. 410]
§ 182-105. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings set forth below:
ACT — Act 113 of 1990 enacted by the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 113
AUTHORITY — The Redevelopment Authority of the County of
Westmoreland or any lawful successor thereto.
COUNTY — County of Westmoreland.
FINANCE OFFICER or TAX COLLECTOR/TREASURER114 — The legally
authorized agent responsible by law for the receipt and disbursement of the
revenues for taxing bodies.
FINLEY ROAD REVITALIZATION AREA OR DISTRICT — The tax increment
district created pursuant to Resolution No. 506115 in accordance with the
provisions of Act 113 of 1990. 116
PROJECT COSTS — Such costs include any and all eligible project costs
undertaken within or for the benefit of the district in accordance with the
express language defining project costs as contained in the Act.
PROJECT PLAN — TIF Proposal prepared by the Redevelopment Authority
of the County of Westmoreland, and the duly authorized amendments
thereto.
TAX INCREMENT — The incremental revenues, determined with reference
to the tax increment base resulting from the increase in the total assessed
value and any increase in millage subsequent to the date the district is
created or taxable real property situated in the district created by
Resolution No. 506.117 This definition applies only to ad valorem taxes on
real property and payments in lieu of taxes assigned to or agreed to be paid
by governmental entities of nonprofit organizations with property situated
or otherwise assignable to the district.
TAX INCREMENT BASE — The aggregate of assessed value of all taxable
real property located within the district created by Resolution No. 506118 on
the date the district was created, December 27, 1995.
113. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6930.1 et seq., the Tax Increment Financing Act.
114. Editor’s Note: Pursuant to Act 188 of 2012, the positions of Treasurer and Tax Collector
have been separated. See §§ 62-2 and 62-3.
115. Editor's Note: Resolution No. 506 is on file in the Township offices.
116. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6930.1 et seq., the Tax Increment Financing Act.
117. Editor's Note: Resolution No. 506 is on file in the Township offices.
118. Editor's Note: Resolution No. 506 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 182-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-105
1:391
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PROPOSAL or TIF PROPOSAL — The
undertakings and activities of the Authority in the Finley Road
Revitalization Area for the elimination and prevention of blight, as set forth
in Exhibit A to Resolution No. 506119 and amendments thereto.
TAX INCREMENT FUND — The fund maintained by the Authority into
which are paid all tax increment revenues and into which are deposited
all other revenues related to the district and the TIF Proposal, from which
money is disbursed to pay project costs related to the district.
TAX INCREMENT REVENUES — One hundred percent of the tax increment
applicable to the district beginning with payments made for 1999
assessments.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Rostraver.
§ 182-106. Boundaries of the district.
The Finley Road Revitalization Area shall contain full units of property
assessed for real property tax purposes as described in Exhibit A to
Resolution No. 506120 and amendments thereto.
§ 182-107. Creation and term of district.
The Finley Road Revitalization Area was created as of the effective date
of Resolution No. 506. The district shall continue in existence until such
time as all project costs are fully paid or until the Township by ordinance
dissolves the district (whichever occurs first), but no longer than 20 years
unless that term is amended as authorized by Act 113. The Authority
currently estimates that the duration of the district will be 20 years or less.
§ 182-108. Name of district.
The district has been identified as "Finley Road Revitalization Area" for all
TIF Proposal and identification purposes.
§ 182-109. Legislative findings.
The Township has determined in accordance with the powers conferred
upon municipalities by the Urban Redevelopment Law121 and by the Act
that, based upon extensive studies and examination of the conditions
existing within the district:
A. The district is a contiguous geographic area within a designated
redevelopment area.
B. The improvements are likely to enhance significantly the value of real
property in the district.
119. Editor's Note: Resolution No. 506 is on file in the Township offices.
120. Editor's Note: Resolution No. 506 is on file in the Township offices.
121. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1701 et seq.
§ 182-105 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-109
1:392
§ 182-110. Approval of TIF Proposal and project financing.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township hereby approves the TIF
Proposal for the district prepared by the Authority and authorizes the
Authority to undertake any and all methods of financing of project costs
available pursuant to Section 9 of the Act.
§ 182-111. Creation of Tax Increment Fund.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township hereby authorizes the
Township Tax Collector/Treasurer122 to deposit all tax increment revenues
received by the Township and county into a Tax Increment Fund to be
created for such purposes by the Authority. The Township Tax Collector/
Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to pay over all tax increment
revenues to the Tax Increment Fund created for the benefit of the district
and directed, controlled and maintained by the Authority. The Treasurer is
also authorized to accept or deposit into the Tax Increment Fund any other
gifts, appropriations, grants, loans or other revenues to be applied to the
district for the purposes of the TIF Proposal. In addition to its share of tax
increment revenues, the Township hereby pledges $100,000 to be paid into
the Tax Increment Fund.
§ 182-112. Tax increment revenues to be held in trust for project.
The tax increment revenues collected by the Tax Collector/Treasurer123
of the Township, from and after the date of settlement of such taxes,
C. The aggregate value of equalized taxable property of the district, plus
all existing tax increment districts, does not exceed 10% of the total
value of equalized taxable property within the Township.
D. Public improvements within the area comprising the district as a whole
have not been adequate and would not reasonably be anticipated to be
adequately developed without the adoption of the TIF Proposal.
E. The TIF Proposal conforms to the Township Comprehensive Plan.
F. The TIF Proposal will afford maximum opportunity, consistent with
sound needs of the community as a whole, for the rehabilitation or
redevelopment of the district by private enterprise.
G. The district is a blighted area containing characteristics of blight as
described in the Urban Redevelopment Law and the TIF Proposal to be
undertaken is necessary to eliminate such conditions of blight. More
particularly, the conditions of blight are characterized as inadequate
planning of the area, faulty street and lot layout and economically or
socially undesirable land uses.
122. Editor’s Note: Pursuant to Act 188 of 2012, the positions of Treasurer and Tax Collector
have been separated. See §§ 62-2 and 62-3.
123. Editor’s Note: Pursuant to Act 188 of 2012, the positions of Treasurer and Tax Collector
have been separated. See §§ 62-2 and 62-3.
§ 182-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-112
1:393
whether or not paid into the Tax Increment Fund, shall be considered as
funds impressed with a trust in favor of the district for purposes of the
TIF Proposal. Tax increment revenues, whether held by the Township Tax
Collector/Treasurer or Authority or otherwise, shall be applied only to the
purposes for by this article and for no other purpose.
§ 182-113. Application of tax increment revenues.
The Authority is hereby authorized to apply tax increment revenues to
project costs incurred in connection with the TIF Proposal for the district in
accordance with the Act. The Authority may undertake such expenditures,
make such appropriations, reimburse parties for prior expenditures related
to project cost, enter into such contracts and agreements with respect
to the TIF Proposal and the district in which the sole judgment of the
Authority shall further the purposes of the TIF Proposal consistent with the
provisions of this resolution. Any tax increment revenues remaining in the
Tax Increment Fund after payment of all project costs has been made or
provided for shall be returned to the proper taxing bodies on a pro rata
basis in the proportions that the property tax millage of each taxing body
bears to the entire millage levied by all taxing bodies at the time that such
funds remain.
§ 182-114. Designation of Authority as project authority.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township hereby designates the
Redevelopment Authority of the County of Westmoreland as the Authority
charged with preparing, implementing, monitoring and directing the TIF
Proposal and as the issuing Authority as defined in the Act for any bonds or
notes which may be necessary to finance project costs for the district.
§ 182-115. Authorization of officers.
The Township hereby authorizes and directs all appropriate officers of the
Township to take all actions necessary to implement the TIF Proposal and
to further the objectives of the TIF Proposal, all in accordance with the Act.
§ 182-116. Procedures for collection of tax increment revenues.
The Authority is hereby directed to establish such dates for receipt of tax
increment revenues, provide for any necessary reserve for tax revenues
and establish provisions for collection and enforcement of payment of tax
increment revenues to the extent permissible under the Act.
§ 182-117. Agreements for financial security for project costs.
The Township hereby authorizes the appropriate officers of the Township
to enter into a cooperation agreement with other taxing bodies or private
developers to provide any form of financial security, collateral, guaranties
or assurances toward payment of project costs as such agreements may
be deemed necessary by the Authority in consultation with the Township.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Township shall not pledge its full faith
§ 182-112 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-117
1:394
and credit toward any payment of project costs or toward any bonds or
notes which may be issued with respect to project costs attributable to the
district. The Township may pledge or assign other sources of revenues as
security for the payment of project costs in accordance with provisions of
the Act.
§ 182-118. Termination of LERTA tax abatements.
The Authority may propose and the Township may adopt, by ordinance or
otherwise, such amendments to the TIF Proposal and the district as are
deemed advisable as provided for pursuant to the terms of the Act.
§ 182-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-118
1:395
Chapter 187
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Minibikes — See Ch. 118.
Parades and assemblies — See Ch. 133.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 166.
§ 182-118 ROSTRAVER CODE § 182-118
1:396
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 187-1. Definitions.
§ 187-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances
of this Township, except where the law specifically authorizes less formal
action for the purpose.
§ 187-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 187-4. Experimental regulations.
The Board of Commissioners may, from time to time, designate places
upon and along the streets in the Township where, for a period of not
more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code124 (the Act of 1976, P.L. 162, No.
81, as amended), except that, in this chapter, the word "street" may be
used interchangeably with the word "highway" and shall have the same
meaning as the word "highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The word "holiday," as used in this chapter, shall mean and include New
Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day and Christmas.
A. The Board of Commissioners shall have the following powers to
regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. Those temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any such regulation
or who moves removes, destroys, injures or defaces any sign or marking
erected, posted or made to give notice of any such regulation shall be
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be liable to the penalty
set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of that
nature and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of $25 and costs.
124. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 187-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-4
1:397
and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those
locations by proper signs and markings. Those regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in this
chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any such
regulation, prohibition or restriction and no person shall move, remove,
destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority
of this section. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in
this chapter for a violation of that nature and, in case of a violation where
no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a
fine of $25 and costs. The purpose of this section is to allow for the test and
experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent
changes in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
§ 187-5. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
§ 187-6. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Township are given authority to direct traffic on
the streets in the Township at intersections of those streets, in public parks
and in other places where the Vehicle Code or this chapter applies.125
A. The Board of Commissioners shall have authority to close any street or
any specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion, while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a motor vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Commissioners shall have authority to establish a
restricted traffic area upon any street where construction or
maintenance work is under way and to station flagmen at each end of
the restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area at any time when a flagman
is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that
vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to proceed.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
125. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 7-1007, Authorization for use of approved speed-timing
devices, as amended 9-6-1990 by Ord. No. 233, which immediately followed this section,
was deleted 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421.
§ 187-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-6
1:398
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 187-7. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
§ 187-8. Traffic signals at certain intersections.
§ 187-9. Intersections where turns prohibited on steady red signal.
§ 187-10. One-way streets established.
§ 187-11. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
A. No person shall drive any vehicle upon any portion of a street in the
Township listed in Schedule I-A (§ 187-33), which is incorporated by
reference into and made a part of this section, at a greater rate of speed
than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street in that
schedule.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs. Any person
exceeding a maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five
miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. Official traffic signals shall be erected at those intersections listed in
Schedule I-B (§ 187-34), which is incorporated by reference into and
made a part of this section, and traffic at those intersections shall be
directed by those signals.
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of an official traffic
signal shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and
costs.
A. Those intersections listed in Schedule I-C (§ 187-35), which is
incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section, are
established as intersections where drivers of vehicles headed in the
direction or directions indicated are prohibited from making a right
turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another one-way street)
on a steady red signal.
B. Any driver of a vehicle who makes a turn on a red signal in violation of
this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and
costs.
A. One-way streets are established as listed in Schedule I-D (§ 187-36),
which is incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon a one-way
street other than in the direction established for traffic upon that street.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 187-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-11
1:399
§ 187-12. No-passing zones established.
§ 187-13. Through highways established.
§ 187-14. Stop intersections established.
A. Schedule I-E (§ 187-37), which is incorporated by reference into and
made a part of this section, lists intersections where turns are
restricted or prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any
vehicle, of the type indicated, traveling upon the first-named street at
any intersection named in that schedule, in the direction or directions
indicated in each case, to make a left turn and/or a right turn into the
second-named street, as indicated, at any time when a turn is
prohibited by that schedule.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. No-passing zones are listed in Schedule I-F (§ 187-38), which is
incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section. It shall
be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing zone.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. Through highways are listed in Schedule I-G (§ 187-39), which is
incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section, and stop
or yield signs shall be erected at every intersection of every through
highway (except those intersections where traffic signals are erected
and maintained as provided in § 187-8), facing traffic approaching the
through highway on intersecting highways. Every driver of a vehicle
approaching the through highway on any intersecting street where
there is a stop or yield sign shall stop the vehicle as required by Section
3323(b) or 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code,126 as the case may be, and shall
not proceed into or across the through highway until he has followed all
applicable requirements of that section of the law.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs of prosecution.
A. Those intersections listed in Schedule I-H (§ 187-40), which is
incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section (in
addition to streets intersecting with the through highways established
by § 187-13) are established as stop intersections, and official stop
signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in such a
position as to face traffic approaching the second-named street upon
the first-named street at each stop intersection, in the direction or
directions indicated for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle
126. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323.
§ 187-11 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-14
1:400
§ 187-15. Yield intersections established.
§ 187-16. Vehicle weight limits established.
approaching the intersection upon the first-named street, in the
direction indicated in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by
Section 3323(b) of the Vehicle Code127 and shall not proceed into or
across the second-named street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. Those intersections listed in Schedule I-I (§ 187-41), which is
incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section (in
addition to streets intersecting with the through highways established
by § 187-13) are established as yield-right-of-way intersections, and
official yield signs shall be erected in such a position as to face traffic
approaching the second-named street upon the first-named street at
each yield intersection, in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection
upon the first-named street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323(c) of
the Vehicle Code,128 and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. On those streets and portions of streets listed in Schedule I-J (§ 187-42),
which is incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section,
vehicle weight limits are established by authority granted by Section
4902(a) of the Vehicle Code,129 and it shall be unlawful for any person to
operate on any of those streets or portions of streets, as the case may
be, any vehicle or combination having a gross weight in excess of the
maximum prescribed for that street or portion of street.
(1) Vehicles may be permitted to exceed the weight limits by applying
for an overweight highway occupancy permit through the Township
office. [Added 5-4-2011 by Ord. No. 616; amended 9-21-2011
by Ord. No. 621]
(a) Applicant shall comply with any generally applicable bonding
and permitting requirements for Township roads that are to be
used by overweight vehicles and equipment.
127. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b).
128. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(c).
129. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a).
§ 187-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-16
1:401
§ 187-17. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets. [Amended
11-4-2015 by Ord. No. 664]
§ 187-17.1. Large truck traffic restricted on Finley Road. [Added
11-7-2012 by Ord. No. 631]
(b) Applicant shall provide a transportation route map which
depicts the roads to be utilized in the Township.
(c) An inventory of the condition of the road(s) shall be done by the
Township and the applicant shall have the opportunity to be
present while the Township videos the road. The applicant
shall be responsible to reimburse the Township for the road
inventory at the current rate set by resolution. [Amended
9-21-2011 by Ord. No. 621]
(d) Applicant shall also submit at the time of application a road
restoration plan that indicates how the applicant plans to
address damage to Township roads.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 and costs, and an
additional penalty of $75 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess
of 3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable weight as prescribed by
Section 4902(e-1) of the Vehicle Code.130
A. It shall be unlawful and no person shall operate any vehicle other than a
passenger car on Willowbrook Road between State Route 201 and
Vernon Drive, except where necessary in order to pick up or deliver any
goods, wares, merchandise or material from or to any premises located
on any such street or portion of a street.
B. Any person who violates Subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a
summary offense and shall, upon conviction before a District Judge, pay
a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000.
A. Prohibition; exceptions. [Amended 5-2-2018 by Ord. No. 700]
(1) Prohibitions. [Amended 5-2-2018 by Ord. No. 700]
(a) It shall be unlawful, and no person shall operate a large truck
westbound on Finley Road in Rostraver Township and exit or
turn north or south onto (SR0201) Pennsylvania Route 201.
(b) It shall be unlawful, and no person shall operate a large truck
on Finley Road in Rostraver Township from the intersection of
SR 3011 to the eastbound side of the Finley Road Bridge over
Cedar Creek. [Added 5-2-2018 by Ord. No. 700]
130. Editor's Note: See now 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(g)(1).
§ 187-16 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-17.1
1:402
§ 187-18. Snow and ice emergency routes established.
(2) Exceptions. [Amended 5-2-2018 by Ord. No. 700]
(a) Large trucks shall be permitted to travel on Finley to make
local deliveries to business establishments along that portion
of Finley Road between Rehoboth Road and the Tri-County
Plaza or Kmart Plaza, provided that any and all large trucks
exiting onto Finley Road after making a local delivery shall
proceed east on Finley Road toward Interstate 70 and enter
Interstate 70 at Exit 44 (the Arnold City exit).
(b) Large trucks, school buses and garbage trucks shall be
permitted to travel on Finley Road between SR 3011 and the
eastbound side of the Finley Road Bridge over Cedar Creek to
make local deliveries and pickups. [Added 5-2-2018 by Ord.
No. 700]
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the term "large truck" shall mean
any vehicle which is 40 or more feet in length by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway.
C. Any person who violates Subsection A(1) of this section shall be guilty
of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction before a District Judge,
pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000.
A. Snow and ice emergency routes are established on those streets and
portions of streets listed in Schedule I-L (§ 187-44), which is
incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section. In order
to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of ice
and snow on those snow and ice emergency routes, the Mayor, at his
discretion, may declare a snow and ice emergency and afterward may
declare the emergency terminated. Information on the existence of the
emergency may be given through radio, newspaper or other available
media, and notification of the termination of the emergency may be
given by use of the same media.
B. While a snow and ice emergency is in effect, it shall be unlawful, at any
time during the continuance of the emergency, for any person to park a
motor vehicle or to allow the vehicle to remain parked on any snow and
ice emergency route; or for any person to drive a motor vehicle, not
equipped with snow tires or equivalent tires or tire chains, on a snow
and ice emergency route.
C. If, at any time during a period of snow and ice emergency, a person
parks a motor vehicle anywhere upon a snow and ice emergency route,
that person shall be guilty of a violation of this section and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $15 and costs.
D. If, at any time during a period of snow and ice emergency, a person
drives a motor vehicle not equipped with snow tires or equivalent tires
or tire chains upon a snow and ice emergency route, that person shall
§ 187-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-18
1:403
be guilty of a violation of this section and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 187-18 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-18
1:404
ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 187-19. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Whenever a space shall be marked off on any street for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within
the lines bounding that space and it shall be a violation of this article for
any person to park a vehicle otherwise.
§ 187-20. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations.
[Amended 4-7-2010 by Ord. No. 600]
No person shall park a vehicle or allow a vehicle to remain parked, at any
time, in any location along any street in the Township listed as a prohibited
zone in Schedule II-A (§ 187-45), which is incorporated by reference into
and made a part of this section.
§ 187-21. Parking prohibited in certain locations, certain days and
hours.
In the locations listed in Schedule II-B (§ 187-46), which is incorporated by
reference into and made a part of this section, parking shall be prohibited
at all times on the days and between the hours indicated in that schedule.
§ 187-22. Parking time limited in certain locations, certain days
and hours.
In the locations listed in Schedule II-C (§ 187-47), which is incorporated by
reference into and made a part of this section, no person shall park a vehicle
or allow it to remain parked, for longer than the time indicated, at any time
on the days and between the hours stated for the location.
§ 187-23. Special purpose parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited.
Special purpose parking zones are established in the locations listed in
Schedule II-D (§ 187-48), which is incorporated by reference into and made
a part of this section, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle or to allow a vehicle to remain parked in any such zone except as
specifically provided in that schedule for that zone.
§ 187-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1990 by Ord. No.
233]
Any person who violates any provision of this Article III shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $15 and costs.
§ 187-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-25
1:405
§ 187-25. Placement of parking ticket on vehicle; effect of payment
of $5 within 10 days. [Amended 9-6-1990 by Ord. No. 233]
The police officers of the Township, under direction of the Board of
Commissioners or the Chief of Police, shall have authority to place an
official parking ticket in a visible place on any vehicle parked on any street
or other location in the Township in violation of any provision of this article
or of any provision in the Vehicle Code relating to parking. The police officer
issuing the ticket shall indicate on it:
A. The identifying numbers and/or letters on the registration plate on the
vehicle, and the name of the state or province that issued the plate.
B. The location where the violation took place.
C. The date and hour when the violation was observed and the ticket
issued.
D. The specific nature and description of the parking violation that was
observed.
E. Any other facts, the nature of which is necessary or helpful for arriving
at a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation.
§ 187-25 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-25
1:406
ARTICLE IV
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 187-26. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a-22) of the Vehicle
Code131 and gives authority to the borough to remove and impound vehicles
that are parked overtime on any street in the Township, in violation of
any provision of Article III of this chapter, and vehicles parked in metered
and unmetered parking lots, operated by the Township, in violation of any
ordinance provision governing those lots.
§ 187-27. Authority to remove and impound.
The police officers of the Township shall have authority to remove and
impound or to order the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked
overtime or otherwise illegally, provided that the circumstances of that
parking are within the authority of this article, as stated in § 187-26. No
such vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to
all provisions of this article.
§ 187-28. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage. [Amended 4-7-2010 by Ord. No. 600]
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only by
approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time by the
Board of Commissioners. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the
Board of Commissioners that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance
in an amount satisfactory to the Board of Commissioners as sufficient to
indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those
vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of towing
or storage. No different schedule of charges, which shall be set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners, shall be adopted without
approval of the Board of Commissioners, and no different charges shall be
demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or
impounded under this article by any approved storage garage. The Board
of Commissioners shall delete from its list of approved storage garages
any garage that shall make any unapproved charge in connection with any
vehicle removed or impounded under this article.
§ 187-29. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours after the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed
shall be sent by the Chief of Police to the owner of record of the vehicle.
The notice shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed,
the reason for its removal and impounding and the garage in which it was
impounded.
131. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22).
§ 187-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-30
1:407
§ 187-30. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized under this
article shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive
and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid.
If payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice. Payment
of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or operator of
any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the
provision of this chapter on account of which the vehicle was removed and
impounded.
§ 187-31. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded under this
article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the
agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place of
storage of the vehicles.
§ 187-32. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 187-30 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-32
1:408
ARTICLE V
Schedules
§ 187-33. Schedule I-A: Maximum Speed Limits on Streets.
A. Speed limits established.
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Abby Lane [Added
1-19-2011 by Ord. No.
614]
Sandstone Way to cul-desac
10
Adams Drive [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565; 4-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 656; 12-29-2015
by Ord. No. 669]
SR 3025 (Vernon Drive)
and dead end
20
Addison Street Third Street and Route
906
25
Airport Road [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 0051 and county line 25
Aitken Avenue
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
SR 3008 and Kennedy
Avenue
25
Allen Avenue SR 0201 and Plainview
Avenue
25
Alpine Circle [Added
6-3-2015 by Ord. No.
662]
Kenneth Drive and cul-desac
20
Ash Avenue Hamilton Avenue and the
terminus of Ash Avenue
25
Atwood Drive Summit Drive and Meade
Street
25
Bargehr Lane SR 0906 (north
intersection) and SR 0906
(south intersection)
25
Bargehr Lane Dunn Street and SR 3021 25
Beaumont Street Price Avenue and the
Township line
25
Beazell Road SR 3008 and Rankin Road 25
Bedsworth Street Main Street and Broad
Avenue
25
§ 187-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-33
1:409
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Belrose Drive Circle Drive and Pleasant
Valley Boulevard
25
Birch Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Spring Grove Boulevard
and SR 3025
20
Bonnie Street Hurst Avenue and Ruth
Place
25
Broad Avenue [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 201 intersection and
first curbline (Highland
Street) NBV
25
Brown Street Leighty Avenue and the
Township line
25
Budds Ferry Road SR 3011 and the terminus
of Budds Ferry Road
25
Buddtown Road Township line (north
intersection) and
Township line (south
intersection)
25
Callie Court [Added
3-15-2017 by Ord. No.
685]
From Rolling Hill Farm
Drive to dead end cul-desac
20
Carson Street Main Street and the
terminus of Carson Street
25
Cedar Creek Road SR 3025 and the terminus
of Cedar Creek Road
25
Cedarwood Drive
[Added 11-2-2005 by
Ord. No. 534]
Rosewood Street to culde-
sac
15
Central Avenue
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Park Avenue to Township
line
15
Cherryblossom Drive
[Added 11-2-2005 by
Ord. No. 534]
Rosewood Street to culde-
sac
15
Chestnut Street Elm Street and the
terminus of Chestnut
Street
25
Chickee Lane [Added
7-3-2002 by Ord. No.
463]
Entire length 25
§ 187-33 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-33
1:410
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Circle Drive SR 0201 and Summit
Drive
25
Clarence Avenue SR 0201 and the terminus
of Clarence Avenue
25
Clark Street SR 3007 and the county
line
15
Clove Street [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Lange Street to dead end 15
College Circle [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Lebanon School Road to
dead end
15
Collingate Drive Collinsburg Road and
Manor Drive
25
Collinhill Place [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Manor Drive to 1/2 culde-
sac
15
Collinsburg Road SR 0136 and the West
Newton Borough line
35
Collinwood Place
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Manor Drive to 1/2 culde-
sac
15
Comanche Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
SR 3109 and the terminus
of Comanche Drive
25
Concord Lane SR 0051 and the terminus
of Concord Lane
25
Cooks Lane SR 3011 and the county
line
25
Country Drive (Oak
Ridge Estates plan of
lots) [Added 11-7-2001
by Ord. No. 455]
Entire length 25
Crawford Lane SR 0981 and the terminus
of Crawford Lane
25
Crest Avenue [Amended
5-7-2014 by Ord. No.
647]
Pleasant Valley Boulevard
and SR 3109
20
§ 187-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-33
1:411
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Cross Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Robertson Drive and
Jaime Drive
25
Cypress Street
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Chestnut Street and the
terminus of Cypress
Street
25
Darr Road SR 0051 and SR 3027 25
Daugherty Lane SR 3011 and the terminus
of Daugherty Lane
25
DaVinci Court [Added
12-29-2015 by Ord.
No. 669]
Galileo Drive and cul-desac
terminus of road
20
Dogwood Drive [Added
11-2-2005 by Ord. No.
534]
Cherryblossom Drive to
cul-de-sac
15
Don Street SR 3005 and Franklin
Drive
25
Donora Road (East) SR 3021 and the terminus
of East Donora Road
25
Dunn Street Bargehr Lane and SR
0906
25
Eagle Drive [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 3109 and Kennedy
Avenue
25
Elks Place [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Finley Road and the
terminus of Elks Place
25
Elm Avenue Comanche Street and the
terminus of Elm Avenue
25
Elmhurst Drive Rodkey Street and
Beazell Road
15
Elm Street Poplar Street and
Railroad Street
25
Emily Drive SR 0201 and Jamie Drive 15
Farmbrook Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Northern intersection
with SR 0051 and
southern intersection
with SR 0051
25
§ 187-33 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-33
1:412
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Fell Avenue [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 3109 and Short Street 25
Fifth Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Shell Street and Thomas
Street
25
Finley Road SR 3025 and SR 0051 35
Finley Road Broad Avenue and SR
3025
35
Flack Road Darr Road and the
terminus of Flack Road
25
Flack Hollow Road SR 3023 and the terminus
of Flack Hollow Road
25
Flora Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 3027 to Riverside
Drive
25
Forest Drive Atwood Drive and the
terminus of Forest Drive
25
Foster Lane Markle Drive and Gallitin
Road
25
Fourth Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Shell Street and Thomas
Street
25
Franklin Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Don Street and terminus
of Franklin Drive
25
Frederick Street Allen Avenue and
Plainview Avenue
25
Galileo Drive [Added
12-29-2015 by Ord.
No. 669]
SR 3025 (Vernon Drive)
and cul-de-sac terminus
of road
20
Gallitin Road SR 3008 and SR 0051 25
Gateview Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Manor Drive to dead end 15
German Street River Drive and the
terminus of German
Street
25
Gibson Street SR 0906 and Irons Street 15
§ 187-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-33
1:413
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Gilmer Street Bargehr Lane and SR
0906
25
Graham Street Leighty Avenue and the
Township line
25
Grand Boulevard SR 3002 and the
Township line
25
Green Hill Road Interstate 70 ramp and
the terminus of Green Hill
Road
25
Grove Avenue
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Liberty Avenue to
Woodland Avenue
15
Hamilton Avenue Short Street and the
terminus of Hamilton
Avenue
25
Harriott Avenue SR 0906 and the terminus
of Harriott Avenue
25
Harris Street Lee Drive and Kellie
Avenue
25
Harvest Moon Drive
[Added 4-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 656]
Morningstar Drive and
Mohawk Drive
15
Hawk Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Fells Church Road to
dead end
15
Henry Street SR 3005 and the
Township line
25
Hickory Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Collinsburg Road and
German Street
25
High Street Summit Drive and
Lookout Avenue
25
Hill Street SR 3005 and the
Township line
25
Hornbeck Drive Beazell Road and Rodkey
Street
25
Hurst Avenue SR 0201 and Bonnie
Street
25
§ 187-33 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-33
1:414
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Irons Street SR 0906 and Gibson
Street
15
James Drive [Added
7-3-2002 by Ord. No.
463]
Entire length 25
Jamie Drive SR 3008 and Emily Drive 15
Jean Street Robertson Drive and the
terminus of Jean Street
25
Johnson Avenue [Added
6-4-1997 by Ord. No.
344]
Entire length 25
Jonathan Willey Road
[Added 2-6-2008 by
Ord. No. 572]
Airport Drive to the
Airport
20
Kellie Avenue Harris Street and Park
Avenue
25
Kennedy Avenue SR 3008 and SR 3021 25
Kenneth Drive
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 344]
Entire length 15
Kimberly Court [Added
9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
519; amended
8-1-2018 by Ord. No.
704]
Valley View Drive to
terminus of cul-de-sac
15
Knowle Lane SR 3007 and the
Township line
25
Lange Street SR 3008 and Kennedy
Avenue
25
Larson Boulevard Beazell Road and Route
330
25
Laurel Drive Rankin Road and the
terminus of Laurel Drive
25
Lee Drive SR 3007 and Park Avenue 25
Leeper Drive Ridge Road and the
county line
25
Leighty Avenue Monongahela Street and
Henry Street
25
§ 187-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-33
1:415
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Liberty Avenue
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Park Avenue to Township
line
15
Lingrel Street Naylor Drive and Rodkey
Street
25
Logan Street Fourth Street and Sixth
Street
25
Lookout Avenue Eastern terminus of
Lookout Avenue and
western terminus of
Lookout Avenue
25
Lutz Run Road Leeper Drive and Todd
Farm Road
25
Lynn Road [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Municipal Drive and the
terminus of Lynn Road
25
Lynnwood Street SR 0201 and the
Township line
25
Main Street SR 3005 and SR 3003 25
Manor Drive Manor Gate Lane and
terminus of Manor Drive
25
Manorgate Lane [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Manor Drive to cul-de-sac 15
Manorview Lane [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Manor Drive to cul-de-sac 15
Manown Lane Northern intersection
with SR 3003 and
southern intersection
with SR 3003
25
Marco Drive [Added
7-3-2002 by Ord. No.
463; amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Entire length 25
Maria Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Patton Road to cul-de-sac 15
§ 187-33 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-33
1:416
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Markle Drive Gallitin Road and SR
3021
25
Martin Road SR 3009 and Patton Road 25
Mary Street Allen Avenue and the
terminus of Mary Street
25
Mathews Road
[Amended 6-6-1994 by
Ord. No. 284]
SR 0906 and SR 3003 15
Matty Drive SR 0981 and terminus of
Matty Drive, including
complete loop at the end
25
McClain Road (East) SR 0981 and the terminus
of East McClain Road
25
McClain Road (West) Concord Lane and the
terminus of West McClain
Road
25
McKenery Drive Northern intersection
with SR 0051 and
southern intersection
with SR 0051
25
Mechanics Street SR 0906 and the terminus
of Mechanics Street
25
Metz Drive SR 0051 and the terminus
of Metz Drive
25
Mildred Drive
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 344;
7-21-2010 by Ord. No.
604]
Entire length 15
Mobert Drive SR 0051 North and SR
0051 South
25
Mohawk Drive [Added
4-1-2015 by Ord. No.
656]
Harvest Moon Drive and
cul-de-sac
15
Monongahela Street SR 3005 and the terminus
of Monongahela Street
25
Moores Road Pollock Drive and SR
0906
25
§ 187-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-33
1:417
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Morningstar Drive
[Added 4-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 656]
Chickee Lane/Pats Drive
and Mohawk Drive
15
Mount Pleasant Road Northern intersection
with SR 0051 and
southern intersection
with SR 0051
25
Mya Court [Added
3-15-2017 by Ord. No.
685]
From Rolling Hill Farm
Drive to dead end cul-desac
20
Naylor Drive Larson Boulevard and
Rodkey Street
25
Nazareth Drive SR 3003 and terminus of
Nazareth Drive
25
Ohio Street SR 3006 and Main Street 25
Oliphant Street Floro Street and the
terminus of Oliphant
Street
25
Orchard Avenue
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
SR 3007 and Park Avenue 15
Orr Drive Budds Ferry Road and
Buddtown Road
25
Otto Street SR 3007 and the county
line
15
Park Avenue (Lynnwood)
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Roberts Avenue to SR
0201
15
Park Avenue (Lynnwood)
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Central Avenue to
Roberts Avenue
15
Park Avenue (Lynnwood)
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Orchard Avenue to
Central Avenue
15
Park Avenue (Lynnwood)
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Kelly Avenue to Orchard
Avenue
15
Park Avenue (Lynnwood)
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Lee Drive to Kelly Avenue 15
§ 187-33 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-33
1:418
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Parkins Street Fourth Street and Fifth
Street
25
Parkview Road
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
SR 3025 to cul-de-sac 15
Pats Drive [Added
7-3-2002 by Ord. No.
463]
Entire length 25
Patterson Lane
[Amended 12-6-2006
by Ord. No. 557]
SR 0201 and McKenery
Drive
25
Patton Lane SR 3009 and Martin Road 25
Pawnee Street SR 3109 and the terminus
of Pawnee Street
25
Peach Avenue Mathews Road and
Quince Avenue
25
Pear Avenue Mathews Road and
Quince Avenue
25
Plainview Avenue Roberts Street and the
terminus of Plainview
Avenue
25
Plaza Drive [Added
12-1-2004 by Ord. No.
523]
SR 51 and STA 5 & 70 15
Plaza Drive [Added
12-1-2004 by Ord. No.
523]
STA 5& 70 to cul-de-sac 20
Pleasant Valley
Boulevard [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 0201 to Weir Drive 25
Pollock Drive Northern intersection
with Route SR 0201 and
southern intersection
with SR 0201
25
Pollack Run Road
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
SR 201 to dead end 20
Poplar Street Elm Street and the
terminus of Poplar Street
25
§ 187-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-33
1:419
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Porter-McNutt Lane Darr Road and County
Lane
25
Porter Road SR 0051 and SR 3027 25
Power Street Third Street and Fifth
Street
25
Price Avenue SR 3007 and Beaumont
Street
25
Pride Drive Summit Drive and the
terminus of Pride Drive
25
Quince Avenue Pear Street and Peach
Street
25
Rachel Drive [Added
3-15-2017 by Ord. No.
685]
From Rolling Hill Farm
Drive to dead end cul-desac
20
Railroad Street Wood Street and Elm
Street
25
Rankin Road SR 3021 and SR 3109 25
Ray Drive Willowbrook Road and
the terminus of Ray Drive
25
Recreation Drive [Added
7-21-2010 by Ord. No.
604]
Municipal Drive and
terminus of Recreation
Drive
10
Reed Avenue [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 3007 and Park Avenue 25
Ridge Road [Amended
11-24-1999 by Ord.
No. 415]
SR 3011 and SR 0051 25
River Drive Collinsburg Road and
German Street
25
Riverside Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Flora Street to the
terminus of Riverside
Drive
25
Robertson Drive SR 3008 and Jamie Drive 25
Robertson Road SR 0136 and the county
line
25
Roberts Street Park Avenue and
Plainview Avenue
25
§ 187-33 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-33
1:420
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Rock Road SR 3025 and the terminus
of Rock Road
25
Rodkey Street Larson Boulevard and
Elmhurst Drive
15
Rolling Drive Circle Drive and Pleasant
Valley Boulevard
25
Rolling Hill Farm Drive
[Added 3-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 685]
From SR 3025/Vernon
Drive to dead end cul-desac
20
Roosevelt Street [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Liberty Avenue to
Orchard Avenue
15
Rose Street Third Street and SR 0906 25
Ross Street Main Street and the
terminus of Ross Street
25
Rosewood Street [Added
11-2-2005 by Ord. No.
534; amended
3-17-2010 by Ord. No.
597]
Willowbrook Road to culde-
sac
15
Roy Street SR 3005 and Franklin
Drive
25
Ruth Place Hursy Avenue and Bonnie
Street
25
Ryans Lane [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 3008 to Aitken Avenue 20
Sam Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Aitken Avenue and Sunset
Avenue
25
Sandstone Way [Added
1-19-2011 by Ord. No.
614]
SR 0201 to Stoneybrook
Drive
15
Scenery Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Short Street and the
terminus of Scenery Drive
25
Scholl Lane [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 201 and the terminus
of Scholl Lane
25
§ 187-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-33
1:421
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Second Street (Wilko)
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Harriott Avenue and the
terminus of Second Street
of
25
Sharon Drive Willowbrook Road and
the terminus of Sharon
Drive
25
Shell Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Fourth Street and Sixth
Street
25
Shilo Lane [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Rankin Road to Marco
Drive
15
Shore Avenue
[Amended 2-6-2008 by
Ord. No. 572]
Monongahela Street and
Henry Street
25
Short Street (Fellsburg) SR 3008 and Hamilton
Avenue
25
Sixth Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Shell Street and Thomas
Street
25
Skyline Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 3008 (Willowbrook
Road) to Sunset Drive
stop sign
15
Skyline Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 201 to SR 3008
(Willowbrook Road)
15
Skyline Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Sunset Drive stop sign to
SR 201
15
Smith Road SR 0051 and the terminus
of Smith Road
25
Snyder Lane SR 0051 and the terminus
of Snyder Lane
25
Somers Street Main Street and the
terminus of Somers
Street
25
Sontino Drive [Added
2-4-2009 by Ord. No.
587]
SR 3025 to cul-de-sac 25
§ 187-33 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-33
1:422
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Spring Grove Boulevard
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565; amended
2-6-2008 by Ord. No.
572]
SR 3025 to cul-de-sac 20
Spring Road Ridge Road and Finley
Road
25
Stewarts Hill [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Fellsburg Road to dead
end
15
Stump Drive Summit Drive and
Sweeney Circle Drive
25
Summit Drive Circle Drive and the
terminus of Summit Drive
25
Sunny Avenue SR 3003 and the terminus
of Sunny Avenue
25
Sunset Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Skyline Drive to Skyline
Drive and Sunset Drive
stop sign
15
Suzanne Drive Laurel Drive and the
terminus of Suzanne
Drive
25
Sweeney Circle Drive Summit Drive and Stump
Drive
25
Sweeney Drive Circle Drive and Pleasant
Valley Boulevard
25
Sylvan Drive Concord Lane and the
terminus of Sylvan Drive
25
Third Street (Webster) SR 0906 and SR 3021 25
Thomas Street Fourth Street and Sixth
Street
25
Thompson Drive SR 0051 and the terminus
of Thompson Drive
25
Timms Lane [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Municipal Drive and West
McClain Road
25
Todd Farm Road [Added
6-4-1997 by Ord. No.
344]
Adel Drive and Mildred
Drive
15
§ 187-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-33
1:423
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Todd Farm Road [Added
6-4-1997 by Ord. No.
344]
Mildred Drive and Todd
Farm Road Extension
20
Todd Farm Road [Added
6-4-1997 by Ord. No.
344]
Ridge Road and Adel
Drive
20
Todd Farm Road
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Ridge Road and
Farmbrook Drive
25
Troup Road Collinsburg Road and SR
3023
35
Underwood Avenue SR 0201 and Roberts
Street
25
Valley View Drive
[Added 9-1-2004 by
Ord. No. 519; amended
8-1-2018 by Ord. No.
704]
SR 3008 (Willowbrook
Road) to end of Valley
View Drive
15
Virginia Drive [Added
8-2-2000 by Ord. No.
432]
Route 201 south to the
terminus of Virginia Drive
25
Wall Street Bargehr Lane and SR
0906
25
Walnut Lane Township line and the
terminus of Walnut Lane
25
Weddell Drive SR 0136 and SR 3021 25
Weddell Drive SR 3021 and Pollock
Drive
Weir Drive [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Forest Drive and Crest
Avenue
25
West Spring Grove
Boulevard [Added
3-17-2010 by Ord. No.
597]
642 linear feet west of
intersection with SR 3025
to intersection of West
Spring Grove Boulevard
15
Wildwind Drive [Added
9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
519; amended
8-1-2018 by Ord. No.
704]
Gallitin Road to terminus
of cul-de-sac
15
§ 187-33 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-33
1:424
§ 187-34. Schedule I-B: Traffic Signal Locations.
Location
Allen's Crossroads Finley Road and Rostraver Road
Fellsburg SR 3109 and SR 3008
Webster SR 0906, north lane and south lane
Monongahela Bridge North lane of SR 0906 and south lane of SR
0906, at SR 3013
Name of Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Wilko Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Harriott Avenue and the
terminus of Wilko Street
25
Willowbrook Road SR 0201 and SR 3025 25
Willow Links Drive
[Added 3-17-2010 by
Ord. No. 597]
SR 0201 to Rosewood
Street
15
Wood Street Collinsburg Road and the
terminus of Wood Street
25
Woodland Avenue Park Avenue and Grove
Avenue
25
Woodlow Drive Stump Drive and the
terminus of Woodlow
Drive
25
Yakubic Lane Jean Street and the
terminus of Yakubic Lane
25
Zundel Street Main Street and the
terminus of Zundel Street
25
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs. Any person
exceeding a maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five
miles per hour over the maximum speed limit. [Added 11-2-2005 by
Ord. No. 534; amended 8-1-2018 by Ord. No. 704]
§ 187-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-35
1:425
§ 187-35. Schedule I-C: Intersections Where Turns Prohibited on
Steady Red Signal.
Intersection
Vehicles Traveling
On Facing
SR 0906 north lane and SR
0906 south lane
SR 0906 north lane North
SR 3109 and SR 3008 SR 3008 East or west
SR 3109 and SR 3008 SR 3109 North or south
§ 187-36. Schedule I-D: One-Way Streets.
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Flora Street
[Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Riverside Drive
(southern
intersection)
Riverside Drive
(northern
intersection)
Northbound
Mathews Road Peach Avenue SR 0906 Northbound
Riverside Drive
[Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Flora Street
(northern
intersection)
Flora Street
(southern
intersection)
Southbound
Third Street
(Webster)
Power Street SR 0906 Northbound
§ 187-37. Schedule I-E: Intersections Where Turns are Prohibited or
Restricted.
Vehicles
Traveling On Direction
Not to
Make Into
Type of Vehicle
Applicable to
(Reserved)
§ 187-38. Schedule I-F: No-Passing Zones.
Name of Street Between Direction of Travel
Finley Road Allen's Crossroads and
Rehoboth Church
intersection
Northeastbound and
southwestbound
§ 187-39. Schedule I-G: Through Highways.
Highway Between
(Reserved)
§ 187-40. Schedule I-H: Stop Intersections Established. [Amended
11-2-2005 by Ord. No. 534]
§ 187-35 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-40
1:426
A. Those intersections listed below which are incorporated by reference
into and made a part of this section are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position
as to face traffic approaching the second-named street upon the firstnamed
street at each stop intersection, in the direction or directions
indicated for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching
the intersection upon the first-named street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code,132 and shall not proceed into or across the second-named
street until he has followed applicable requirements of that section of
the law.
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
SR 64121 [Added
9-6-1994 by Ord. No.
286]
Willowbrook Road-
Budds Ferry Road
Both
Abby Lane [Added
1-19-2011 by Ord. No.
614]
Sandstone Way Westbound
Adams Drive [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 3025 Southeastbound
Addison Street SR 0906 Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Addison Street Bargehr Lane Southwestbound
Addison Street Third Street Northeastbound
Airport Road [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 0051 North Southwestbound
Aitken Avenue [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 3008 Southwestbound
Allen Avenue SR 0201 Southeastbound
Alpine Circle [Added
6-3-2015 by Ord. No.
662]
Kenneth Drive Southbound
Atwood Drive Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
Northbound
Atwood Drive Summit Drive Southbound
Bargehr Lane SR 0906 Northbound and
southeastbound
Beaumont Street Price Avenue Southeastbound
132. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b).
§ 187-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-40
1:427
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Beazell Road SR 3008 Northeastbound
Beazell Road Fifth Street Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Beazell Road Rankin Road Southwestbound
Bedsworth Street Finley Road Southeastbound
Bedsworth Street Main Street Northwestbound
Bedsworth Street Ohio Street Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Belrose Drive Circle Drive Southbound
Belrose Drive Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
Northbound
Brown Street Leighty Avenue Northeastbound
Budds Ferry Road SR 3025 Southwestbound
Budds Ferry Road [Added
9-6-1994 by Ord. No.
286]
SR 64121 Westbound
Budds Ferry Road Orr Drive Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Callie Court [Added
3-15-2017 by Ord. No.
685]
Rolling Hill Farm
Drive
Westbound
Carson Street Main Street Southeastbound
Cedar Creek Road SR 3025 Northwestbound
Cedarwood Drive [Added
11-2-2005 by Ord. No.
534]
Rosewood Street Southeastbound
Central Avenue [Added
12-30-2002 by Ord. No.
479]
Park Avenue Northbound
Central Avenue
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Roosevelt Street Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Cherryblossom Drive
[Added 11-2-2005 by
Ord. No. 534]
Rosewood Street Northwestbound
Cherry Way [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Hickory Drive Southwestbound
Chestnut Street German Street Northwestbound and
southeastbound
§ 187-40 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-40
1:428
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Chestnut Street
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Cypress Street Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Chestnut Street Wood Street Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Chickee Lane [Added
7-3-2002 by Ord. No.
463]
SR 3109 Fells
Church Road
Eastbound
Circle Drive Sweeney Drive Northeastbound
Clarence Avenue SR 0201 Northwestbound
Clark Street SR 3007 Northeastbound
Clove Street [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Lange Street Northeastbound
College Circle [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Lebanon School
Road
Southeastbound
Collingate Drive Collinsburg Road Northwestbound
Collinhill Place Manor Drive Northwestbound
Collinsburg Road German Street Southeastbound
Collinsburg Road
[Amended 8-6-1997 by
Ord. No. 356; 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Hickory Drive Southeastbound and
northwestbound
Collinsburg Road SR 0136 Southeastbound
Collinwood Place Manor Drive Northwestbound
Comanche Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
SR 3109 Southwestbound
Concord Lane SR 051 North Northwestbound and
southwestbound
Cooks Lane SR 3011 Eastbound
Country Drive [Added
11-7-2001 by Ord. No.
455]
Vernon Drive - SR
3025
Northbound
Crawford Lane SR 0981 Northeastbound
Crest Avenue SR 3109 Southwestbound
Crest Avenue [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Weir Drive Northeastbound and
southwestbound
§ 187-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-40
1:429
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Crest Avenue Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
Southeastbound
Cross Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Jamie Drive Southeastbound
Darr Road SR 0051 North Westbound
Darr Road SR 3027 Southeastbound
Daugherty Lane SR 3011 Southwestbound
DaVinci Court [Added
12-29-2015 by Ord. No.
669]
Galileo Drive Eastbound
Dogwood Drive [Added
11-2-2005 by Ord. No.
534]
Cherryblossom
Drive
Westbound
Donora Road (East) SR 3021 Eastbound
Don Street Finley Road Northwestbound
Dunn Street SR 0906 Southeastbound
Eagle Drive [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 3109 Northeastbound
Eagle Drive [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Kennedy Avenue Southwestbound
Eagle Drive [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Eagle Drive Northeastbound
Elk Place Finley Road Northwestbound
Elm Avenue [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Comanche Drive Southwestbound
Elm Avenue Hamilton Avenue Southwestbound
Elmhurst Drive Beazell Road Northwestbound
Elm Street Lange Street Northeastbound
Emily Drive SR 0201 Southeastbound
Farmbrook Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
SR 051 South Northeastbound
Farmbrook Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Todd Farm Road Southeastbound
§ 187-40 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-40
1:430
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Fell Avenue [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 3109 Southwestbound
Fell Avenue [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Short Street Northeastbound
Finley Road SR 051 South Eastbound
Finley Road SR 3011 Northeastbound,
southeastbound and
southwestbound
Flack Hollow Road SR 3027 Northeastbound
Flack Road Darr Road Southwestbound
Flora Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 3027 Southbound
Flora Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Riverside Drive Westbound
Forest Drive Atwood Drive Southwestbound
Foster Drive SR 3109 Northeastbound
Foster Lane Markle Road Southeastbound
Franklin Drive Roy Street Northeastbound
Frederick Street Allen Avenue Southwestbound
Frederick Street Plainview Avenue Northeastbound
Galileo Drive [Added
12-29-2015 by Ord. No.
669]
SR 3025 (Vernon
Drive)
Southeastbound
Gallitin Road SR 0051 North Southwestbound
Gallitin Road SR 3008 Southeastbound
Gallitin Road [Added
4-1-1998 by Ord. No.
371]
Entrance to
Rostraver Ice Arena
(130 feet east of
Route 51)
Eastbound
German Street [Amended
8-6-1990 by Ord. No.
233]
Collinsburg Road Both
German Street River Drive Northeastbound
German Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Hickory Drive Northeastbound
§ 187-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-40
1:431
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Gibson Street SR 0906 Southeastbound
Gilmer Street SR 0906 North Northeastbound
Gilmer Street SR 0906 South Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Gilmer Street Bargehr Lane Southwestbound
Gilmer Street [Added
9-6-1990 by Ord. No.
233]
Third Street Both
Graham Street Leighty Avenue Northeastbound
Grand Boulevard SR 3003 Southeastbound
Green Hill Road Ramp I-70 Eastbound
Grove Avenue Liberty Avenue Northwestbound
Hamilton Avenue Elm Avenue Westbound
Harriott Avenue SR 0906 Northwestbound
Harris Street Lee Street Northwestbound
Harvest Moon Drive
[Added 4-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 656]
Mohawk Drive Eastbound
Harvest Moon Drive
[Added 4-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 656]
Morningstar Drive Northwestbound
Henry Street SR 3005 Northeastbound
Hickory Drive [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Collinsburg Road Southwestbound
Hickory Drive [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Cypress Street Southeastbound
Hickory Drive [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
German Street Northwestbound and
southeastbound
High Street Summit Drive Southbound
Hill Street SR 3005 Northeastbound
Hill Street Leighty Avenue Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Hill Street Thomas Avenue Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Hornbeck Drive Beazell Road Westbound
Hornbeck Drive Larson Boulevard Southeastbound
§ 187-40 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-40
1:432
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Hurst Avenue SR 0201 Northwestbound
Irons Street SR 0906 Southwestbound
Irons Street Gibson Street Southwestbound
James Drive [Added
7-3-2002 by Ord. No.
463]
Beazell Road Northbound
James Drive [Added
7-3-2002 by Ord. No.
463; amended 4-1-2015
by Ord. No. 656]
Chickee Lane Southeastbound
Jamie Drive LR 3008 Southwestbound
Jean Street (Lynnwood) Allen Avenue Southeastbound
Jonathan Willey Road
[Added 2-6-2008 by
Ord. No. 572]
Airport Drive Westbound
Jonathan Willey Road
[Added 2-6-2008 by
Ord. No. 572]
Rostraver Airport
Private Road
Eastbound
Kellie Avenue Park Avenue Northeastbound
Kennedy Avenue SR 3008 Southwestbound
Kennedy Avenue SR 3021 Southwestbound
Kennedy Avenue
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Aitken Avenue Southeastbound
Kenneth Drive [Amended
7-21-2010 by Ord. No.
604]
Mildred Drive Westbound
Kimberly Court [Added
9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
519]
Valley View Drive Southwestbound
Knowle Lane SR 3007 Northeastbound
Lange Street SR 3008 Southeastbound
Lange Street Kennedy Avenue Northeastbound
Larson Boulevard SR 3109 Northeastbound
Larson Boulevard Beazell Road Southwestbound
Laurel Drive Rankin Road Northeastbound
Lebanon Street SR 3109 Southwestbound
Lee Drive SR 3007 Southwestbound
Leeper Drive Ridge Road Northeastbound
§ 187-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-40
1:433
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Leighty Avenue Henry Street Southeastbound
Leighty Avenue Hill Street Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Leighty Avenue Monongahela Street Northwestbound
Liberty Avenue Park Avenue Northeastbound
Liberty Avenue [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Roosevelt Street Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Lingrel Street Naylor Drive Southwestbound
Lingrel Street Rodkey Street Northeastbound
Logan Street Fifth Street Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Logan Street Fourth Street Southwestbound
Logan Street Sixth Street Northeastbound
Lutz Run Road Leeper Drive Westbound
Lutz Run Road Todd Farm Road Northeastbound
Lynn Road [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Municipal Drive Southeastbound
Lynnwood Street SR 0201 Northeastbound
Main Street SR 3003 Northeastbound
Main Street SR 3005 Southwestbound
Manor Drive Collingate Drive Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Manown Lane SR 3003 Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Marco Drive (2 stop signs)
[Added 7-3-2002 by
Ord. No. 463; amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Pats Drive Eastbound
Maria Drive Patton Road Southeastbound
Markle Drive SR 3021 Northwestbound
Markle Drive Gallitin Road Southwestbound
Martin Road SR 3009 Southeastbound
Mary Street Allen Avenue Southwestbound
Mathews Road SR 0906 Northwestbound
Mathews Road SR 3003 Southwestbound
§ 187-40 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-40
1:434
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Matty Drive SR 0981 Southeastbound
McClain Road (East) SR 0981 Southeastbound
McClain Road (West) Concord Lane Southwestbound
McKenery Drive SR 0051 South Northeastbound
Mechanics Street SR 0906 North Eastbound
Mechanics Street SR 0906 South Eastbound and
westbound
Metz Drive SR 0051 South Northeastbound
Mildred Drive [Added
7-21-2010 by Ord. No.
604]
Todd Farm Road Southwestbound
Mildred Road [Amended
4-5-2000 by Ord. No.
426]
Kenneth Drive Eastbound and
Northbound
Mildred Road Todd Farm Road Southwestbound
Mobert Drive SR 0051 North Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Monongahela Street SR 3005 Northeastbound
Moores Road SR 3021 Northbound
Moores Road Pollock Drive Northeastbound
Morningstar Drive
[Added 4-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 656]
Mohawk Drive Eastbound
Morningstar Drive
[Added 4-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 656]
Pats Drive Northeastbound
Mount Pleasant Road SR 0051 North Southwestbound
Mount Pleasant Road Porter Road Northbound
Mya Court [Added
3-15-2017 by Ord. No.
685]
Rolling Hill Farm
Drive
Eastbound
Naylor Drive Larson Boulevard Northwestbound
Naylor Drive Rodkey Street Southeastbound
Nazareth Drive Manown Lane Southwestbound
Ohio Street SR 3005 Southwestbound
Ohio Street Main Street Northwestbound
§ 187-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-40
1:435
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Oliphant Street
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Flora Street Southbound
Orchard Avenue SR 3007 Southwestbound
Orchard Avenue [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Park Avenue Northeastbound
Orchard Avenue [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Roosevelt Street Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Orr Drive Budds Ferry Road Southbound
Orr Drive Buddtown Road Northbound
Otto Street SR 3007 Northeastbound
Park Avenue (Lynnwood) SR 0201 Northwestbound and
Southeastbound
Park Avenue (Lynnwood) Central Avenue Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Park Avenue (Lynnwood)
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Liberty Avenue Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Park Avenue (Lynnwood)
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Orchard Avenue Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Park Avenue (Lynnwood)
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Reed Avenue Northwestbound
Park Avenue (Lynnwood) Roberts Street Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Park View Road SR 3025 Northwestbound
Parkins Street Fifth Street Northeastbound
Parkins Street Fourth Street Southwestbound
Pats Drive [Added
11-2-2005 by Ord. No.
534]
Chickee Lane Southeastbound
Pats Drive [Added
7-3-2002 by Ord. No.
463]
James Drive Northeastbound
Pats Drive [Added
4-1-2015 by Ord. No.
656]
Morningstar Drive Southeastbound
§ 187-40 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-40
1:436
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Patterson Lane SR 0201 Northwestbound
Patterson Lane McKenery Drive Eastbound
Patton Road SR 0906 Northwestbound
Patton Road SR 3009 Southeastbound
Pawnee Street SR 3109 Southwestbound
Peach Avenue Mathews Road Southwestbound
Pear Avenue Mathews Road Southwestbound
Plaza Drive [Added
12-1-2004 by Ord. No.
523]
224 feet north of SR
51 (entrance to
shopping plaza)
Northeastbound
Plaza Drive [Added
12-1-2004 by Ord. No.
523]
370 feet north of SR
51 (exit and
entrance drive to
SR 51)
Southwestbound
Plaza Drive [Added
12-1-2004 by Ord. No.
523]
530 feet north of SR
51 (entrance to
shopping plaza)
Northeast bound
Plaza Drive [Added
12-1-2004 by Ord. No.
523]
560 feet north of SR
51 (entrance to
shopping plaza)
Southwestbound
Pleasant Valley Boulevard SR 0201 Eastbound
Pleasant Valley Boulevard
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Atwood Drive Eastbound
Pleasant Valley Boulevard
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Weir Drive Southwestbound
Pollock Drive SR 0201 Northeastbound and
southeastbound
Poplar Street German Street Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Poplar Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Cypress Street Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Poplar Street Wood Street Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Porter-McNutt Lane Darr Road Northwestbound
Porter Road SR 0051 North Northwestbound
Porter Road SR 3027 Southeastbound
§ 187-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-40
1:437
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Power Street Third Street Southbound
Price Avenue SR 3007 Southwestbound
Pride Drive Summit Drive Northbound
Rachel Drive [Added
3-15-2017 by Ord. No.
685]
Rolling Hill Farm
Drive
Eastbound
Rankin Road SR 3021 Northwestbound
Rankin Road SR 3109 Southeastbound
Ray Drive Willowbrook Road Southeastbound
Recreation Drive [Added
4-1-2015 by Ord. No.
656]
Entrance to
Township
maintenance garage
Southbound
Recreation Drive [Added
7-21-2010 by Ord. No.
604]
Municipal Drive Southbound
Reed Avenue [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 3007 Southwestbound
Ridge Road SR 0051 South Northeastbound
Ridge Road SR 3011 Southwestbound
Ridge Road [Added
11-24-1999 by Ord. No.
417]
Leeper Road Eastbound and
westbound
Ridge Road Spring Road Northwestbound
River Drive Collinsburg Road Southbound
Riverside Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Flora Street Southeastbound
Robertson Drive SR 3008 Southwestbound
Robertson Drive Jamie Drive Southeastbound
Robertson Drive Jean Street Northwestbound
Robertson Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Cross Street Southwestbound
Roberts Street Allen Avenue Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Roberts Street Park Avenue Southwestbound
Roberts Street Plainview Avenue Northeastbound
Rock Road SR 3025 Northwestbound
§ 187-40 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-40
1:438
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Rodkey Street Larson Boulevard Northwestbound
Rolling Drive Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
Northbound
Rolling Drive Summit Street Southbound
Rolling Hill Farm Drive
[Added 3-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 685]
Mya Court Eastbound
Rolling Hill Farm Drive
[Added 3-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 685]
Vernon Drive/SR
3025
Northbound
Roosevelt Street
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Central Avenue Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Roosevelt Street
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Liberty Avenue Southeastbound
Roosevelt Street
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Orchard Avenue Northwestbound
Rose Street SR 0906 North Northeastbound
Rose Street SR 0906 South Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Rose Street Bargehr Land Southwestbound
Rose Street Third Street Northeastbound
Rosewood Street [Added
11-2-2005 by Ord. No.
534]
Willowbrook Road Northwestbound
Rosewood Street [Added
3-17-2010 by Ord. No.
597]
Willow Links Drive Eastbound
Rosewood Street [Added
3-17-2010 by Ord. No.
597]
Willow Links Drive Westbound
Ross Street Main Street Southeastbound
Roy Street Broad Avenue Northwestbound
Roy Street Franklin Drive Northwestbound
Ruth Place Hurst Avenue Southwestbound
Ryans Lane [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 3008 Southbound
§ 187-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-40
1:439
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Ryans Lane [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Aitken Avenue Northwestbound
Sam Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Aitken Avenue Southeastbound
Sam Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Eagle Drive Northwestbound
Sandstone Way [Added
1-19-2011 by Ord. No.
614]
SR 0201 Northwestbound
Sarber Lane SR 3008 Northwestbound
Scenery Drive [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Short Street Southwestbound
Scholl Lane [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
SR 0201 Southeastbound
Second Street (Wilko)
[Amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Harriott Avenue Southeastbound
Sharon Drive Willowbrook Road Northwestbound
Shilo Lane [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Marco Drive Northeastbound
Shilo Lane [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Rankin Road Southwestbound
Shore Avenue [Amended
2-6-2008 by Ord. No.
572]
Brown Street Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Shore Avenue [Amended
2-6-2008 by Ord. No.
572]
Graham Street Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Shore Avenue [Amended
2-6-2008 by Ord. No.
572]
Henry Street Southeastbound
Shore Avenue [Amended
2-6-2008 by Ord. No.
572]
Monongahela Street Northwestbound
§ 187-40 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-40
1:440
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Short Street SR 3008 Northwestbound
Smith Road SR 0051 South Northeastbound
Snyder Lane SR 0051 North Southwestbound
Snyder Lane SR 0051 South Northeastbound
Somers Street Main Street Southeastbound
Sontino Drive [Added
2-4-2009 by Ord. No.
587]
SR 3025 Northwestbound
Spring Road Finley Road Northeastbound
Spring Road [Added
9-5-2001 by Ord. No.
451]
Ridge Road Southbound
Spruce Alley Collinsburg Road Southwestbound
Spruce Alley River Road Northeastbound
Stewarts Hill SR 3008 Southeastbound
Strawberry Lane Collingburg Road Northeastbound
Strawberry Lane Wood Street Southeastbound
Stump Drive Summit Drive Northeastbound
Sunset Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Skyline Drive Southeastbound
Suzanne Drive Laurel Drive Northwestbound
Sweeney Circle Drive
[Added 5-2-2018 by
Ord. No. 700]
Stump Drive Eastbound
Sweeney Circle Drive Summit Drive Northeastbound
Sweeney Drive SR 0201 Southeastbound
Sweeney Drive Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
Northbound
Sylvan Drive Concord Lane Northwestbound
Third Street SR 0906 North Northwestbound
Third Street SR 3021 Southeastbound
Third Street [Added
8-6-1990 by Ord. No.
233]
Power Street Both
Thomas Street [Amended
2-6-2008 by Ord. No.
572]
Fifth Street Northeastbound and
southwestbound
§ 187-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-40
1:441
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Thompson Drive SR 0051 North Southwestbound
Timms Lane McClain Road
(West)
Southeastbound
Timms Lane [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Municipal Drive Northwestbound
Todd Farm Road Ridge Road Northwestbound
Troup Road SR 3023 Westbound
Troup Road Collinsburg Road Southeastbound
Underwood Avenue SR 0201 Southeastbound
Underwood Avenue Roberts Street Northwestbound
Valley View Drive [Added
9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
519]
SR 3008
(Willowbrook Road)
Southbound
Valley View Drive [Added
9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
519]
Valley View Drive Southwestbound
Wall Street SR 0906 North Northeastbound
Wall Street SR 0906 South Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Wall Street Bargehr Lane Southwestbound
Weddell Drive SR 0136 Northbound
Weddell Drive SR 3021 Northwestbound and
southeastbound
Weddell Drive Pollock Drive Eastbound
Weir Drive [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Crest Avenue Northbound
Weir Drive [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Forest Drive Southbound
West Spring Grove
Boulevard [Added
3-17-2010 by Ord. No.
597]
West Spring Grove
Boulevard
Northbound
Wildwind Drive [Added
9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
519]
Gallitin Road Northeastbound
Wilko Street Harriott Avenue Southeastbound
§ 187-40 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-40
1:442
§ 187-41. Schedule I-I: Yield-Right-of-Way Intersections.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
§ 187-42. Schedule I-J: Streets Where Vehicle Weight Limits are in
Force.
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction of Travel
Willowbrook Road SR 0201 Westbound
Willowbrook Road SR 3025 Northeastbound
Willowbrook Road [Added
9-6-1994 by Ord. No.
286]
SR 64121 Southeastbound
Willowbrook Road Ray Drive Northeastbound and
southwestbound
Willow Links Drive
[Added 3-17-2010 by
Ord. No. 597]
SR 0201 Northbound
Woodland Avenue Park Avenue Northeastbound
Woodlow Drive Stump Drive Southeastbound
Wood Street Collinsburg Road Southwestbound
Wood Street [Amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
Hickory Drive Southwestbound
Zundel Street Main Street Southeastbound
Zundel Street Rose Street Southeastbound
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. Weight limits established.
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Abby Lane [Added
1-19-2011 by Ord.
No. 614]
From Standstone Way to
cul-de-sac
26,000 pounds
Adams Drive [Added
4-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 656]
From SR 3025 (Vernon
Drive) to dead end
26,000 pounds
Addison Street Between Third Street
and SR 0906
26,000 pounds
§ 187-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-42
1:443
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Aitken Avenue
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 3008 and
Kennedy Avenue
26,000 pounds
Allen Avenue Between Frederick
Street and SR 0201
26,000 pounds
Alpine Circle [Added
6-3-2015 by Ord.
No. 662]
From Kenneth Drive to
cul-de-sac
26,000 pounds
Ash Avenue
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Comanche
Drive and the terminus
of Ash Avenue
26,000 pounds
Atwood Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Summit Drive
and Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
26,000 pounds
Bargehr Lane Between Dunn Street
and SR 3021
26,000 pounds
Beaumont Street Between Price Avenue
and the Township line
26,000 pounds
Beazell Road Between Elmhurst Drive
and SR 3008
26,000 pounds
Bedsworth Street Between Main Street and
Broad Avenue
26,000 pounds
Belrose Drive Between Circle Drive
and Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
26,000 pounds
Birch Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Spring Grove
Boulevard and SR 3025
26,000 pounds
Bonnie Street
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Hurst Drive and
Ruth Place
26,000 pounds
Broad Avenue
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 201 and
North Belle Vernon line
26,000 pounds
Brown Street Between Leighty Avenue
and the Township line
26,000 pounds
Budds Ferry Road Between Willowbrook
Road and terminus of
Budds Ferry Road
10,000 pounds,
except 30,000
pounds for local
traffic (See Schedule
I-K, § 187-43)
§ 187-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-42
1:444
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Buddtown Road
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between West Newton
Borough line and
walking trail/West
Newton Borough line
26,000 pounds
Callie Court [Added
3-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 685]
From Rolling Hill Farm
Drive to dead end cul-desac
26,000 pounds
Carson Street Between Main Street and
the terminus of Carson
Street
26,000 pounds
Cedar Creek Road
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 3025 and
dead end
26,000 pounds
Cedarwood Drive
[Added 11-2-2005
by Ord. No. 534]
Between Rosewood
Street and the end of the
cul-de-sac on Cedarwood
Drive
26,000 pounds
Central Avenue Between Park Avenue
and the Township line
26,000 pounds
Cherryblossom Drive
[Added 11-2-2005
by Ord. No. 534]
Between Rosewood
Street and the end of the
cul-de-sac on
Cherryblossom Drive
26,000 pounds
Chestnut Street Between Elm Avenue and
the terminus of Chestnut
Street
26,000 pounds
Chickee Lane
[Added 7-3-2002 by
Ord. No. 463]
Entire length 26,000 pounds
Circle Drive Between Summit Avenue
and SR 0201
26,000 pounds
Clarence Avenue Between SR 0201 and
the terminus of Clarence
Avenue
26,000 pounds
Clark Street Between SR 3007 and
the Township line
26,000 pounds
Clove Street [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Lange Street
and dead end
26,000 pounds
College Circle
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Lebanon School
Road and dead end
26,000 pounds
§ 187-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-42
1:445
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Collingate Drive Between Collinsburg
Road and the terminus of
Collingate Drive
26,000 pounds
Collinhill Place
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Manor Drive
and 1/2 cul-de-sac
26,000 pounds
Collinsburg Road Between Route SR 0136
and the terminus of
Collinsburg Road
30,000 pounds
Collinwood Place
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Manor Drive
and 1/2 cul-de-sac
26,000 pounds
Comanche Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 3109 and
the terminus of
Comanche Drive
26,000 pounds
Concord Lane
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 0051 and SR
0051
26,000 pounds
Country Drive
[Added 11-7-2001
by Ord. No. 455]
Entire street 26,000 pounds
Crest Avenue Between SR 3109 and
Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
26,000 pounds
Cross Street
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Robertson
Drive and Jamie Drive
26,000 pounds
Cypress Street
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Chestnut Street
and the terminus of
Cypress Street
26,000 pounds
Darr Road Between SR 0051 and
the terminus of Darr
Road
30,000 pounds
Daugherty Lane
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 3011 and
dead end
26,000 pounds
DaVinci Court
[Added 12-29-2015
by Ord. No. 669]
From Galileo Drive to
cul-de-sac terminus of
road
26,000 pounds
§ 187-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-42
1:446
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Dogwood Drive
[Added 11-2-2005
by Ord. No. 534]
Between Cherryblossom
Drive and the end of the
cul-de-sac on Dogwood
Drive
26,000 pounds
Don Street Between Finley Road and
Franklin Drive
26,000 pounds
Eagle Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 3109 and
Kennedy Avenue
26,000 pounds
East Donora Road
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 3021 and
dead end
26,000 pounds
East McClain Road
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 0981 and
dead end
26,000 pounds
Elks Place
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Finley Road and
the terminus of Elks
Place
26,000 pounds
Elm Avenue
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Comanche
Drive and the terminus
of Elm Avenue
26,000 pounds
Elmhurst Drive Between Beazell Road
and Rodkey Street
26,000 pounds
Emily Drive Between Jamie Drive and
SR 0201
26,000 pounds
Farmbrook Drive
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Todd Farm
Road and dead end north
and south
26,000 pounds
Fell Avenue
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Route 330 and
Short Street
26,000 pounds
Fifth Street
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Shell Street and
Thomas Street
26,000 pounds
Finley Road [Added
5-2-2018 by Ord.
No. 700]
East Side Bridge over
Cedar Creek to SR 51
26,000 pounds
Finley Road [Added
5-2-2018 by Ord.
No. 700]
Indian Hill Road (SR
3011) to East Side
Bridge over Cedar Creek
20,000 pounds
§ 187-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-42
1:447
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Finley Road
[Amended
7-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 604]
SR 201 and railroad
crossing
80,000 pounds
Flack Road [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Darr Road and
dead end
26,000 pounds
Flack Hollow Road
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 3027 and
dead end
26,000 pounds
Flora Street [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between SR 3027 and
Riverside Drive
26,000 pounds
Forest Drive Between Atwood Drive
and the terminus of
Forest Drive
26,000 pounds
Fourth Street
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Shell Street and
Thomas Street
26,000 pounds
Franklin Drive
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Don Street and
dead end/ North Belle
Vernon line
26,000 pounds
Frederick Street Between Allen Avenue
and Plainview
26,000 pounds
Galileo Drive [Added
12-29-2015 by Ord.
No. 669]
From SR 3025 (Vernon
Drive) to cul-de-sac
terminus of road
26,000 pounds
Gateview Drive
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Manor Drive
and dead end
26,000 pounds
German Street Between River Drive and
the terminus of German
Street
26,000 pounds
Gibson Street
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 0906 and
Irons Street
26,000 pounds
Gilmer Street
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 0906
northbound and
Monongahela River
26,000 pounds
Graham Street Between Leighty Avenue
and the Township line
26,000 pounds
§ 187-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-42
1:448
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Grand Boulevard
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 3003 and
City of Monessen line
26,000 pounds
Green Hill Road
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 8018 (ramp
to I-70) and dead end
26,000 pounds
Grove Avenue Between Woodland
Avenue and the Township
line
26,000 pounds
Hamilton Avenue Between Short Street
and the terminus of
Hamilton Avenue
26,000 pounds
Harriott Avenue
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 0906 and
Highland Street
26,000 pounds
Harris Street Between Kellie Avenue
and Lee Drive
26,000 pounds
Harvest Moon Drive
[Added 4-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 656]
From Morningstar Drive
to Mohawk Drive
26,000 pounds
Hawk Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between SR 3109 and
private concrete drive
26,000 pounds
Henry Street Between SR 3005 and
the Township line
26,000 pounds
Hickory Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Collinsburg
Road and German Street
26,000 pounds
High Street Between Summit Drive
and Lookout Avenue
26,000 pounds
Hill Street Between SR 3005 and
the Township line
26,000 pounds
Hornbeck Drive Between Beazell Road
and Rodkey Street
26,000 pounds
Hurst Avenue Between Route 201 and
Bonnie Street
26,000 pounds
Irons Street [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between SR 0906 and
dead end
26,000 pounds
§ 187-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-42
1:449
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
James Drive [Added
7-3-2002 by Ord.
No. 463]
Entire length 26,000 pounds
Jamie Drive Between SR 2008 and
Emily Drive
26,000 pounds
Jean Street Between Robertson
Drive and the terminus
of Jean Street
26,000 pounds
Johnson Avenue
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 3003 and
Broad Avenue
26,000 pounds
Jonathan Willey Road
[Added 2-6-2008 by
Ord. No. 572]
Between Airport Drive
and Rostraver Airport
26,000 pounds
Kellie Avenue Between Harris Street
and Park Avenue
26,000 pounds
Kennedy Avenue Between SR 3021 and SR
3008
26,000 pounds
Kenneth Drive
[Amended
7-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 604]
Entire length 26,000 pounds
Kimberly Court
[Added 9-1-2004 by
Ord. No. 519]
Entire length 26,000 pounds
Knowle Lane Between Route 711 and
the Township line
26,000 pounds
Lange Street Between SR 3008 and
Kennedy Avenue
26,000 pounds
Larson Boulevard Between Beazell Road
and SR 3109
26,000 pounds
Laurel Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Rankin Road
and cul-de-sac
26,000 pounds
Lee Drive Between SR 3007 and
Park Avenue
26,000 pounds
Leeper Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Ridge Road and
Fayette County line
26,000 pounds
Leighty Avenue Between Monongahela
Street and Henry Street
26,000 pounds
§ 187-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-42
1:450
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Liberty Avenue Between Park Avenue
and the Township line
26,000 pounds
Lingrel Street Between Naylor Drive
and Rodkey Street
26,000 pounds
Logan Street Between Fourth Street
and Sixth Street
26,000 pounds
Lookout Avenue Entire length 26,000 pounds
Lynn Road [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Municipal Drive
and dead end
26,000 pounds
Lynnwood Street Between SR 0201 and
the Township line
26,000 pounds
Main Street
(Pricedale)
Between SR 3003 and
Ross Street
16,000 pounds
Main Street
(Pricedale)
Rostraver Bridge No. 3 6,000 pounds
Manor Drive Between Manor Gate
Lane and terminus of
Manor Drive
26,000 pounds
Manorgate Lane
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Manor Drive
and cul-de-sac
26,000 pounds
Manorview Lane
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Manor Drive
and cul-de-sac
26,000 pounds
Manown Lane
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 3003 and
Nazareth Drive
26,000 pounds
Marco Drive [Added
7-3-2002 by Ord.
No. 463; amended
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Entire length 26,000 pounds
Maria Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Patton Road
and cul-de-sac
26,000 pounds
Markle Road [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Gallitin Road
and SR 3021
26,000 pounds
Martin Road Between SR 3009 and
Patton Road
26,000 pounds
§ 187-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-42
1:451
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Mary Street [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Allen Avenue
and dead end
26,000 pounds
Mathews Road Between SR 0906 and SR
3003
26,000 pounds
Matty Drive From SR 0981 to
terminus of Matty Drive,
including the entire loop
at the end
26,000 pounds
McClain Road (West) Between Concord Lane
and Timms Lane
30,000 pounds
McKenery Drive Between Route 51 and
Snyder Lane
26,000 pounds
Mechanics Street
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 0906
northbound and
Monongahela River
26,000 pounds
Metz Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between SR 0051
southbound and dead
end
26,000 pounds
Mildred Drive
[Amended
7-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 604]
Entire length 26,000 pounds
Mobert Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between SR 0051
northbound and SR 0051
southbound
26,000 pounds
Mohawk Drive
[Added 4-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 656]
From cul-de-sac to dead
end
26,000 pounds
Monongahela Street Between SR 3005 and
Township line
6,000 pounds
Moores Road [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Pollack Run
Road and SR 3021
26,000 pounds
Morningstar Drive
[Added 4-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 656]
From Chickee Lane to
Mohawk Drive
26,000 pounds
Mt. Pleasant Road
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 0051 and
Porter Road
26,000 pounds
§ 187-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-42
1:452
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Mya Court [Added
3-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 685]
From Rolling Hill Farm
Drive to dead end cul-desac
26,000 pounds
Naylor Drive Between Larson
Boulevard and Rodkey
Street
26,000 pounds
Nazareth Drive Between SR 3003 and
the terminus of Nazareth
Drive
26,000 pounds
Ohio Street Between Main Street and
SR 3005
26,000 pounds
Oliphant Street
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Flora Street
and dead end
26,000 pounds
Orchard Avenue Between SR 3007 and
Park Avenue
26,000 pounds
Orr Drive Between Budds Ferry
Road and Buddtown
Road
30,000 pounds
Otto Street Between SR 3007 and
the Township line
26,000 pounds
Park Avenue
(Lynwood)
Between Central Avenue
and Woodland Avenue
26,000 pounds
Park Avenue
(Lynwood)
Between Lee Drive and
Orchard Avenue
26,000 pounds
Park Avenue
(Lynwood)
Between eastern
terminus of Park Avenue
and Price Avenue
26,000 pounds
Park Avenue
(Lynwood)
Between Roberts Street
and SR 0201
26,000 pounds
Parkins Street Between Fourth Street
and Fifth Street
26,000 pounds
Parkview Road
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 3025 and
cul-de-sac
26,000 pounds
Pats Drive [Added
7-3-2002 by Ord.
No. 463]
Entire length 26,000 pounds
Patterson Lane Between SR 0201
(Rostraver Road) and
McKenery Drive
26,000 pounds
§ 187-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-42
1:453
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Patton Road Between SR 0906 and
the terminus of Patton
Road
26,000 pounds
Patton Road Between SR 3009 and
Martin Road
26,000 pounds
Pawnee Street Between SR 3109 and
the terminus of Pawnee
Street
26,000 pounds
Peach Avenue
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Mathews Road
and Quince Avenue
26,000 pounds
Pear Avenue [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Mathews Road
and Quince Avenue
26,000 pounds
Plainview Avenue
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Allen Avenue
and dead end
26,000 pounds
Plaza Drive [Added
12-1-2004 by Ord.
No. 523]
SR 51 to cul-de-sac 26,000 pounds
Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Weir Drive and
SR 0201
26,000 pounds
Pollock Drive Between SR 0201 and
Moores Road
26,000 pounds
Pollack Run Road
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 0201 and
dead end
26,000 pounds
Poplar Street Between Elm Street and
the terminus of Poplar
Street
26,000 pounds
Porter-McNutt Lane
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Darr Road and
Fayette County line
26,000 pounds
Porter Road Between SR 0051 and SR
3027
30,000 pounds
Power Street
[Amended
12-1-2004 by Ord.
No. 523]
Between Third Street
and Shell Street
26,000 pounds
§ 187-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-42
1:454
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Price Avenue Between SR 3007 and
the Township line
26,000 pounds
Pride Drive Between Summit Drive
and the terminus of Pride
Drive
26,000 pounds
Rachel Drive [Added
3-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 685]
From Rolling Hill Farm
Drive to dead end cul-desac
26,000 pounds
Railroad Street Between Elm Street and
Wood Street
26,000 pounds
Rankin Road Between Beazell Road
and SR 3021
26,000 pounds
Ray Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Willowbrook
Road and cul-de-sac
26,000 pounds
Recreation Drive
[Added 7-21-2010
by Ord. No. 604]
From maintenance
garage entrance to
terminus of DiVirgilio
Park
26,000 pounds
Reed Avenue
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 3007 and
Park Avenue
26,000 pounds
Ridge Road [Added
11-24-1999 by Ord.
No. 416; amended
11-5-2003 by Ord.
No. 501]
Between SR 0051 and
Finley Road (SR 3011)
26,000 pounds
River Drive Between German Street
and Collinsburg Road
26,000 pounds
Riverside Drive
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Flora Street
and dead end
26,000 pounds
Robertson Drive Between SR 3008 and
Jamie Drive
26,000 pounds
Robertson Drive
[Added 12-4-1989
by Ord. No. 220]
Between SR 3008 and
Yakubic Lane
26,000 pounds
Roberts Street Between Park Avenue
and Plainview Avenue
26,000 pounds
Rock Road Between SR 3025 and
the terminus of Rock
Road
26,000 pounds
§ 187-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-42
1:455
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Rockwood Road
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR 3021 and SR
0136
26,000 pounds
Rodkey Street Between Elmhurst Drive
and Hornbeck
26,000 pounds
Rolling Drive Between Circle Drive
and Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
26,000 pounds
Rolling Hill Farm
Drive [Added
3-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 685]
From SR 3025 (Vernon
Drive) to dead end culde-
sac
26,000 pounds
Roosevelt Street
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Liberty Avenue
and OrchardAvenue
26,000 pounds
Rose Street Between Third Street
and SR 0906
26,000 pounds
Rosewood Street
[Added 11-2-2005
by Ord. No. 534;
amended 3-17-2010
by Ord. No. 597]
Between Willowbrook
Road and the end of the
cul-de-sac on Rosewood
Street
26,000 pounds
Ross Street Between Main Street and
the terminus of Ross
Street
26,000 pounds
Roy Street Between SR 3005 and
Franklin Drive
26,000 pounds
Ruth Place [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Hurst Drive and
Bonnie Street
26,000 pounds
Ryans Lane [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between SR 3008 and
Aitken Avenue
26,000 pounds
Sam Street
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Eagle Drive and
Aitken Avenue
26,000 pounds
Sandstone Way
[Added 1-19-2011
by Ord. No. 614]
From SR 0201 to
Stoneybrook Drive
26,000 pounds
Scenery Drive
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Short Street
and the terminus of
Scenery Drive
26,000 pounds
§ 187-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-42
1:456
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Scholl Lane [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between SR 0201 and
dead end
26,000 pounds
Sharon Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Willowbrook
Road and cul-de-sac
26,000 pounds
Shell Street
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Fourth Street
and Sixth Street
26,000 pounds
Shilo Lane [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Rankin Road
and Marco Drive
26,000 pounds
Shore Avenue
[Amended 2-6-2008
by Ord. No. 572]
Between Monongahela
Street and Henry Street
26,000 pounds
Short Street Between SR 3008 and
Hamilton Street
26,000 pounds
Sixth Street
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565;
2-6-2008 by Ord.
No. 572]
Between Shell Street and
Thomas Street
26,000 pounds
Skyline Drive [Added
12-4-1989 by Ord.
No. 220]
Entire length 26,000 pounds
Snyder Lane Between McKenery Drive
and SR 0051
26,000 pounds
Somers Street Between Main Street and
the terminus of Somers
Street
26,000 pounds
Sontino Drive
[Added 2-4-2009 by
Ord. No. 587]
SR 3025 to cul-de-sac 26,000 pounds
Spring Grove
Boulevard [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between SR 3025 and
cul-de-sac
26,000 pounds
Spring Road
[Amended
11-24-1999 by Ord.
No. 416]
Between Ridge Road and
Finley Road
26,000 pounds
§ 187-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-42
1:457
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Stewarts Hill [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between SR 3008 and
stone cul-de-sac
26,000 pounds
Stump Drive Between Summit Drive
and Sweeney Circle
Drive
26,000 pounds
Summit Drive Circle Drive and the
terminus of Summit
Drive
26,000 pounds
Sunny Avenue Between SR 3003 and
the terminus of Sunny
Avenue
26,000 pounds
Sunset Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Skyline Drive
and Sunset Drive
26,000 pounds
Suzanna Drive
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between Laurel Drive
and Hammerhead
turnaround
26,000 pounds
Sweeney Circle Drive Between Summit Drive
and Stump Drive
26,000 pounds
Sweeney Drive Between Circle Drive
and Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
26,000 pounds
Sylvan Drive [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between Concord Lane
and dead end
26,000 pounds
Third Street
(Webster)
Between SR 3021 and SR
0906
26,000 pounds
Thomas Street
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565;
2-6-2008 by Ord.
No. 572]
Between Fourth Street
and Sixth Street
26,000 pounds
Timms Lane [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between West McClain
Road and Municipal
Drive
26,000 pounds
Todd Farm Road
[Amended 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 345]
Between Ridge Road and
Todd Road Extension
20,000 pounds
Underwood Avenue Between Roberts Road
and SR 0201
26,000 pounds
§ 187-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-42
1:458
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Valley View Drive
[Added 9-1-2004 by
Ord. No. 519]
Entire length 26,000 pounds
Virginia Drive
[Added 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 565]
Between SR0201 and
private road
26,000 pounds
Wall Street [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between SR 0906
northbound and Railroad
Street
26,000 pounds
Walnut Lane [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 565]
Between West Newton
Borough line and dead
end
26,000 pounds
Weir Drive
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Forest Drive
and Fifth Street
26,000 pounds
West Spring Grove
Boulevard [Added
3-17-2010 by Ord.
No. 597]
Between a point 642
linear feet west of SR
3025 and West Spring
Grove Boulevard
(intersection with West
Spring Grove Boulevard)
26,000 pounds
Wildwind Drive
[Added 9-1-2004 by
Ord. No. 519]
Entire length 26,000 pounds
Willowbrook Road Between SR 0201 and
Budds Ferry Road
10,000 pounds,
except 30,000
pounds for local
traffic (See Schedule
I-K)
Willow Links Drive
[Added 3-17-2010
by Ord. No. 597]
Between SR 0201 and
Rosewood Street
26,000 pounds
Woodland Avenue Between Park Avenue
and Grove Avenue
26,000 pounds
Woodlow Drive Between Stump Drive
and the terminus of
Woodlow Drive
26,000 pounds
Wood Street
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Hickory Drive
and Railroad Street
26,000 pounds
§ 187-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-42
1:459
§ 187-43. Schedule I-K: Streets Where Truck Traffic is Restricted.
Street Between
Budds Ferry Road Willowbrook Road and terminus of Budds Ferry Road
[see also Schedule I-J (§ 187-42)]
Willowbrook Road
[Repealed
11-4-2015 by
Ord. No. 664]
Willowbrook Road
[Added
11-4-2015 by
Ord. No. 664]
State Route 201 and Vernon Drive
§ 187-44. Schedule I-L: Snow and Ice Emergency Routes.
Street Between
(Reserved)
Street Portion
Maximum Gross
Weight
Wood Street Between Collingsburg
Road and the terminus of
Wood Street
26,000 pounds
Yakubic Lane [Added
12-4-1989 by Ord.
No. 220]
From Robertson Drive to
Skyline Drive
26,000 pounds
Zundel Street
[Amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
Between Main Street and
the terminus of Zundel
Street
26,000 pounds
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 and costs, and an
additional penalty of $75 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess
of 3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable weight as prescribed by
Section 4902(e-1) of the Vehicle Code.133 [Added 11-2-2005 by Ord.
No. 534]
133. Editor's Note: See now 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(g)(1).
§ 187-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-45
1:460
§ 187-45. Schedule II-A: Locations Where Parking is Prohibited at
All Times.
Street Side Portion
Route 51 [Added
9-7-1993 by Ord. No.
272; amended 11-1-1993
by Ord. No. 276]
Both Between Todd Road and Darr
Road and the Fayette County line
Route 906 [Added
8-1-1994 by Ord. No.
285]
West Between Mechanics Street and
Washington Street
Cemetery Road (near
Municipal Building)
Both Entire extent
Concord Lane Both Between SR 0051 and West
McClain Road
Crest Avenue North Between Belrose Drive and SR
3109
Crest Avenue [Added
9-5-2001 by Ord. No.
452; amended 11-5-2008
by Ord. No. 579]
North Beginning at the intersection of
Crest Avenue and Pleasant Valley
Boulevard and proceeding in a
westerly direction to the
entrance of the Belle Vernon Area
High School parking lot
Crest Avenue [Added
4-7-2010 by Ord. No.
600]
South Beginning at the intersection of
Crest Avenue and Park Avenue
and proceeding in a westerly
direction to the entrance of the
Belle Vernon Area Auxiliary
Athletic Field
Crest Avenue [Added
9-5-2001 by Ord. No.
452; amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 565]
South Beginning at the intersection of
Crest Avenue and Pleasant Valley
Boulevard and proceeding in a
westerly direction to the
entrance of Crest Avenue and
Weir Drive
Hurst Avenue South Between SR 0201 and Bonnie
Street
Main Street [Added
8-1-1944 by Ord. No.
285]
East Between Bedsworth Avenue and
Ohio Street
Pleasant Valley Boulevard
[Added 4-4-2001 by Ord.
No. 447; amended
9-5-2007 by Ord. No.
565]
South Beginning at the westerly side of
Tax Parcel ID No. 56-09-06-0-042
and continuing to the westerly
side of Tax Parcel ID No.
56-09-06-0-003, for a distance of
approximately 475 linear feet
§ 187-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-45
1:461
Street Side Portion
Weir Drive [Added
10-26-2016 by Ord. No.
678]
Both From the intersection of Crest
Avenue and Weir Drive to the
intersection of Forest Drive and
Weir Drive
West McClain Road
[Added 12-29-2015 by
Ord. No. 669]
Both From the intersection of West
McClain Road and Timms Lane
south to the terminus of West
McClain Road to I-70
§ 187-46. Schedule II-B: Locations Where Parking is Prohibited
Certain Days and Hours.
Street Side Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
§ 187-47. Schedule II-C: Locations Where Parking is Limited
Certain Days and Hours.
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time Limit
Crest
Avenue
[Added
4-7-2010
by Ord.
No. 600]
North The upper and
lower
entrances drive
to the
Rostraver
Elementary
School
Monday
through
Friday
7:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
5 minutes
§ 187-48. Schedule II-D: Special Purpose Parking Zones
Location Authorized Purpose or Vehicle
Designated reserved spaces in
Municipal Building Parking Lot
Spaces for Township officials only
Spaces for police parking only
Spaces for handicapped parking
only
§ 187-49. Schedule III-A: On-Street Metered Parking Zones.
Street Side Between Hours Days
(Reserved)
§ 187-45 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-50
1:462
§ 187-50. Schedule III-B: Off-Street Metered Parking Zones.
Parking Lot
Location
Rate
Maximum
Parking
Time
Days in
Operation
Hours in
Operation
(Reserved)
§ 187-51. Schedule III-C: Off-Street Unmetered Parking Zones.
Parking Lot Location
Maximum
Parking Time
Hours in
Operation
(Reserved)
[See also Schedule II-D (§ 187-48)]
§ 187-52. Schedule IV-A: Sidewalks Where Riding and Parking of
Pedalcycles is Prohibited.
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 187-53. Schedule IV-B: Pedestrian Control Signals.
Location
Intersection of Finley Road and Rostraver Road (SR 0201) (Allen's
Crossroads)
§ 187-54. Schedule IV-C: Pedestrian Crossing Restrictions.
Street Location Type of Restriction
(Reserved)
§ 187-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-54
1:463
Chapter 195
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Agency — See Ch. 51.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 97.
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 101.
Junk and junk dealers — See Ch. 112.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 164.
Occupancy of right-of-way — See Ch. 166, Art.
II.
Streetlighting — See Ch. 169.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 178.
§ 187-54 ROSTRAVER CODE § 187-54
1:464
ARTICLE I
Titles
§ 195-1. Ordinance title.
An Ordinance of the Township of Rostraver, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania, amending all prior ordinances dealing with and regulating
and restricting the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other
structures, their construction, alteration, extension and all facilities and
services in and about such buildings and structures, the percentage of lot
that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces,
the density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures
and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes; establishing and
maintaining building lines and setback building lines upon any or all public
roads and highways; establishing for such purposes districts and defining
the boundaries thereof; providing for appointment of a Zoning Hearing
Board and setting forth the duties and functions of said Board; providing
for the appointment of a Zoning Officer; and for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter and imposing fines and penalties for violation.
§ 195-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Township of Rostraver," and the district map shall be known and may be
cited as the "Rostraver Township Zoning Map."
§ 195-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-2
1:465

ARTICLE II
Purpose and Objectives
§ 195-3. Purpose.
This chapter has been developed for the purpose of lessening congestion on
roads and highways; to secure safety from fire, panic and other danger; to
promote health, morals and the general welfare; to provide adequate light
and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue congestion
of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewage, schools, parks and other requirements and facilities; to provide
for a reasonable mix of land uses and dwelling types; to preserve scenic
and historic values, prime agricultural land, natural areas, aquifers and
floodplains; and to accommodate reasonable overall community growth.
§ 195-4. Community development objectives.
This chapter has been developed to assist in furthering the long-range
community development objectives of Rostraver Township as originally
outlined in the Rostraver Township Comprehensive Plan of 1966 and
subsequent reviews and evaluations of the material documented therein.
Considerations have included land use changes from 1966 to 1989, regional
development trends, the status of community infrastructure, local housing
conditions, population factors and other pertinent local and areawide
studies and documentation. Specifically, the local community development
objectives relate to the following elements:
A. Creation and maintenance of orderly development patterns and the
coordination of interrelationships between living and working areas of
the community to provide for functionally distinguishable but
complimentary districts, as delineated in the various components of the
Comprehensive Plan and subsequent studies.
B. Maintenance and improvement of the aesthetic quality of the
community.
C. Protection of the natural environmental quality and significant open
space features throughout the Township.
D. Preservation of viable agricultural pursuits and areas devoted to such
purposes.
E. Protection of the residential character of the community consistent with
the need for a variety of housing types and densities and the ability of
the community to expand in an orderly manner.
F. Preservation of property values and encouragement of the highest and
best use of developable land areas.
G. Maintenance and expansion of the municipal economic base.
§ 195-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-4
1:467
H. Development of accessways, utility systems, municipal services and
community facilities consistent with local needs.
I. Coordination and cooperation with area and regional development
programs and trends that are consistent with the type and quality of
growth necessary to achieve the community development objectives of
the Township.
§ 195-4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-4
1:468
ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 195-5. Interpretation.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words shall be
interpreted or defined as follows:
§ 195-6. Definitions.134
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Accessory buildings shall
include, but not be limited to, the following, which are subordinate to the
principal buildings on the same lot:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural shall
include the singular.
C. The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual.
D. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
E. The term "shall" is always mandatory.
F. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall
be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged" or "designed
to be used or occupied."
G. The word "building" includes the word "structure."
H. The word "erected" shall include the word "constructed."
I. The word "moved" shall include the word "relocated."
In all residential zones, including Planned Residential Developments,
unless prohibited by declaration of covenants: [Amended 5-4-2016 by
Ord. No. 675]
Children's playhouse, picnic shelter, greenhouse (noncommercial),
garage, carport, garden house or storage building for domestic
storage.
(1)
Swimming pool, ornamental pool, tennis court, basketball court or
similar private recreational facility.
(2)
Storage of camping, sports and similar equipment, owned or leased
for noncommercial purposes, for the use of the residents of the
premises.
(3)
A.
134. Editor's Note: See also § 195-79B.
§ 195-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-6
1:469
ACCESSORY USE — A use that is subordinate and incidental to the main
use or uses on the same lot or premises. Said uses shall not include
nonconforming uses under the terms of this chapter.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — Any commercial establishment in which is offered
for sale as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade
videocassettes, movies, books, magazines or other periodicals or other
media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on nudity
or sexual conduct or on activities which, if presented in live presentation,
would constitute adult entertainment.[Added 3-22-1996 by Ord. No. 312]
ADULT BUSINESS — An adult bookstore, movie theater or movie house or
other adult entertainment, as defined herein. In the event that an activity
or business which might fall under a use category other than adult business
is combined with and/or includes activities which constitute an adult
bookstore, adult movie theater or movie house or adult entertainment, as
defined herein, then such activity or business shall constitute an adult
business and shall be governed by those provisions in this chapter
applicable to adult business uses and not by provisions applicable to any
other use category.[Added 3-22-1996 by Ord. No. 312]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — An establishment providing, either as a sole
use or in conjunction with or in addition to other uses, entertainment
consisting of the use of nudity or of live dancing, posing, displaying, acting
or other live presentation or use of persons whose actions are distinguished
or characterized by emphasis on use of the human body in a manner
intended to or resulting in arousal of sexual excitation or sexual titillation
or a prurient interest or intended to or resulting in producing lustful
emotions.[Added 3-22-1996 by Ord. No. 312]
ADULT MOVIE THEATER OR MOVIE HOUSE (including ADULT MINITHEATERS)
— Any movie theater which on a regular continuing basis
shows films rated X by the Motion Picture Coding Association of America
or any movie theater which presents for public viewing on a regular,
continuing basis so-called adult films depicting sexual conduct, as defined
by this chapter.[Added 3-22-1996 by Ord. No. 312]
(4) Home gardening.
In commercial zones:
Storage of merchandise and goods normally carried in stock in
conjunction with the principal use on the same parcel or lot of
ground.
(1)
Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities
on the same parcel or lot of ground.
(2)
B.
In all zones:
Required off-street motor vehicle parking areas and loading and
unloading areas.
(1)
(2) Fences and ornamental walls and landscape features.
C.
§ 195-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-6
1:470
AGRICULTURE — Any use of a unit of land of five acres or more together
with attendant structures for farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture,
floriculture, arboriculture or animal husbandry. Accessory activities and
structures permitted in conjunction with an agricultural use may include
barns, stables, corn cribs, silos and other similar uses or structures that are
clearly related to an agricultural operation.[Amended 1-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 667]
AGRICULTURAL SECURITY AREA — A unit of 500 or more acres of land
used for agricultural production, under the ownership of one or more
persons, created by a municipality in cooperation with local agricultural
landowners under Pennsylvania Act 43 of 1981,135 to guarantee that farm
businesses will be recognized as the primary activity on designated
properties for the purpose of encouraging the continuity, development and
viability of farming.
AGRITOURISM — The practice of visiting an agribusiness, horticultural, or
agricultural operation, including, but not limited to, a farm, orchard, winery,
greenhouse, hunting preserve, a companion animal or livestock show, for
the purpose of recreation, education, or active involvement in the operation,
other than as a contractor or employee of the operation.[Added 2-15-2017
by Ord. No. 682]
AIRPORT — A tract of leveled land opened to the public where an aircraft
can take off and land, usually equipped with hard-surfaced landing strips,
a control tower, hangars, aircraft maintenance and refueling facilities, and
accommodations for passengers and cargo.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No.
601]
AIRPORT-RELATED SERVICE — Uses which provide direct services to the
traveling public and are located on the premises of an airport facility,
including but not limited to retail stores, professional and business offices,
hotels, eating and drinking establishments, business services and personal
services.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
ALLEY — A service way at least 20 feet wide, providing a secondary public
means of access to abutting properties.
ALTERATION or ADDITION (structural or use change) — Any change in
the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns,
beams, girders or foundations or by extending on a side, front or rear or
by increasing in height or the moving from one location to another or any
change in use from a conforming zoning district classification.
AMBULANCE SERVICE — Any entity within the definition of "ambulance
service" as used in the Pennsylvania Emergency Medical Services
Act.136[Added 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 387]
135. Editor's Note: See the Agricultural Area Security Law, 3 P.S. § 901 et seq.
136. Editor's Note: The Pennsylvania Emergency Medical Services Act was repealed by 2009,
Aug. 18, P.L. 308, No. 37, § 6(2). See now the Emergency Medical Services System Act, 35
Pa.C.S.A. § 8101 et seq.
§ 195-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-6
1:471
AMBULANCE STATION — Any building owned or leased by either a hospital
or an ambulance service licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and used primarily to provide emergency medical services.[Added
9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 387]
AMBULANCE SUBSTATION — An ambulance station which meets the
following criteria: no longer than 2,000 square feet; houses no more than
the two vehicles; staffed by no more than two employees; and less than
25 miles from the building which houses the main office of the hospital
or ambulance service which operates the substation.[Added 9-2-1998 by
Ord. No. 387]
ANIMATION — Depicting action, motion, light or color changes through
electrical or mechanical means.[Added 4-2-2014 by Ord. No. 644]
APARTMENT — A room or suite of rooms in a multifamily structure, which
is designed for use as a single housekeeping unit and which contains a
functional kitchen, bath and toilet facilities, permanently installed.
AREA — Area of a lot or site shall be calculated from dimensions derived by
horizontal projection of the site.
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the
main grade level of the principal building exclusive of uncovered porches,
terraces, steps, garages and other accessory buildings.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Any premises used for the retail sale
of motor fuel and lubricants and incidental services such as lubrication and
the sale, installation or minor repair of tires, batteries or other automobile
accessories, but not including major repair work, such as motor
replacement, body fender repair or spray painting.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR — Engine maintenance, repair or reconditioning,
collision repair, including straightening and repainting, replacement of
parts and incidental services.
AUTOMOTIVE SALVAGE — The dismantling or disassembling of two or
more used motor vehicles or trailers or the storage, sale or dumping of two
or more dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or
their parts.
BANK — An institution for lending, borrowing, exchanging, issuing and
safeguarding money in an office or building.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No.
601]
BASEMENT or CELLAR — A portion of a building partly or completely
below grade. It shall be considered a building story if more than 50% of its
clear height is above the average level of the adjoining ground.
BILLBOARD — Structure, building wall or other outdoor surface used to
display lettered, pictorial, sculptured or other matter which directs
attention to any product, announcement, commodity or service offered only
elsewhere than on the premises.
BUFFER AREA — A strip of land which is planted and maintained in shrubs,
bushes, trees, grass or other landscaping material and within which no
§ 195-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-6
1:472
structure is permitted except a wall or fence. The purpose of a buffer is
to place additional horizontal space between potentially conflicting land
uses.[Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
BUILDING — An independent and detached structure having a roof
supported by columns or walls or resting on its own foundation, including
but not limited to mobile homes, garages, greenhouses and other accessory
buildings, and utilized for housing, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattels or activity sites.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finish grade to the highest point of the roof.
BUILDING LINE — An imaginary line located a fixed distance from the front
line of the lot and interpreted as being the nearest point that a building may
be constructed to the front lot line. The building line shall limit the location
of porches, patios and similar construction, steps excepted, to the face of
this line. (Refer to "front yard.")
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — The building or portion thereof housing the main
or primary use of the land.
BUSINESS SERVICE — Any business activity which renders service to other
commercial or industrial enterprises.
CAMPING AND RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — Any licensed or
unlicensed trailer or other vehicle designed or used for temporary living
or sleeping purposes, regardless of whether the wheels are attached or
unattached or a permanent or semipermanent foundation is constructed
underneath, or any structure of a permanent or semipermanent nature
which is not connected to utilities. "Camping and recreational equipment"
shall include travel trailers, pickup coaches, motorized home and boat
trailers and shall be defined as follows:
CAR WASH — An area of land and/or a structure with machine- or handoperated
facilities used principally for the interior and/or exterior cleaning,
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational
and vacation purposes, permanently identified as a travel trailer by the
manufacturer of the trailer and, when equipped for the road, which
must be licensed and inspected.
A.
PICKUP COACH — A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a
pickup or truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable
for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation
uses.
B.
C. BOAT TRAILER — A trailer designed to haul boats.
MOTORIZED HOME — A motorized vehicle with sufficient equipment
to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreational and vacation uses. This unit must also be licensed and
inspected.
D.
§ 195-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-6
1:473
washing, polishing or waxing of motor vehicles.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601]
CHICKEN — A member of the subspecies Gallus domestics, a domesticated
fowl. This shall not include a rooster or any species of turkey, duck, guinea
fowl, goose or other fowl.[Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
CHICKEN COOP — A structure for sheltering chickens, including four
opaque walls and a roof with ventilation through windows or other
protected openings.[Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
CHICKEN RUN/PEN — A fenced area for chickens.[Added 1-20-2016 by
Ord. No. 667]
CHURCH — An institution of any religious denomination where people
regularly observe, practice or participate in religious or spiritual services,
meetings or activities.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
CLINIC — Any establishment where human patients or animals are
examined and treated by doctors or dentists but not hospitalized overnight.
CLUB — An establishment operated for social, athletic, recreational or
educational purposes but open only to members and not the general public.
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more communications antennas
on an existing communications tower, or on any structure that has been
approved by the Township to support at least one communications
antenna.[Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705]
COMMERCIAL (Business) — Engaging in a business, enterprise, activity
or other undertaking related to or connected with trade or commerce in
general (excludes home occupation).137
COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT — A parking lot and/or garage used only for
the parking of vehicles where a fee is charged to park, or the property is
leased for parking, but it shall not include the storage of vehicles for repair,
dismantling, display or sale.[Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — A structure used for transmitting or
retransmitting electronic signals, such as a microwave or drum antenna.
Communications antennas shall include, but are not limited to, antennas
used for cellular telephone communications. Communications antennas
shall not include facilities used for the reception of cable television or those
used by federally licensed amateur radio operators.[Added 5-7-1991 by
Ord. No. 341; amended 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705]
COMMUNICATIONS APPLICANT (APPLICANT) — Any entity or person that
applies for a communications facility building permit, zoning approval and/
or permission to use the public right-of-way, Township-owned land, or other
137. Editor’s Note: The former definitions of “commercial communications antenna” and
“commercial communications tower,” added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341, and which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705; and the
former definition of “Commission, Planning,” which followed this definition, was repealed
8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 468.
§ 195-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-6
1:474
property for the placement, modification, construction, or siting of wireless
communications facilities.[Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705]
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unmanned building
containing communications equipment required for the operation of
communications antennas and covering an area on the ground not greater
than 250 square feet.[Added 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 341]
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — The antennas, nodes, control boxes,
towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and other equipment
used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving, distributing, providing,
or accommodating wireless communications services.[Added 9-5-2018 by
Ord. No. 705]
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure, other than a building, that
is constructed for the primary purpose of supporting one or more
communications antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting
lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles. Communications towers shall
not include towers operated by federally licensed amateur radio
operators.[Added 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 341; amended 9-5-2018 by
Ord. No. 705]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use that is not appropriate to a particular zoning
district as a whole but which may be suitable in certain locations within
the district only when specific conditions and factors prescribed for such
cases within this chapter are present. Conditional uses are to be permitted
or denied by the governing body, following study and recommendations by
the Planning Agency, pursuant to express standards and criteria set forth
in this chapter.[Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 468; 12-4-2002 by Ord.
No. 475]
CONDOMINIUM — A unit in or an arrangement under which a tenant in a
multifamily building or in a complex of multiunit dwellings holds full title to
his or her unit and joint ownership in the common grounds.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — An area of land and any structure which may
or may not include administrative offices for an industry that provides
landscaping, construction, remodeling, home improvement and related
services on a contractual basis, and stores all or part of the materials,
equipment or vehicles used in the industry on site.[Added 6-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 601138]
CONVERSION APARTMENT — A suite of rooms, consisting of at least one
private bedroom, one additional habitable room, one separate and private
bathroom and separate and private sanitary cooking facilities, designed or
intended for occupancy by one family, which is established in a portion of a
building originally used or designed for use by a single-family unit.
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY — A publicly or privately owned building or
structure and related facilities used for the housing or detention of persons
138. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of "contractor's plant
and storage."
§ 195-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-6
1:475
who have been charged with or have been convicted of criminal
offenses.[Added 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 562]
DAY-CARE/FAMILY HOME — Any family residence other than a child's own
home or the home of a child's relative, operated for profit or not for profit,
in which child day care is provided at any one time to four, five or six schoolage
children (the day the child initially enters the first grade of a public
or private school system to 12 years of age), preschoolers (approximately
three years of age to initial school entry at the first grade level of a
public or private school system) or to infants and toddlers (from birth to
approximately three years of age) who are not relatives of the caregiver.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility in which child day-care services are
provided for seven or more school-age, preschool or infant children in an
institutional related structure suitable for such functions.
DEEP MINE — An underground mine in which the main entry or access
is by means of a vertical shaft. Uses may include coal-mining portals,
tipples, cleaning plants, conveyor systems, shops, structures and accessory
facilities normally associated with deep mining operations.[Added
6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
DENSITY — The area of a lot or group of lots computed exclusive of any
portion of the right-of-way of any road, divided by the number of families
housed on the lot or group of lots.
DERRICK — Any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure which
is required or used in connection with drilling or reworking a well for the
production of oil and gas, i.e. rig.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
DISTRICT, ZONING — A section of the municipality for which uniform
regulations site governing the use, height, area and intent of use of
buildings and land and open spaces about buildings are herein established.
DRILLING — Specifically any digging or boring of a new well to explore,
develop, or produce oil, gas or other hydrocarbons, or to inject gas, water
or any other fluid of substance into the earth and in all cases any redialing
therein. This term shall not include any surveying or staking related thereto
of any property prior to any drilling as defined herein.[Added 6-1-2011 by
Ord. No. 617]
DRILLING EQUIPMENT — The derrick, all parts and appurtenances to such
structure, and every piece of apparatus, machinery, or equipment used,
erected, or maintained for use in connection with drilling.[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
DRIVEWAY — A private accessway to a parking area, garage or structure,
including accessways to land use activity areas.
DUMP — A lot or land or part thereof used primarily for the disposal,
abandonment, dumping, burial or burning, or any other means and for
whatever purpose, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded
machinery, vehicles or parts thereof or waste material of any kind (excludes
private or public sewage disposal and permitted sanitary landfills).
§ 195-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-6
1:476
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof providing complete
housekeeping facilities for one family unit.
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment where the
public may obtain refreshments, meals or prepared foods, not including
a microbrewery/microdistillery.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601;
amended 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 698]
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION, COMMERCIAL — A school, which charges
students tuition to learn a trade or skill for professional or recreational use.
This does not include a college or university; it includes institutions which
may require specialized equipment.[Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483139]
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION, NONCOMMERCIAL — A school, including
a public school, parochial school, private school, college, university and a
private nursery school or preschool, having regular sessions with regularly
employed instructors, which teach those subjects that are fundamental
and essential in elementary, secondary or higher education under the
supervision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a lawful constituted
ecclesiastical governing body or a corporation meeting the requirements of
the commonwealth.[Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
EQUIPMENT REPAIR, MINOR — Incidental repairs, replacement of parts
and servicing of small appliances and minor household equipment such
as motors, lawn equipment and chain saws; shall not include automotive
repairs, farm equipment or repair or servicing of commercial products and
machinery.
ERECTED — Includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon or any
physical operations on the land required for the building. Excavation, fill,
drainage and the like shall be considered part of the erection.140
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing complete
housekeeping facilities for one individual or one family.
A.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached or separate building
designed for or occupied exclusively as a residence for one family.
B.
DWELLING, DUPLEX — A detached or separate building designed for
or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each
other with separate entrances and facilities.
C.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY OR MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A structure
containing three or more separate dwelling units for families living
independently of each other which may provide joint services and/or
facilities but separate housekeeping, sanitary and cooking facilities.
Such structures may be referred to as "apartment," "garden
apartment," "townhouse" or "row house."
D.
139. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of “educational
institution.”
140. Editor’s Note: The former definitions of “essential communications antenna” and
“essential communications tower,” added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341, and which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705.
§ 195-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-6
1:477
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or
disposal systems and their essential buildings, excluding essential
communications towers, essential communications antennas, commercial
communications towers and commercial communications antennas, as
defined herein.[Added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341]
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated, disturbed or filled, and any conditions resulting
therefrom.[Amended 9-7-2005 by Ord. No. 531]
FAMILY — One or more persons who live together in a single housekeeping
unit and maintain a common household, as distinguished from a group
occupying a boardinghouse. A family may consist of a single person or of
two or more persons, whether or not related by blood, marriage or adoption.
For purposes of this chapter, the term "family" shall not include, nor shall
it be interpreted to include, a group care facility or similar functions or
activities that provide room or board or room and board to one or more
persons who are residents by virtue of receiving services such as health,
social, rehabilitative, general supervision or similar services or functions or
activities, irrespective of whether or not they are provided by governmental
agencies, their licensed or certified agents, responsible nonprofit social
service agencies or corporations, profit-oriented organizations or
businesses or private individuals.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.[Added 9-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
FIRE STATION — A building where firefighters are stationed and their
vehicles and equipment are kept.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building determined by dimensions measured between exterior faces
of walls as in a single-family dwelling or by dimensions measured between
common interior separating walls as in duplex, apartments and townhouses
(excludes cellar or basement floor areas, roofed porches, roofed terraces
and accessory building attached or otherwise).
FOOTCANDLE — A common unit of light intensity used in the United States
and stated in lumens per square foot. It is measurable with a light meter.
(Note: Lux is the metric equivalent. There are approximately 10.7 lux per
footcandle.)[Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
FULL CUTOFF LUMINAIRE — A lighting unit in its mounted form that
allows no direct light or reflected source image from the lighting unit
above a ninety-degree plane, and no more than 10% of rated lamp output
on an eighty-degree plane, at any lateral angle around the fixture.[Added
4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
§ 195-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-6
1:478
FULLY SHIELDED — Providing internal and/or external shield and louvers
to prevent brightness from lamps, reflectors and lenses from causing glare
at normal viewing angles.[Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
FUNERAL HOME — A structure used for the embalming of the deceased
and for the viewing of the deceased prior to burial.[Added 6-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 601]
GARAGE — A private garage is an accessory building with area for housing
motor driven vehicles, the property of and for the use of the occupants of
the lot on which the garage is located. A public garage is any garage other
than a private garage, as defined herein, available to clients, operated for
gain and which is used for storage, repair, rental, lubricating, washing and
servicing or equipping of motor vehicles.
GARDEN (APARTMENT) DWELLING — A multifamily residential building,
not exceeding three stories in height, in which units are arranged side to
side, back to back or one above another, which may have either private
external entrances or common hall access and which may have private
exterior yard area for each unit.
GARDEN CENTER/COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE — A retail commercial
sales establishment for the sale of plants, garden supplies and related items.
For purposes of this chapter, said establishments shall not include the sale
or service of machinery, tractors or mowing equipment in excess of 20
horsepower.
GLARE — The sensation produced by direct lighting that causes an
annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance and visibility to the
eye.[Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Township Commissioners of the
Township of Rostraver, Westmoreland County, PA.
GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITIES — Any federal, state or local agency.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The area within the perimeter of the outside walls
of a building as measured from the inside surface of the exterior walls, with
no deduction for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns, or
other interior spaces.[Added 8-7-2019 by Ord. No. 715]
GROUP RESIDENTIAL FACILITY — An establishment that provides room
and board in a family environment to persons who receive supervised care
limited to health, social, rehabilitative or housing services. Such facilities
may include child and adult services for individuals not in need of
hospitalization or incarceration, but who because of age, convalescence,
infirmity, disability or related circumstances require such care. Group
residential facilities may be characterized as rest homes, nursing homes,
personal care homes or similarly described uses; however, the scope of
all operations shall be of a limited nature as specified in this
chapter.[Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
HALFWAY HOUSE — A transitional residential facility, licensed and
operated by a government, contractor to a government or a social service
agency that provides a supervised environment to temporary residents who
§ 195-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-6
1:479
require psychiatric, correctional or behavioral treatment between periods
of institutional and independent living.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
HEIGHT OF A COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — The vertical distance
measured from the ground level to the highest point on a communications
tower, including all antennas mounted on the tower.[Added 5-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 341]
HOME GARDENING — The cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers or
vegetables on a piece of ground adjoining the dwelling for use of the
residents therein.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a service or product oriented
character, conducted in conjunction with a single-family dwelling unit by the
residents thereof, which is clearly subordinate to the use of the dwelling for
living purposes and does not change the character thereof or have exterior
evidence of such subordinate use other than a small announcement sign;
and in connection therewith, there is not involved the exterior keeping of or
exhibition of stock-in-trade. In the pursuit of such activities, all operations
shall be conducted indoors and be free of any procedures which could be
construed as adversely influencing surrounding residential uses because of
noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interference, odor or similar conditions.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing primary health services and medical
or surgical care to persons, who are primarily inpatients, who suffer from
illness disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical and medical
conditions. Hospitals may include accessory uses such as laboratories,
training, medical offices, outpatient care and group residential facilities.
A hospital may also include psychological care, but facilities primarily for
the secure housing of persons who are adjudicated to be a danger to
themselves or others shall be regarded as correctional facilities by this
chapter.[Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
HOTEL; MOTEL; TOURIST HOME — A building or a group of buildings in
which lodging is provided and offered to the general public or to a select
group of patrons for compensation.
ILLUMINANCE — The intensity of incident light at a point, measured in
footcandles or lux.[Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
IMPROVEMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved land,
including by not limited to the construction, reconstruction, renovation,
expansion or alteration of buildings or other structures; paving for streets,
pads and parking of five or more stalls; mining; dredging; and the
subdivision of land.[Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
JUNK — Any discarded material or article and shall include, but not be
limited to, scrap metal, abandoned or junked motor vehicles or vehicle
parts, machinery or machinery parts, papers, glass and related items,
containers or partially dismantled structures or parts thereof. It shall also
include a partially dismantled motor vehicle not bearing current
registration plates and which is not in the process of ongoing and immediate
repair. It shall not include refuse or garbage kept in a proper container for
the purpose of prompt disposal.
§ 195-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-6
1:480
JUNKYARD — The use of more than 200 square feet of the area of any
lot, whether inside or outside a building, or the use of any portion of
any lot that joins the street for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk,
including scrap metals, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment
of automobiles or other vehicles, machinery or parts thereof.
JUVENILE DETENTION FACILITY — A publicly or privately owned building
or structure for the temporary detention of those juveniles adjudicated
delinquent or dependent.[Added 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 562]
KENNEL — Any structure, pen or area set aside for the breeding, boarding,
training, show or keeping of dogs, cats or similar domestic animals of four
or more such animals for economic gain.[Amended 5-4-2005 by Ord. No.
528]
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition); a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner; or other persons having a
proprietary interest in land.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light emitted by a lighting installation which shines
beyond the boundaries of the property on which the installation is
sited.[Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
LOADING SPACE — A space within the main building or on the same lot
therewith providing for the standing, loading or unloading of vehicles.
LOT — A tract or parcel of land held in single or separate ownership, that
is described by reference to a recorded plat or by metes or bounds and is
intended as a unit for transfer of ownership, use, improvement, dedication
or for development.
LOT AREA — The horizontal surface area within the lines of the lot.
LOT, CORNER — A lot, abutting two or more streets at their intersection,
on which the building line for all streets must be observed.
LOT COVERAGE — The ratio of ground area covered by principal and
accessory structures to the total ground area of the lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line contiguous with the street right-of-way line.
LOT LINE, REAR — The line generally parallel to the front lot line, which
defines the rear of the lot.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH — The total horizontal distance across the lot between the side
lot lines, measured at the building line and the front lot line.[Amended
7-2-2003 by Ord. No. 495]
LUMEN — A unit of measurement of light. One lumen is equal to one
footcandle falling onto one square foot of area.[Added 4-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 508]
§ 195-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-6
1:481
LUMINAIRE — A complete luminaire, including a lamp or lamps, together
with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the
lamps and to connect the lamps to the power supply.[Added 4-7-2004 by
Ord. No. 508]
MAJOR HIGHWAY — Interstate 70, State Route 51 and State Route
201.[Added 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 387]
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY — A use engaged in manufacturing, assembly,
fabrication, packaging or other industrial processing of products primarily
from extracted or raw materials or the bulk storage and handling of such
products and materials, or a use having the potential to produce noise, dust,
glare, odors, vibration, smoke or other noxious emissions beyond its lot
lines.[Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT — The processing, handling or fabrication of
materials and products where no processes are involved which will produce
noise, vibration, air pollution, fire hazard, noxious emission, high traffic
volumes or other factors which will disturb or endanger neighboring
properties.
METHADONE TREATMENT FACILITY — A facility owned and operated
by a private for-profit entity, a private nonprofit entity or Westmoreland
County where the drug methadone or similar substances are prescribed
and administered for the treatment, maintenance or detoxification of
persons.[Added 7-5-2006 by Ord. No. 549]
MICROBREWERY/MICRODISTILLERY — A building in which beer or other
alcoholic beverages are brewed, fermented or distilled for consumption,
which possesses the appropriate license from the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board, producing less than 15,000 barrels per year (for purposes
of this definition, a barrel is 31 gallons). On-site consumption and food
sales may occur so long as allowed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board.[Added 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 698]
MINE VENTILATING SHAFT — A mining adjunct operation consisting of a
structure and appurtenant facilities to permit the introduction and removal
of air and other gases from underground coal mines.
MINI-STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group of buildings in a
controlled-access and fenced compound that contains various sizes of
individualized, compartmentalized and controlled access stalls and/or
lockers leased by the general public for a specified period of time for the
storage of personal property.[Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
MIXED COMMERCIAL RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — A single building that
contains a retail business, office, or personal and professional services on
the first floor or lower floors, and multiple residential dwelling units on the
second floor or above.[Added 2-4-2009 by Ord. No. 584]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-family dwelling structure
designed and intended for permanent occupancy, with a minimum body
width of eight feet and a minimum body length of 32 feet, built on a
chassis for towing on its own running gear, contained in one unit or in two
§ 195-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-6
1:482
units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of later being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations and constructed for use without attachment to a permanent
foundation other than being secured to appropriate piers, tie-downs or
similar approved anchoring devices and structures.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any contiguous parcel or tract of land under
single ownership, used or intended to be used for the placement of two
or more mobile homes for nontransient use, together with the required
improvements and facilities upon the land, whether or not consideration or
rental is required for the use of the parcels or facilities thereon.
MODEL HOME — A temporary office establishment that engages in the
selling of lots and homes in a developing subdivision.[Added 5-4-2005 by
Ord. No. 528]
MODULAR HOME — A factory fabricated transportable building unit, other
than a mobile home, designed to be used independently or incorporated
with similar units into a modular structure on a permanent foundation at a
permanent building site.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A structure containing three or more separate
dwelling units for families living independently of each other which may
provide joint services and/or facilities but separate housekeeping, sanitary
and cooking facilities.[Amended 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 388]
NATURAL GAS COMPRESSOR STATION — A facility designed and
constructed to compress natural gas that originates from an oil and gas
well or collection of such wells operating as a midstream facility for delivery
of oil and gas to a transmission pipeline, distribution pipeline, natural
gas processing plant or underground storage field, including one or more
natural gas compressors, associated buildings, pipes, valves, tanks and
other equipment.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
NATURAL GAS FACILITIES — Any facilities not mentioned herein and
related to natural gas development must comply with the special exception
requirements herein.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
NATURAL GAS PROCESSING PLANT — A facility designed and constructed
to remove materials, such as ethane, propane, butane, and other
constituents or similar substances from natural gas to allow such natural
gas to be of such quality as is required or appropriate for transmission
or distribution to commercial markets, but not including facilities or
equipment that are/is designed and constructed primarily to remove water,
water vapor, oil or naturally occurring liquids from natural gas.[Added
6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
NATURAL WATERCOURSE — A discernible definite natural course or
channel along which water is conveyed ultimately to streams or rivers at
lower elevations. A natural watercourse may be permanent in nature or
may originate from a temporary source such as runoff from rain or melting
snow.[Added 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 388]
§ 195-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-6
1:483
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL — A neighborhood oriented commercial
facility that provides essential everyday needs to the residents of the
immediate community and is not dependent upon transient or nonresident
trade.
NET FLOOR AREA — The area dimensions (generally expressed as square
feet) of all floors of a building measured using interior dimensions, but not
including all spaces used as stairwells, hallways, mechanical equipment and
other areas not intended for human occupancy.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601]
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. The business activity shall be compatible with the
residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses. The
business shall employ no employees other than family members residing
in the dwelling. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no
stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature. There shall be no outside
appearance of a business use, including but not limited to parking, signs
or lights. The business activity may not use any equipment or process
which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood. The business activity may not
generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type, which
is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood. The
business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and may
not occupy more than 30% of the ground floor area. The business may
not involve any illegal activity. The business shall not be visible from
surrounding properties or the adjacent street.[Added 2-5-2003 by Ord.
No. 482]
NONBUSINESS USES — Service or charitable activities conducted on a
voluntary or nonprofit basis by individuals or public or service groups and
organizations.
NONCONFORMING USE — A building, structure or premises lawfully
occupied at the time of the enactment of this chapter by a use that does
not conform with the provisions of this chapter for the district in which it
is located; also, such use resulting from amendments to the Zoning District
Map or in text provisions made hereafter.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below
the top of nipple or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.[Added 3-22-1996 by Ord. No. 312]
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit signed by the Zoning Officer setting forth
that a building, structure or parcel of land is in compliance with this chapter
and may lawfully be occupied or employed for specified uses.
§ 195-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-6
1:484
OFFICE — A facility in which services, clerical work, professional duties and
similar functions are carried out.
OIL and GAS — Crude oil, natural gas, methane gas, coal bed methane gas,
propane, butane and/or any other constituents or similar substances that
are produced by drilling a well of any depth into, through, and below the
surface of the earth.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
OIL AND GAS DRILL SITE — The oil and gas drill site shall consist of
the area occupied by the facilities, structures, and equipment necessary
for or incidental to the drilling, production or operation of an oil or gas
well.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
OIL AND GAS WATER STORAGE FACILITY — Tanks of any construction
(metal, fiberglass, concrete, etc.), ponds and impoundments used for the
storage of water and/or water that has been used and is being reused,
including but not limited to brine and frac water.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 617]
PENNSYLVANIA PLANNING CODE — Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988), and amendments
of same, as may be adopted from time to time. 141
PERMITTED USE — A use by right which is specifically authorized in a
particular zoning district.
PERSONAL AND BUSINESS SERVICES — A commercial establishment
providing services and/or goods to individuals and businesses. This
definition includes barber and beauty shops, light repair services such
as clothing alteration and shoe repair, copy and retail printing services,
and similar business services, but does not include eating and drinking
establishments or similar businesses which are primarily involved in retail
sales.[Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
PET GROOMING — Any property, premises, place or commercial
establishment in or at which the trimming of the hair or fur and/or washing
of animals for economic gain.[Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
PHILANTHROPIC USE — Philanthropic uses shall be limited to public and
semipublic activities which involve and relate exclusively to charitable,
benevolent and public oriented service functions, such as provided by the
American Red Cross, Salvation Army, social centers sponsored by public or
semipublic organizations or similar groups.
PLANNED BUSINESS PARK — A land development which is planned,
designed, developed, and typically maintained as a single entity and
containing two or more principal structures with appurtenant common
areas to accommodate light manufacturing, warehouse, and office uses,
with potential for retail, residential and service businesses incidental to the
predominant office or industrial uses.[Added 2-4-2009 by Ord. No. 584]
PLANNED (UNIT) RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Development of a
tract of land for primarily residential purposes under single ownership or
141. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-6
1:485
control; the development of which is unique and of a substantially different
character than that of the surrounding area. Such development shall be
based on a plan that allows for flexibility of design not available under
standard zoning district requirements.
PLANNING AGENCY — The Rostraver Township Planning Agency as duly
created by the local governing body.[Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No.
468142]
PRINCIPAL USE — The major or dominant use of a lot or land parcel.
PRIVATE CLUB/LODGE — An organization catering exclusively to members
and their guests at premises for social, recreational or athletic purposes
which are not conducted primarily for gain, provided that any
merchandising or commercial activities are conducted only as required
generally for the membership of such organization.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An office or business conducted by an
individual or association dealing with medicine, law, accounting, real estate,
architecture, engineering, finance or related services.
PUBLIC — Includes any use activity owned and/or operated by federal,
state, county or local governmental units.
PUBLIC FACILITY — Any building, structure or land used or intended for
use to service the public for government services, including municipal,
county, state and federal government units. This does not include a
correctional facility, an educational institution, group residential facility,
hospital, juvenile detention facility, methadone treatment facility, halfway
house or any other such facility.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601143]
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER — A structure, owned and
operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support overhead
electricity transmission lines.[Added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341]
RECREATION —
MUNICIPAL RECREATION — Developed or undeveloped open spaces
and/or structures and facilities which are provided by a governmental
body for public use for the purposes of play, amusement or relaxation.
Such uses may include sports facilities, parks, assembly buildings,
passive areas, gardens and related amenities.
A.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL INDOOR — Indoor facilities for leisure
time activities that are provided as a business pursuit, including
facilities open to the public and those requiring membership; includes
indoor theaters, lodges, fraternal organizations, bowling alleys and
indoor skating facilities.
B.
142. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of “Planning
Commission.”
143. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of "public library," added
4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483, which immediately followed.
§ 195-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-6
1:486
RELATED EQUIPMENT OR BASE STATION — Any structure or equipment
at a fixed location, not including a tower, that enables FCC-licensed
communications between a user and a wireless network.[Added 9-5-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
RESEARCH AND TESTING LABS — Any establishment which carries on
investigations in the natural, physical or social sciences, or engineering
and development as an extension of such investigations by persons with
professional training, with the objective of creating end products and which
may include, as an accessory use, pilot production to test concepts and
ideas prior to the undertaking of full-scale production.[Added 6-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 601144]
RETAIL BUSINESS — An establishment located entirely within an enclosed
building which engages in the selling of goods or merchandise to the
general public but does not include wholesaling, supply yards or light
industrial businesses.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for use as a street, alley, interior walk or
other public purpose and dedicated for public use; all must be recorded in
the County Recorder of Deeds office. For purposes of this chapter, public
right-of-way lines shall prevail over private parcel lines that are designated
as falling within the public right-of-way. When a lot abuts a right-of-way of a
public thoroughfare or alley, all applicable lot area and front, side and rear
lot requirements shall be computed from the public right-of-way line.
ROADSIDE STANDS — Stands offering for sale agricultural products grown
on the premises.
ROADSIDE VENDOR STANDS — Stands, trailers, truck beds or similar
facilities offering products for sale which are not produced on the
immediate premises.
ROW HOUSE (TOWNHOUSE) — A multifamily dwelling structure,
consisting of at least three single-family dwelling units that are attached
side by side by unpierced party walls.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR — Outdoor facilities for
leisure time activities that are provided as a business pursuit, including
outdoor facilities open to the public and those requiring membership;
includes swimming pools, tennis courts, drive-in theaters and golf
courses. [Amended 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
C.
NEIGHBORHOOD RECREATION — Developed or undeveloped open
spaces and/or structures and facilities which are reserved for the
residents of a plan of lots sharing common relationships or associations
for the purposes of play, amusement or relaxation. Such uses may
include sports fields, parks, passive areas and related amenities.
[Amended 7-3-2002 by Ord. No. 462]
D.
144. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definitions of "restaurant, drive-in"
and "restaurant, full service," which immediately followed.
§ 195-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-6
1:487
SANITARY LANDFILL — A disposal site employing an engineering method
of disposing of solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental
hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume and applying
a cover material over all solid wastes, subject to permitting by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection's Waste
Management.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
SCREEN PLANTING — An arrangement of vegetative material or opaque
architectural materials of sufficient height and density to conceal from
view of adjoining or adjacent property owners the structures and uses on
the premises on which the screen or planting is located. The purpose of
screening is to place a vertical visual barrier between potentially conflicting
land uses.[Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
SERVICE STATION — A building, buildings, premises or portions thereof
which are used for the sale of gasoline, diesel, propane, compressed natural
gas, or other fuel for motor vehicles, including electric charging stations;
may or may not include a convenience store offering for sale food products
and household items.[Amended 11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 717]
SETBACK — The minimum distance that a structure can be located from
a right-of-way or property line or another structure, thereby creating a
required open space on a lot.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated and patently
offensive representations, descriptions or acts of masturbation, excretory
functions, homosexuality, sodomy, sexual intercourse or physical contact
with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if
such person is female, breast.[Added 3-22-1996 by Ord. No. 312]
SHOPPING CENTER — A combination of retail commercial uses on a
common contiguous site, designed as a unit, with adequate off-street free
parking area and usually consisting of several one story buildings.
SIGN — Any writing (including letter, word or numeral); pictorial
representation (including illustration or decoration); emblem (including
device, symbol, trademark, banner or pennant); or any other figure of
similar character which is a structure or any part thereof or is attached
to, painted on or in any other manner represented on a building or other
structure and is used to announce, direct attention to or advertise.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC VARIABLE MESSAGE — An electrically activated sign
whose message content is alphabetical or numerical only, and either whole
or in part, may change by means of electronic programming.[Added
12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
SIGN, MULTIPLE SLATS/PANELS — A sign whose message changes by
means of flipping of slats or panels encased in a stationary frame or cabinet.
This does not include a sign whose message is changed in a revolving or
oscillating manner.[Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
SIGN, PORTABLE — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to
a structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including but not limited
§ 195-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-6
1:488
to signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to
"A" or "T" frames; sandwich board signs; and balloons and banners used for
advertising.[Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
SIGN, ROTATING — A sign which, in its entirety, moves in a revolving,
oscillating or similar manner. Such motion does not include methods of
changing the sign face copy by flipping of slats or panels.[Added
12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
SIGN, SNIPE — Any sign of any material whatsoever that is attached in any
way to a utility pole, tree or fence.[Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
SITE PLAN — A plan, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a
parcel of land that includes lot lines, streets, building sites, buildings, open
space and other information.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — The permission or approval for a land use activity,
expressly granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, after formal application, in
situations where provision therefor is made by the terms of this chapter.
SPECIALIZED ANIMAL RAISING AND CARE — The use of land and
structures for the raising and care of fur-bearing animals, stabling and care
of horses, animal kennels, bird raising, not including chickens, and similar
operations.[Amended 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528; 1-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 667]
STAGING FACILITY — A facility or location on a permitted site for the
storage of equipment and vehicles used to support development activities
at other permitted sites.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications facilities which render them more visually appealing or
blend the proposed facility into the existing structure or visual backdrop in
such a manner as to render it minimally visible to the casual observer. Such
methods include, but are not limited to, alternative mounting structures,
such as architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure and facilities constructed
to resemble trees, shrubs, flagpoles, and light poles.[Added 9-5-2018 by
Ord. No. 705]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET — A public or private way, other than an alley, that affords the
principal means of on-grade access to abutting properties. A street may be
designated as a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, boulevard, road, avenue,
lane, drive, place or other appropriate name.
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS — The following street classifications shall
apply to all streets in the Township:
EXPRESSWAY — Expressways are limited access freeways that carry
through traffic between major urban centers and to and from points
outside of a region with no local interference.
A.
§ 195-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-6
1:489
STREET LINE — The line defining the edge of the legal width of a dedicated
street right-of-way.
STRIP MINING — Surface mining of coal, earth removal, stone removal or
quarrying and/or procedures that are normally conducted for profit wherein
soil and/or its contents are removed as a business activity.[Amended
5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528; 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. Structures
include buildings, sheds and signs.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE[Added 9-5-2018
by Ord. No. 705] —
SUPPLY YARDS — A commercial establishment storing or offering for sale
building supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain
and similar goods. Supply yards do not include the wrecking, salvaging,
dismantling or storage of automobiles and similar vehicles.
TOURIST HOME — A single-family residence offering, for pay, overnight
or short-term lodging for transient guests.[Added 8-7-2019 by Ord. No.
715]
TRACT — A lot or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under
single control and usually considered a unit for purposes of development.
TRANSIENT GUEST — A transient person who maintains legal residency
elsewhere or otherwise does not meet expectations of permanent residency
but may be lodging in the Township under a commercial basis for a period
of less than 30 days.[Added 8-7-2019 by Ord. No. 715]
ARTERIAL — Arterials carry major movements of traffic within or
through the community.
B.
COLLECTOR — Collectors carry the internal traffic movements within
the Township and connect developed areas with the arterial system.
The collector system simultaneously provides abutting property with
road access and accommodates local internal traffic movements.
C.
LOCAL — Local streets provide access to immediately adjacent land but
normally carry a small portion of the total vehicle miles traveled daily.
D.
E. PRIVATE — Any vehicular way that is not dedicated as a public street.
Any increase in the height of a wireless support structure by more than
10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever
is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed wireless
communications facility may exceed the size limits set forth herein if
necessary to avoid interference with existing antennas; or
A.
Any further increase in the height of a wireless support structure which
has already been extended by more than 10% of its originally approved
height or by the height of one additional antenna array.
B.
§ 195-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-6
1:490
TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL — A premises wherein material or
merchandise not manufactured, remanufactured or fabricated upon the
premises is transferred from one carrier to another or from one type of
carrier to another type of carrier for reshipment in the same or different lots
and that may provide accessory storage, loading and/or unloading facilities
in conjunction therewith and that may also perform the functions of a
transportation dispatch office. Shipping and receiving facilities operated as
an accessory use to the warehousing, manufacturing, remanufacturing or
fabricating of material or merchandise shall not be deemed to constitute a
transportation terminal.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
USE — The purpose of the activity for which the land or building thereon
is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.
The term "permitted use" or "use by right" or its equivalent shall not be
deemed to include any nonconforming use.
VARIANCE — A modification of the literal provisions of this chapter which
the Zoning Hearing Board is permitted to grant when strict enforcement of
said provisions would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique
to the individual property on which the variance is sought.
VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICES — Facilities for the sale and service of
vehicles; includes factory authorized car dealers, mobile home dealers,
self-propelled or towed recreational vehicle dealers, farm or construction
equipment dealers or any similar factory authorized dealers.
VETERINARY CLINIC — An establishment where domestic and agricultural
animals are examined and treated by veterinarians.[Added 6-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 601]
WAREHOUSE — An establishment involved in the storage and handling of
freight or merchandise, including but not limited to a distribution center
and wholesale distribution but does not include a wholesale business,
supply yard, transportation terminal, mini-storage facility or contractor's
yard.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601; amended 4-1-2015 by Ord. No.
654]
WATER-RELATED RECREATION — Profit or nonprofit developments and
related facilities, established by private, semipublic or governmental
entities for river oriented recreational functions and activities such as
marinas, water recreation facilities, food service, cruise and excursion
centers and related amenities.
WATER TREATMENT AND STORAGE FACILITY — A facility or location,
other than impoundment ponds related to oil and gas operations, for the
treatment and storage of nonpotable water, including but not limited to
brine and frac water that has been used and is being reused.[Added
5-2-2012 by Ord. No. 627]
WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.).[Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705]
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — An establishment engaged in selling
merchandise in large quantities to retailers, institutional, commercial or
§ 195-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-6
1:491
professional business customers or other wholesalers rather than to the
general public, or acting as a broker for such merchandise sales, but does
not include supply yards or warehousing.[Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No.
601]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as a
communications tower or any other support structure that could support
the placement or installation of a wireless communications facility if
approved by the Township.[Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705]
YARD — A space on the same lot with a principal structure, open,
unoccupied and unobstructed by structures, except as may be otherwise
provided in this chapter.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Board appointed by the Rostraver
Township Commissioners and assigned the duties of judging various
appeals and variance requests of persons aggrieved by the interpretation
of this chapter and further, assigned to consider the qualification of special
exceptions under the terms and conditions specified in this chapter.
ZONING MAP — The Official Zoning Map or Maps of Rostraver Township
which are part of this chapter, together with all amendments subsequently
adopted. 145
ZONING OFFICER — The individual authorized by the Rostraver Township
Commissioners to be the administrator of the day-to-day application of the
provisions contained in this chapter.
ZONING PERMIT — A statement signed by the Zoning Officer indicating
that the application for permission to construct or alter is approved and in
accordance with the requirements and terms of this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot,
unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts
and similar improvements, the depth of which is the least distance
between the front lot at the right-of-way line and the building line.
A.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot between
the rear of the principal building and the rear lot line, unoccupied
other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts and similar
improvements.
B.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the principal structure and the side lot
line, extending from the front yard or from the front line where no front
yard is required, to the rear yard. The width of the required side yard
is measured horizontally, at 90º with the side lot line, from the nearest
part of the principal building.
C.
145. Editor's Note: Said map or maps are on file in the Township offices.
§ 195-6 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-6
1:492
ARTICLE IV
Establishment of Districts
§ 195-7. Zoning districts. [Amended 3-22-1996 by Ord. No. 312;
8-5-1998 by Ord. No. 386; 8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 575; 2-4-2009 by
Ord. No. 584]
For the purpose of applying the provisions of this chapter, the Township of
Rostraver is hereby classified and divided into the following zoning districts:
A-1 Agricultural District
VR Village Residential District [Added 8-7-2019 by Ord. No. 715]
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Suburban Residential District
R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District
B-1 Special Business District
B-2 Retail Business District
MU Mixed Use District
I-1 Light Industrial District
I-2 Heavy Industrial District
I-3 Mixed Industrial - Services District
§ 195-8. Zoning Map.
The location of the boundaries of the established zoning districts are shown
on the Zoning Map adopted by the Board of Commissioners, on file in
the office of the Township Secretary. Said Zoning Map, together with
amendments and all explanatory matter thereon, shall be deemed to
accompany, be and is hereby made a part of this chapter.146
§ 195-9. Interpretation of district boundaries.
District boundaries shall be determined as follows:
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
center lines of streets, highways, street lines, highway right-of-way
lines or streams, such center lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot
lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
C. Where district boundaries approximately follow a railroad, such
boundaries shall be deemed to be located in the center of such railroad
right-of-way.
146. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 195-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-9
1:493
D. Where the boundary of a district follows a stream or other body of
water abutting another municipality, the boundary shall be deemed to
be the limits of jurisdiction of the Township unless otherwise indicated.
E. Where streets, property lines or other physical boundaries and
delineations are not applicable, boundaries shall be determined by the
scale shown on the original Zoning Map on file in the office of the
Township Secretary.
F. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Zoning Map or in other
circumstances not covered in this § 195-9, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall interpret the district boundary.
G. When a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate
ownership at the effective date of this chapter, the regulations which
apply to the use in a less restricted district shall extend over the portion
of the lot in the more restricted district a distance of not more than 100
feet beyond the district boundary line.
§ 195-9 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-9
1:494
ARTICLE V
General Provisions
§ 195-10. Use of property.
Following the effective date of this chapter, no building or land shall be
used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved
or altered unless in conformity with the regulations specified for the zoning
district in which it is located or applicable special regulations.
§ 195-11. Restrictions.
A. Following the effective date of this chapter, no building shall hereafter
be erected or altered: to exceed the height; to accommodate a greater
number of families; to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or to
have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards or side yards than are
specified herein for the zoning district in which such building is located.
B. No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for
another building.
C. A lot containing a slope of 3 to 1 (three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical) or greater for a distance of 50% of its total depth shall have a
minimum of 25% total increase in lot depth than is otherwise required
by this chapter prior to the granting of a zoning permit.
D. Roosters are only permitted in the Agricultural (A-1) district with a
minimum of five acres. [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-11
1:495

ARTICLE VI
A-1 Agricultural District
§ 195-12. Statement of purpose and use summary.
The A-1 Agricultural District is established to preserve productive
agricultural land resources and to provide sites for low-density residential
development that will be compatible with natural features, agricultural
pursuits and the perpetuating of the low-density use characteristics of the
district. Uses in this district include:
A. Use permitted by right.
(1) Agriculture (commercial and noncommercial).
(2) Greenhouse (noncommercial).
(3) Riding stable.
(4) Single-family detached dwelling.
(5) Specialized animal raising and care.
(6) Accessory uses.
(7) Essential services.
(8) Ambulance substation. [Added 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 387]
(9) Communications antennas that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,147 subject to the requirements
of § 195-81. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705148]
(10) (Reserved)
(11) Municipal or neighborhood recreation. [Added 7-3-2002 by Ord.
No. 462]
(12) No-impact home-based business. (See definition.) A zoning permit/
certificate is required for a no-impact home-based business, i.e.,
computer programming, data processing, typing and word
processing service, Internet companies, Web designers, and
telephone answering services and solicitation work. [Added
2-5-2003 by Ord. No. 482]
B. Conditional use.
(1) Day-care/family.
(2) Funeral home.
147. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
148. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(9), regarding essential
communications antennas, and Subsection A(10), regarding commercial communications
antennas, both added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341.
§ 195-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-12
1:497
(3) Hospital, sanitarium or care facility.
(4) Ambulance station. [Added 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 387]
(5) Agritourism. [Added 2-15-2017 by Ord. No. 682]
(6) Garden center/commercial greenhouse. [Added 2-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 682]
(7) Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act149 and communications
towers, subject to the requirements of § 195-81. [Added 9-5-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
C. Special exception.
(1) Cemetery, mausoleum.
(2) Conversion apartments.
(3) Home occupation.
(4) School bus shelter.
(5) (Reserved)150
(6) Group residential facility.
(7) Mine ventilation shaft.
(8) Mobile home park.
(9) Motel.
(10) 151Public facility. [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(11) Strip mining.
(12) Veterinary clinic.
(13) (Reserved)152
(14) (Reserved)
(15) Blasting. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(16) Church. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
149. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
150. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(5), which listed garden center/commercial
greenhouse as a special exception, was repealed 2-15-2017 by Ord. No. 682. See now
Subsection B(6).
151. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(10), Municipal recreation, was repealed 7-3-2002 by
Ord. No. 462. See now subsection A(11).
152. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(13), regarding essential communications towers, and
Subsection C(14), regarding commercial communications antennas, both added 5-7-1997
by Ord. No. 341, were repealed 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705.
§ 195-12 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-12
1:498
§ 195-13. Conditional use provisions.
The following conditional uses may be authorized by the Township
Commissioners pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
(17) (Reserved)153
(18) Commercial outdoor recreation. [Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No.
508]
(19) Model home. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
(20) Oil and gas drill site. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
D. Accessory use examples (not limited to the following):
(1) Agricultural structure, incidental to agriculture use.
(2) Garden shed/shelter.
(3) Home gardening.
(4) Private garage.
(5) Private swimming pool.
(6) Roadside stands.
(7) Other uses customary to principal use.
(8) Chicken coop and chicken run/pen. [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 667]
A. Day-care/family.
(1) All activities shall be conducted in a private detached single-family
residence.
(2) Activities shall be limited to functions normally associated with the
part-time tending of children on a for-hire or fee basis and shall not
include overnight lodging.
(3) Activities shall be conducted within a home atmosphere that is void
of any special facilities or appurtenances other than secure play
areas and/or apparatus that are deemed to be normal single-family
accessory uses within the immediate neighborhood.
(4) Safe off-street pickup and dropoff areas shall be provided at the
site.
(5) Outdoor play areas shall be fenced to control access to adjacent
properties and vehicular ways.
153. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(17), which listed a public library as a special
exception use, added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483, was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
§ 195-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-13
1:499
(6) No more than six children shall be provided day-care services at
any given time.
(7) The Chief or designated agent of the Township Fire Department
shall inspect the premises to evaluate emergency access, fire
hazards, evacuation provisions, structure layout, fire alarm devices
and emergency fire-fighting provisions. No occupancy permit shall
be issued prior to a satisfactory report and approval of such
authority.
(8) All licenses and certifications required by state and/or county
agencies shall be obtained as conditions precedent to granting of
an occupancy permit.
(9) Nothing in these provisions shall apply to non-hire child care and
child tending activities within the context of normal family and
acquaintance situations.
(10) Day-care facilities may be established in existing public buildings
such as churches and schools for more than six children, provided
that they meet all requirements of the Pennsylvania Departments of
Public Welfare and Labor and Industry for "centers." All approvals,
permits and licenses shall be obtained prior to granting of local
approvals.
B. Funeral home.
(1) Parking and cortege formation in conjunction with funeral home
operations shall be accommodated in off-street facilities.
(2) Ingress and egress of traffic shall be coordinated with local traffic
movements and volumes in a manner that will preclude safety
hazards.
(3) Advertisement and location signing shall be limited to one sign not
exceeding 12 square feet in area.
(4) All parking areas shall be landscaped subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter. [Added
6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
C. Hospitals. Hospitals shall be developed pursuant to the following
standards:
(1) The hospital site shall be a minimum of three contiguous acres.
(2) All structures shall be a minimum distance of 150 feet from
property boundaries.
(3) All facilities shall be served by a municipal water supply.
(4) All facilities shall be served by a municipal sanitary sewerage
system or a private sewage treatment facility approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP).
§ 195-13 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-13
1:500
(5) All development shall be based on a site plan subject to the review
of the Township Planning Agency and approval of the Township
Board of Commissioners. The site plan shall: [Amended 8-7-2002
by Ord. No. 468]
(a) Be prepared by a registered architect or registered engineer;
and
(b) Designate the location of all utility systems, storm drainage,
accessways, structures, landscaping, parking areas, adjacent
uses and related site features.
(6) All required county, state and federal requirements, permits and
licenses shall be obtained prior to granting of local approvals.
(7) All parking areas shall be landscaped subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter and shall provide
a screen planting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter. [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No.
601]
D. Ambulance station. [Added 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 387]
(1) The site shall be no more than one mile by public road from an
entrance to a major highway.
(2) The site shall be served by a municipal water supply and sanitary
sewage system.
(3) All required county, state and federal requirements, permits and
licenses shall be obtained prior to granting of conditional approval.
E. Agritourism. The intent of this conditional use is to allow for the
integrated approval of limited commercial activities as part of the
agricultural operation. [Added 2-15-2017 by Ord. No. 682]
(1) Minimum lot area shall be five contiguous acres.
(2) The total area proposed for all agritourism uses shall not exceed
50% of the total buildings for inside operations and 30% of the total
acreage for outdoor operations:
(a) Storage, retail or wholesale marketing or processing of
agricultural products into a value-added agricultural product is
a permitted use in a farming operation.
(b) Direct marketing of produce in a farm market.
(c) Cider mills and limited wineries, as defined and regulated by
the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, in a tasting room.
(d) Seasonal U-pick fruits and vegetables operations.
§ 195-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-13
1:501
(e) Seasonal outdoor mazes of agricultural origin such as straw
bales or corn.
(f) Food sales and processing.
(g) Value-added agricultural products or activities such as
educational tours of processing facilities, workshops or
livestock care and feeding subject to the standards and criteria
of Article XVIII, § 195-67.
(h) Playgrounds or equipment typical of a school playground, such
as slides or swings, excluding motorized vehicles or rides.
(i) Petting farms, animal displays and pony rides subject to the
standards and criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-67, with the
exception of § 195-67B(2).
(j) Wagon rides, sleigh and hayrides.
(k) Nature trails.
(l) Open-air or covered picnic area with restrooms.
(m) Educational classes, lectures, seminars.
(n) Historical agricultural exhibits.
(o) Kitchen facilities.
(p) Gift shops for the sale of agricultural products and
agriculturally related products.
(q) Overnight accommodations.
(r) Banquet and event facility.
(s) Small-scale entertainment, including, but not limited to, car
shows, art fairs or musical entertainment.
(t) Family-oriented animated barns, including, but not limited to,
fun houses or haunted houses.
(3) Parking: agritourism.
(a) Parking spaces required shall be:
[1] One space per each four seats.
[2] One space per each overnight room.
[3] One space per each 2,500 square feet of lot area being
used for agritourism outdoor operation.
(b) Parking may be either gravel or paved as determined by the
Board of Commissioners, based on applicant estimates for
seasonal parking and the intensity of the use. Overflow parking
§ 195-13 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-13
1:502
areas may be required by the Board of Commissioners to
accommodate seasonal peak demand. Overflow parking
facilities may be located on the grass.
(c) Required paved parking shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet
from all property lines and shall provide a screen planting,
subject to the standards and criteria of Article XVIII,
§ 195-75G, of this chapter.
(4) Signs for agritourism operations shall follow the requirements set
forth in this chapter, Article XVI, § 195-54A(1)(b).
(5) All agritourism operations shall be served by a municipal water
supply.
(6) All agritourism operations shall be served by a municipal sanitary
sewerage system or a private sewage treatment facility approved
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(PADEP).
(7) All development shall be based on a site plan subject to the review
of the Township Planning Agency and approval of the Township
Board of Commissioners. The site plan shall:
(a) Be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor or
registered engineer; and
(b) Designate the location of all utility systems, storm drainage,
accessways, structures, landscaping, parking areas, adjacent
uses and related site features.
(8) All required county, state and federal requirements, permits and
licenses shall be obtained prior to granting of local approvals.
(9) Agritourism operations that generate noise from loud speakers,
speakers, intercoms, and/or music shall be limited to the hours of
7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and remain under 70 dBA as measured at
the property line.
(10) Outdoor lighting shall follow the requirements set forth in this
chapter, Article XVIII, § 195-81.2.
(11) The governing body may grant a modification of the requirements
of one or more provisions of this section if the literal enforcement
will exact hardship, provided that such modification will not be
contrary to the public interest and the purpose and intent of this
chapter is observed.
(a) All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall
accompany and be a part of the application. The request shall
state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, the provision or
§ 195-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-13
1:503
provisions of this section involved and the minimum
modification necessary.
(b) The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning
Agency for advisory comments.
(c) The governing body and the Planning Agency shall keep a
written record of all action on all requests for modifications.
(12) The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions as part
of the conditional use per the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).
F. Garden center/commercial greenhouse.
(1) Permitted uses shall be limited to activities implicitly encompassed
in the definition for "garden center/commercial greenhouse" as
delineated in § 195-6 of this chapter, plus the propagation of plant
materials and storage of supplies and equipment associated with
said activities.
(2) No activities or substances shall be employed, stored or utilized in
a manner that will constitute a danger to the health, safety or
general welfare of site occupants, adjacent areas or the community
at large. Where reasonable concern is raised by Township officials
or other affected parties, the applicant for a conditional use shall be
required to certify that no such adverse conditions are present or
will be introduced.
(3) All site access shall be designed to provide for safe site ingress and
egress. Provisions for turning movements, vehicle stacking, site
distances and related factors shall be incorporated in the design of
accessways to provide for maximum safety conditions on adjacent
highways.
(4) All contemplated uses, including storage of supplies and
equipment, shall be conducted to ensure compatibility with the
character of perimeter areas and the community in general.
(5) Site buffering shall be provided as specified in Article XVIII,
§ 195-75, of this chapter.
(6) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2.
(7) Minimum lot area shall be five contiguous acres.
(8) Signs shall follow the requirements set forth in this chapter, Article
XVI, § 195-54.
(9) The governing body may grant a modification of the requirements
of one or more provisions of this section if the literal enforcement
will exact hardship, provided that such modification will not be
§ 195-13 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-13
1:504
§ 195-14. Special exception provisions.
The following special exceptions may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
contrary to the public interest and the purpose and intent of this
chapter is observed.
(a) All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall
accompany and be a part of the application. The request shall
state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, the provision or
provisions of this section involved and the minimum
modification necessary.
(b) The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning
Agency for advisory comments.
(c) The governing body and the Planning Agency shall keep a
written record of all action on all requests for modifications.
(10) The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions as part
of the conditional use per the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).
G. Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act154 and communications towers,
subject to the standards and criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-81, of this
chapter. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705]
A. Cemetery, mausoleum.
(1) Minimum site area shall be 25 contiguous acres.
(2) All structures shall be a minimum of 100 feet from property
boundaries.
(3) All vehicular points of access shall be subject to the approval of the
Township of Rostraver and the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(4) No crematory facilities shall be authorized in conjunction with the
establishment of a cemetery.
B. Conversion apartment.
(1) Each living unit shall contain a minimum of 400 square feet of gross
floor area.
(2) Each living unit shall contain not less than one private bedroom
and one additional habitable room in addition to separate and
private kitchen and bathroom facilities.
154. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-14
1:505
(3) The Chief of the Township Fire Department or designated agent
thereof shall inspect the premises to evaluate access, fire hazard
potential, fire escape provisions, structural layout and adequacy of
smoke and fire alarm devices.
(4) A maximum of three dwelling units shall be permitted in any single
structure.
(5) Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each living unit.
C. Home occupation.
(1) A home occupation that involves an activity or operation that is
construed as being capable of adversely influencing surrounding
residential uses through any of the following conditions shall not be
permitted:
(a) Changes the external appearance of the dwelling.
(b) Is visible from surrounding properties or the adjacent street.
(c) Generates traffic, parking or other congestion in excess of
normal levels in the neighborhood.
(d) Creates hazards to persons or property.
(e) Creates interference or a nuisance.
(f) Involves outside storage, display or operations.
(2) The accessory use shall be located in the principal dwelling or an
accessory building. The accessory use shall be limited to not more
than 30% of the ground floor area of the principal dwelling
structure, nor more than 50% of one accessory building. The total
area utilized for home occupation activities shall not exceed 400
square feet.
(3) Signs shall be limited to the provisions of this chapter for the
district in which the home occupation is located.
(4) Only members of the family residing on the premises shall be
engaged in such occupation, plus one non-family assistant may be
employed.
(5) Off-street parking requirements for home occupations shall be
provided on the immediate site and to the rear of the required front
yard setback line. A minimum of three off-street spaces shall be
provided in addition to normal residential requirements.
(6) Activities shall be limited to the following types and categories of
use:
(a) Professional, technical or business pursuits that involve only
office-related functions and practices.
§ 195-14 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-14
1:506
(b) Light handicrafts, sewing, photography and objects of art.
(c) Teaching instruction, limited to groups of no more than four
students at any one time.
(d) Small appliance and minor equipment repair and servicing,
including saws and private residential lawn equipment.
(e) Beautician, barber and similar services, limited to facilities for
service to no more than one client at any given time.
(f) (Reserved)155
(7) The following types and categories of use shall not be authorized as
home occupations:
(a) Automotive repair and painting.
(b) Restaurants and tearooms.
(c) Tourist homes.
(8) Any proposed home occupation that is not specifically cited as an
acceptable activity [Subsection C(6) of this section] or as not
acceptable [Subsection C(7) of this section] may the submitted to
the Zoning Hearing Board for consideration as a special exception.
D. School bus shelter.
(1) The shelter shall be erected a minimum of 10 feet from a street
right-of-way.
(2) Structures shall be sited in a manner that allows for minimum site
distances of 100 feet along all streets within 150 feet.
(3) All structures shall be designed and maintained in a manner that is
aesthetically compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
E. (Reserved)156
F. Group residential facility.
(1) The services shall be provided in a family environment as opposed
to an institutional structure or setting.
(2) The group residential facility shall not include business or
professional offices (other than incidental offices), business
activities, fraternal or social clubs, hospitals, clinics or other such
activities.
155. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(6)(f), Telephone answering services, was repealed
2-5-2003 by Ord. No. 482.
156. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, Garden center/commercial greenhouse, amended
4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508, was repealed 2-15-2017 by Ord. No. 682.
§ 195-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-14
1:507
(3) The number of residents in any single group residential facility
shall be limited to no more than eight persons, including client
residents, staff and family of staff. Clients shall be limited to no
more than six ambulatory persons.
(4) Supervision shall be provided by responsible and appropriately
qualified adults on duty, on the premises on a twenty-four-hour-aday
basis. A minimum of one such adult shall be in residence at the
facility and on duty at all times.
(5) Lot, yard and all other dimensional requirements of the zoning
district in which the facility is located shall be met. Each lot shall
include a minimum of 1,600 square feet of exterior open space
which is maintained and suitable for passive and/or active
recreational use.
(6) In addition to normal residential parking requirements, parking
facilities shall be provided at the rate of one off-street space for
every two resident clients.
(7) A group residential facility shall be located not less than 2,500
linear feet from any other group residential facility.
(8) As part of the special exception application process, the Chief of
the Township Fire Department or the designated agent thereof
shall inspect the premises to evaluate access, fire hazard potential,
fire escape provisions, structure layout and adequacy of smoke and
fire alarm devices.
(9) Sanitary facilities, consisting of a sink, water closet and tub or
shower, shall be provided at a ratio of one each for every four
inhabitants of the facility.
(10) A dining area shall be provided which is of sufficient size to
accommodate all clients and residents at a single seating.
(11) A minimum of 72 square feet of contiguous sleeping and personal
area shall be provided for each client. Said area, for purposes of
this requirement, shall be computed exclusive of common use areas
such as circulation areas, storage areas, dining areas, kitchen and
food preparation areas, game rooms and related recreation or
instruction areas and other common use spaces.
(12) A license or certification shall be obtained from the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, Department of Labor and Industry, Department of
Public Welfare, and any other state or county agency having
jurisdiction, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In
the event that an appropriate licensing or certifying agency does
not exist, the applicant shall demonstrate to the Zoning Hearing
Board that the proposal for establishing such a facility satisfies a
demonstrated need and will be conducted in a responsible manner
without detriment to surrounding properties.
§ 195-14 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-14
1:508
(13) The sponsor shall file annually with the Township Secretary and the
Zoning Officer information certifying that the facility continues to
adequately meet the conditions of the original approval. Changes of
sponsorship or of any conditions of original approval shall
constitute a new use, and the full conditional use procedure for
obtaining a new use shall be exercised.
(14) In considering a request for establishment of a group residential
facility under the provisions for special exceptions in the Township,
the Zoning Hearing Board may attach any reasonable conditions
and safeguards beyond those expressed in this chapter and other
applicable codes duly enacted.
(15) Documentation shall be submitted which certifies approval of
sewage disposal provisions by the Sewage Enforcement Officer and
certification shall be provided from competent sources that
adequate water supply is available.
G. Mine ventilating shafts.
(1) The application shall include a development and operation plan.
The following information and all other data deemed appropriate
and necessary to demonstrate that the intent and purposes of this
chapter will be achieved shall be included:
(a) A description of the character, timing and duration of the
proposed operation, including maps and plans showing the
location of the site, all access routes from public roads and
area and extent of the proposed activity.
(b) The location and identity of ownership of all structures and
land uses that will or may be affected by the proposed
operation.
(c) Plans for restoring and reclaiming all involved areas following
discontinuance of the underground mining.
(d) A site plan of the proposed facility showing all structures,
facilities, accessways, fencing and screening provisions.
(2) Every ventilating shaft, including all structures intended to supply
air or power to underground coal mines, shall be constructed and
landscaped in a manner appropriate to the district in which it is
located. The lot for ventilating shafts shall be not less than one acre, and ventilating
shafts shall not be located within 100 feet of any property line.
Open areas shall be covered with an appropriate vegetative
material and properly maintained. Suitable baffles shall be utilized
to protect the adjacent properties from noise of exhaust fans
consistent with the following requirements:
(a) Maximum noise level 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.: 75 dBA.
(b) Maximum noise level 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.: 70 dBA.
§ 195-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-14
1:509
(3) All uses shall be completely enclosed by a metal fence not less than
six feet high, with the top portion above the height of six feet
(above ground level) to be constructed of barbed wire or other
security material.
(4) For each use that is visible from any structure used for residential,
cultural, social, educational, recreational, religious or similar
purposes in an agricultural or residential district, there shall be a
buffer strip of land planted and maintained for screening purposes.
(5) The applicant shall have obtained from each appropriate state and
federal regulatory agency or authority a permit issued in
accordance with all applicable state and federal laws and
regulations for the proposed use. In the event such permits have
not been issued at the time the special exception is requested,
approval shall be conditioned on the granting of said state and
federal approvals.
H. Mobile home park. Mobile home parks shall be established and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of the Mobile Home Parks
Ordinance of Rostraver Township, Ordinance No. 109, adopted
December 1, 1969.157
I. Motels, hotels and tourist homes, subject to the following:
(1) These establishments may have related facilities such as
restaurants, auditorium spaces, swim club areas and similar
functions. All such related facilities available to other than
registered guests shall require additional parking facilities as
prescribed in this chapter for public assembly facilities.
(2) In addition to the regulations governing the A-1 Agricultural
District, establishments shall be subject to the following additional
safeguards and regulations:
(a) No operation shall be conducted on a lot of less than two acres.
(b) Establishments shall be serviced by and connected to a water
system regulated by the PUC and approved by PADEP and a
municipal sewage system or a sewage treatment system
approved by PADEP.
(c) Front, side and rear yards that are not permanently paved shall
be landscaped and maintained year around.
(d) Units or parts and amenities thereof shall be placed no closer
than 50 feet of any property line.
157. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development, Art. XVII, Mobile
Home Parks.
§ 195-14 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-14
1:510
(e) The required space between buildings shall not be less than 20
feet, and the space between the fronts or rears of the units
shall not be less than 80 feet.
(f) Signs and off-street parking and loading space shall be
developed in accordance with Articles XVI, XVII and XVIII of
this chapter. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(g) Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by a plan
showing as a minimum:
[1] The extent and area of the lot.
[2] All entrances, exits, driveways, roads and walkways.
[3] Locations of all structures and their use.
[4] Location and source of all utilities, including sewers,
water, electricity and natural gas.
(h) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2. [Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
J. (Reserved)158
K. Strip mining.
(1) A special exception shall be obtained for surface extraction (strip
mining). All applications submitted for consideration of the Zoning
Hearing Board shall include, at a minimum, the following
documentation and all other pertinent data deemed necessary to
process the applications: [Amended 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528;
6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
(a) A description of the character of the proposed operation, its
timing and proposed duration, together with duplicates of
maps and plans to be submitted to state and federal regulatory
agencies or authorities for the issuance of necessary permits.
(b) Identification of seams of coal, rock, ore, beds of sand and
gravel, strata of soil or other material to be removed in
connection with the proposed extractive operation.
(c) An analysis of the possible impact of extractive operations
upon groundwater supplies in all affected areas of the
Township and the measures that will be taken to guarantee
that any loss, diminution or pollution of water supply will be
corrected.
(d) The location and identity of ownership of all structures and
land uses that may be affected by the proposed operation.
158. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, Municipal recreation, was repealed 7-3-2002 by Ord.
No. 462.
§ 195-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-14
1:511
(e) Plans for the restoration or reclamation of all land affected by
the extractive operation.
(f) Receipt of a certification from each state or federal agency or
authority having enforcement jurisdiction for the issuance of
all necessary permits, licenses or grants of authority for the
installation and operation of the proposed extractive operation,
that the owner or operator seeking the special exception has
fully complied with all requirements.
(g) A description of plans for the transportation of materials,
products and equipment to be used, removed from or marketed
in connection with the proposed extractive operation,
including routes of travel, number and weight of vehicles to be
used and procedures which will be made to maintain and
repair roads that are targeted for use.
(h) A complete drainage and stormwater drainage plan, which
includes all storm sewers and appurtenances, along with an
approved best management practice method of disposal of all
stormwater collected, that will verify the peak
postdevelopment release rate of runoff, shall comply with the
stormwater management districts established in Chapter 164
of the Code of the Township of Rostraver, including but not
limited to any necessary agreements and/or bonding. [Added
4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483; amended 7-2-2003 by Ord. No.
495; 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
[1] If the stormwater drainage plan proved that a detention
structure is needed to maintain the peak postdevelopment
release runoff rate for that stormwater management
district in Chapter 164 of the Code of the Township of
Rostraver, agreements will need to be done to confirm that
the detention structure will remain intact after the project
is complete. The Township shall obtain a bond from the
responsible party to insure compliance with this provision.
[Amended 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
[2] In the event the Township determines that the public
interest is best served by mandating that the pond be filled
in at a reasonable time after land disturbance activities
have been substantially completed, the landowner/
developer shall complete the same at a time and in a
manner required by the Township. The Township shall
obtain a bond from the responsible party to insure
compliance with this provision.
(i) A copy of the water monitoring reports for all wells within a
one-thousand-foot radius of the project. [Added 4-2-2003 by
Ord. No. 483]
§ 195-14 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-14
1:512
(2) No top-of-slope or quarry wall shall be located closer than 100 feet
to any property or street line. The perimeter surrounding the area
of operation shall be fenced with a fence of minimum height of
eight feet where required by Township officials.
(3) No rock crusher, cement plant or other crushing, grinding,
polishing or cutting machinery or other physical or chemical
process for treating such products shall be permitted in the A-1
Agricultural District or other areas of the Township.
(4) The removal designated in the permit shall be begun within a sixtyday
period from the date of issuance of a permit or the permit shall
be revoked at the expiration of said period.
(5) The designated operator shall complete operation within a period
of time as designated in the permit.
(6) Prior to beginning operation, the designated operator shall deposit
a bond issued by a reputable bonding company in the amount
specified by the Township Commissioners for each and every mile
of Township road or portion thereof proposed to be traversed for
removing material from the site. The period designated for the
bond shall start with the issuance date of the permit.
(7) The backfilling operation, after all surface excavation is completed,
shall reestablish a satisfactory vegetative ground cover that will
deter soil erosion and eventually rebuild the soil. Legumes such as
Crownvetch and rye grass and/or plantings of evergreens or
deciduous trees shall be planted in accordance with Soil
Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
recommendations.
(8) The stripping and selling of topsoil and/or sod shall be permitted
only under the following conditions:
(a) When it is part of the construction or alteration of a building or
the grading incidental to such building activity.
(b) When it is in conjunction with normal lawn preparation and
maintenance.
(c) When it is in conjunction with the construction or alteration of
a street or utility improvement.
(d) In commercial sod farms or farming operations where such use
is permitted, provided that sound soil practices are observed.
(9) All land disturbance activities shall be conducted in such a way as
to minimize accelerated erosion and resulting sedimentation.
Measures to control erosion and sedimentation shall, at a
minimum, meet the standards of the Westmoreland County
Conservation District and the Pennsylvania Department of
Protection. The Township shall obtain a bond from the responsible
§ 195-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-14
1:513
party to insure compliance of all earthmoving activities. Said bond
with be calculated by the Township based on 110% of the cost of
erosion and sedimentation controls measures. [Added 4-2-2003
by Ord. No. 483; amended 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
L. Veterinary clinic.
(1) A site plan showing proposed development of the site, including
topography, building locations, parking, traffic circulation, usable
open space, landscaped area and utilities and drainage features.
(2) Preliminary building plans and elevations sufficient to indicate the
dimensions, general appearance, scale of all buildings.
(3) All design, architectural features, materials, landscaping and
associated treatments shall be developed and maintained
compatible with adjacent residential uses.
(4) Provisions for all vehicular ingress and egress in conjunction with
the site shall be approved by Township officials.
(5) On-site parking shall be provided for all anticipated residents, staff
personnel and patrons or visitors. The total estimated amount of
parking area required shall be documented by the developer and
subject to the recommendation of the Planning Agency. All parking
areas shall be landscaped subject to the standards and criteria of
Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter. [Amended 8-7-2002 by
Ord. No. 468; 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(6) Sign requirements applicable to the A-1 District shall apply (see
§ 195-54). [Amended 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
(7) On-site kennel facilities shall provide a screen planting, subject to
the standards and criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-75G, of this
chapter. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(8) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2. [Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
M. (Reserved)159
N. Blasting. [Amended 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(1) A special exception shall be obtained for excavating that requires
blasting. All applications submitted for consideration of the Zoning
Hearing Board shall include, at a minimum, the following
documentation and all other pertinent data deemed necessary to
process the applications:
159. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection M, Essential communications towers and commercial
communications towers, added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341, was repealed 9-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 705.
§ 195-14 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-14
1:514
(a) A description of the character of the proposed operation, its
timing and proposed duration, together with duplicates of
maps and plans to be submitted to state and federal regulatory
agencies or authorities for the issuance of necessary permits.
Including a complete copy of Module 16: Blasting Plan
submitted to PADEP.
(b) An analysis of the possible impact of the blasting upon
groundwater supplies in all affected areas of the Township and
the measures that will be taken to guarantee that any loss,
diminution or pollution of the water supply will be corrected.
(c) The location and identity of ownership of all structures and
land uses that may be affected by the proposed operation.
(d) Receipt of a certification from each state or federal agency or
authority having enforcement jurisdiction for the issuance of
all necessary permits, or licenses and that the owner or
operator seeking the special exception has fully complied with
all requirements.
(e) Blasting insurance shall also be required for blasting
contractors, and the reasonable limits of such insurance shall
be based on the nature and extent of the applicant’s proposed
operations.
(2) The proposed blasting shall begin within six months from the date
of issuance of a permit or the permit shall be revoked at the
expiration of said period.
(3) The designated operator shall complete operation within a period
of time as designated in the permit.
(4) Blasting may occur only between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 3:30
p.m., Monday through Friday, unless specifically authorized
otherwise.
O. Churches, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, § 195-14P,
of this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483; amended
6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
P. Public facility. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483; amended
4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508; 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(1) All parking areas shall be landscaped subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter.
(2) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2 if this chapter.
(3) A site plan showing the proposed development of the lot, including
building locations, adequate off-street parking, traffic circulation,
§ 195-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-14
1:515
easements and rights-of-way, landscaped area and drainage
features.
(4) Sign requirements shall be applicable to the zoning district in
which the facility is located.
(5) Ingress and egress for all site access and off-street parking shall be
situated in a manner to minimize interference with traffic
movements on adjacent street rights-of-way.
Q. Commercial outdoor recreation, subject to the standards and criteria of
Article XII, § 195-38E, of this chapter. [Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No.
508]
R. Model home. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
(1) A site plan showing the proposed development of the lot, including
building locations, adequate off-street parking, traffic circulation,
easements and right-of-ways.
(2) Sign and lighting requirements shall be applicable to the zoning
district in which the facility is located.
(3) Lot, yard and all other dimensional requirements shall be
applicable to the zoning district in which the facility is located for a
dwelling.
(4) A zoning permit shall be issued annually as long as the
development is being constructed.
(5) There shall be no on-street parking permitted.
S. Oil and gas drill site. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
(1) A special exception shall be obtained for all oil and gas drill sites.
All applications submitted for consideration of the Zoning Hearing
Board shall include, at a minimum, the following documentation
and all other pertinent data deemed necessary to process the
application:
(a) Copy of the notification sent to the surface owner of the drill
site.
(b) A written description of the character of the proposed
operation, its proposed timing and duration, together with
duplicates of maps and plans to submitted to state and federal
regulatory agencies or authorities for the issuance of
necessary permits.
(c) A calendar concerning well site development and drilling
activities that indicates the following:
[1] Site preparation beginnings and endings.
§ 195-14 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-14
1:516
[2] Anticipated drilling activity beginnings and endings.
[3] Anticipated completion (perforating) work to begin and
end.
[4] Anticipated stimulation (fracturing) work to begin and
end.
[5] Anticipated production work to begin and end.
[6] Anticipated discontinued use date.
(d) A narrative including the number of wells, including DEP
permit number(s) for any or all wells if available at the time of
submittal and provided when issued later and the location,
number, and description of equipment and structures to the
extent known. The narrative shall also include an overview of
the project as it relates to natural gas compressor stations or
natural gas processing plants.
(e) The applicant shall provide a plan for the transmission of gas
from the site. The plan will identify but not be limited to
gathering lines, compressors and other mid- and downstream
facilities located within the Township and extending 800 feet
beyond the Township boundary.
(f) The applicant must provide the Township with an anticipated
list and description of all types of equipment weighing in
excess of 10 tons and identification of the proposed routing of
vehicles on Township roads. The proposed hauling routes must
be designed to minimize the impact on collector, connector and
local streets within the Township. The Township reserves the
right to designate required truck hauling routes throughout
the Township.
[1] Vehicular access to a site solely via a local residential
street is prohibited.
[2] Vehicular access to a site via a collector street is
permitted.
(g) The applicant shall provide the Township with the name of the
person supervising the drilling operation and a phone number
where such person can be reached 24 hours a day for each day
of the week. Annually, or upon any change of relevant
circumstances, the applicant shall update such information
and provide it to the Township.
(h) The applicant shall provide the Township with a copy of the
Preparedness Prevention and Contingency Plan (PPC), as
required by and filed with the PA DEP, and a copy of the SARA
Title III Tier II Chemical Inventory submitted to PENNSAFE.
§ 195-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-14
1:517
(i) The applicant shall provide an outline of training program for
Township's first responders.
(j) A survey of the property showing the drill site(s) with all
permanent facilities (tanks or other surface installations) with
locations and distances to property lines, the approximate
number of acres to be disturbed for development, and
identifying the floodway of the property(ies) as identified in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) prepared and approved by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
(k) A complete drainage and stormwater drainage plan, which
includes all storm sewers and appurtenances, along with an
approved best management practice method of disposal of all
stormwater collected, that will verify the peak
postdevelopment release rate of runoff, shall comply with the
stormwater management districts established in Chapter 164
of the Code of the Township of Rostraver, including but not
limited to any necessary agreements and/or bonding.
[1] If the stormwater drainage plan proved that a detention
structure is needed to maintain the peak postdevelopment
release runoff rate for that stormwater management
district in Chapter 164 of the Code of the Township of
Rostraver, agreements will need to be done to confirm that
the detention structure will remain intact after the project
is complete. The Township shall obtain a bond from the
responsible party to insure compliance with this provision.
[2] In the event the Township determines that the public
interest is best served by mandating that the pond be filled
in at a reasonable time after land disturbance activities
have been substantially completed, the landowner/
developer shall complete the same at a time and in a
manner required by the Township. The Township shall
obtain a bond from the responsible party to insure
compliance with this provision.
(l) Information on lighting at the drill site and wellhead or any
other area being developed.
(m) Information on anticipated noise levels at drill site.
(n) The applicant shall provide plans for the restoration or
reclamation of all land affected by the operation.
(2) The oil and gas drill sites shall only be permitted to occur on
property with a minimum of 10 contiguous acres or larger. Multiple
property owners can combine adjoining parcels to achieve the
minimum 10 acres required. A well survey plat showing the
planned surface location of the wells and a list of the property
§ 195-14 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-14
1:518
owners in the well unit, and acreage participation by each
landowner.
(3) Water storage facilities and staging facilities shall be considered an
accessory use to property only where an oil and gas drill site is to
be located.
(4) Access directly to state roads shall require Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT) highway occupancy
permit (HOP) approval, and access directly to county roads shall
require HOP approval. Prior to initiating any work at a drill site, the
Township shall be provided a copy of the HOP prior to commencing
site development to access the site and for overweight vehicles.
(5) In compliance with § 187-16, the applicant of the oil or gas well and
any or all subcontractors shall execute an excess maintenance
agreement with the Township for a permit and post a bond at the
paved highway rate in favor of the Township in a form acceptable to
the Township prior to beginning any work on a drill site. The bond
is to guarantee restoration of Township roads damaged as a result
of hauling associated with the drilling operation.
(6) In accordance with the appropriate Township ordinance, as
amended, driveways accessing the drill site shall be paved with an
impervious material from the paved public street for a distance of
50 feet into the drill site. The impervious material shall be in place
prior to the commencement of the drilling operation.
(7) All drill site pads, and on-site accessory water storage facilities
shall be secured with a fence, in compliance with § 195-72, with a
secured gate as follows:
(a) The fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height, chain link
with green fabric mesh.
(b) The fencing shall be in place throughout the drill operation and
until the water storage facility is removed or filled in.
(c) The chain link fence shall have a minimum thickness of 11
gauge.
(d) Warning signs shall be installed at one-hundred-foot spacing to
provide notice of the potential dangers.
(e) The drill site assigned address shall be clearly visible on the
access gate for emergency 911 purposes.
(f) A sign shall include the well name and number, name of the
operator and the telephone number for a person responsible
who may be contacted in case of emergency, pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Oil and Gas Act (PA Act 223).160
§ 195-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-14
1:519
(g) For each entrance gate, the operator shall provide the
Township with a lock box and key to access the well site in case
of emergency. The location of said gate(s) shall be to the
satisfaction of the Township.
(8) Lighting. No drill site lighting used for the drilling operation shall
be positioned or directed in such a manner so that it shines directly
upon public roads, adjacent property or property in the general
vicinity of the drill site. Site lighting shall be directed downward
and shielded so as to avoid glare on public roads and adjacent
properties. All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance
with § 195-81.2.
(9) Dust, vibration, odors. All drilling operations shall be conducted in
such a manner to minimize dust, vibration or noxious odors and
shall be in compliance with § 195-74. All equipment used shall be
constructed and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor or other
harmful effects are minimized by the operations carried on at the
drill site to avoid injury to persons living in the vicinity and are in
compliance with § 195-74.
(10) Noise. The Township may require acoustical blankets, sound walls,
mufflers or other alternative methods to ensure compliance with
the performance standards relating to noise and as more
specifically set forth § 195-74 with respect to the location of a
proposed drill site if such methods are required in order to ensure
such compliance. [Amended 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 706]
As part of the special exception application, and prior to
construction, the operator shall establish the ambient or
background noise level baseline. The baseline shall be established
hourly over a seventy-two-hour period with at least one twentyfour-
hour reading on a Saturday or Sunday. A noise consultant/
engineer mutually agreed upon by the Township and owner/
operator will be responsible for determining the residual
background noise level baseline. The operator and Township will
mutually agree to the location of the sampling equipment. The
operator shall be responsible for all costs associated with the
noise consultant/engineer. The results shall be provided to the
Township.
(a) The noise generated during construction, drilling, hydraulic
fracturing, production, compression and rework activities
when measured at the property line of adjoining properties or
within 100 feet of any occupied building on any affected
property shall not exceed the greater of the performance
standards for noise set forth in § 195-74C(2) of the Zoning
160. Editor's Note: The Oil and Gas Act was repealed by 2012, Feb. 14, P.L. 87, No. 13, § 3. See
now Oil and Gas, 58 Pa.C.S.A. § 3201 et seq.
§ 195-14 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-14
1:520
Ordinance or the ambient or background noise level
established above.
(b) Adjustments to noise limit. Adjustments to the noise limit
described in Subsection S(10)(b)[1] shall be permitted if
requested at the time of special exception hearing in
accordance with the following only during the daytime 7:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m., per § 195-74:
Permitted Increase
(dBA)
Duration of Increase
(minutes)*
5 15
10 5
15 1
* Cumulative minutes during one hour
The permitted increase shall be calculated using the greater
of the performance standards set forth in § 195-74C or the
ambient or background noise level established above. The
operator shall provide a computer-generated, site-specific,
noise-impact model based on the topography, vegetation and
structures of the proposed drill site within a 5,000-foot radius
from the outer boundary of the proposed oil and gas vertical
bore locations. The simulation model shall include both the
unabated noise analysis as well as several noise analyses,
including the effects of noise abatement plans.
(c) If a complaint that the operator is violating the foregoing noise
limits is received by the Township from a Township property
owner/resident who owns/occupies property impacted by noise
generated during construction, drilling, or hydraulic fracturing
activities, the Township Zoning Officer shall determine initially
whether the complaint has merit. If the complaint has merit,
the Township Zoning Officer shall notify the operator and
provide the operator with a forty-eight-hour period in which to
cure. Following the expiration of such forty-eight-hour cure
period, the Township Zoning Officer shall conduct an
inspection to determine whether the operator has established
compliance. If the Township Zoning Officer determines the
operator remains in violation of the noise limit, the operator
shall, within 24 hours following receipt of notification, begin
continuous sound monitoring for a period of 48 hours at the
property line to an occupied structure. A noise consultant/
engineer mutually agreed upon by the Township and owner/
operator shall conduct hourly testing and report the findings to
the Township. The operator shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the noise consultant/engineer. The applicant
shall report the findings to the Township and shall mitigate the
§ 195-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-14
1:521
problem to the allowable level if the noise level exceeds the
allowable limits immediately after the 48 hours of sound
monitoring. If after the 48 hours of sound monitoring
determines the operator remains in violation of the noise limit,
the operation shall cease and desist until such time the noise
levels come into compliance with the allowable noise limits
established.
(11) Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor used
in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any
production equipment or used in development shall not be
discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with i) an exhaust
muffler; or ii) an exhaust box. The exhaust muffler or exhaust box
shall be constructed of noncombustible materials designed and
installed to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations. Moreover, all
such equipment with an exhaust muffler or exhaust box shall be
maintained in good operating condition according to
manufacturer's specifications.
(12) All permanent facilities shall be painted an earth tone color to
blend in with the surrounding area. The Township may require
fencing and or landscaping to buffer the facilities from adjacent
properties in accordance with § 195-75G.
(13) Topsoil must remain on site so it can be put back during the
restoration of the site.
(14) All grading and filling shall be designed in compliance with
§ 195-70.
(15) The public street entrance and the property on which a drill site is
located shall at all times be kept free of mud, debris, trash or other
waste materials.
(16) A zoning permit shall not be issued for any well to be drilled within
any floodway identified in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
prepared and approved by Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA). Oil and gas activities in the one-hundred-year
floodplain are discouraged but may be permitted if the following
provisions are met:
(a) Earthmoving activities that do not materially change the
contour of the land are permitted for the purpose of pipeline
installation.
(b) There is compliance with Chapter 97 of the Code of the
Township of Rostraver.
(c) If no other area provides access to the oil or gas deposit, then
oil and gas drilling may be permitted in the floodplain. The
applicant must provide conclusive documentation that no other
§ 195-14 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-14
1:522
location allows access to the oil or gas deposits other than a
location within the floodplain.
(d) No storage of chemicals shall be permitted within the
floodplain.
(e) Only necessary and needed structures will be permitted within
the floodplain.
(f) All structures within the flood zone shall be designed to
withstand a one-hundred-year storm event.
(g) An engineer registered in Pennsylvania and qualified to
present such documentation that structures will not cause
additional flooding on adjacent, upstream and/or downstream
properties shall provide such documentation to the Township.
(h) A closed loop system for drill cutting is preferred within the
one-hundred-year flood fringe.
(17) Height The height of the drilling rig and facilities on site, such as
drying tanks, etc., are exempt from the height limits found in this
chapter. Permanent structures whether principal or accessory must
comply with the maximum height regulation per subsequent zoning
district and shall be in compliance with § 195-73.
(18) Setbacks. The well bore (centered on the derrick drilling rig) shall
be located a minimum setback distance, 200 feet from any existing
structure or water well and 150 feet from any body of water and
wetland larger than one acre as listed in the Pennsylvania Oil and
Gas Act (PA Act 223).161
(19) Signal interference. The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to
avoid and/or mitigate any disruption or loss of radio, telephone,
cellular phone, television or similar signals, and shall mitigate any
harm caused by the oil and gas use in a timely manner.
(20) The applicant shall not clear brush or trees by way of burning, and
shall chip, grind or remove all tree stumps from properties it clears
for development purposes However, the applicant shall be
permitted to burn any brush, trees, or stumps that have been
removed from the ground and collected into a pile or piles on the
properties while the applicant is engaging in development. The
applicant shall notify the Township Emergency Management
Coordinator prior to burning.
(21) Prior to drilling, the applicant shall provide the Township's First
Responders, through its Emergency Management Coordinator and
Zoning Officer, a copy of its Preparedness, Prevention and
161. Editor's Note: The Oil and Gas Act was repealed by 2012, Feb. 14, P.L. 87, No. 13, § 3. See
now Oil and Gas, 58 Pa.C.S.A. § 3201 et seq.
§ 195-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-14
1:523
Contingency (PPC) Plan. Included with the PPC Plan shall be the
SARA Title III Tier II Chemical Inventory submitted to PENNSAFE.
(a) Upon review of the PPC Plan, a meeting between all parties
will be held to discuss emergency and first response
procedures; and determine which first response personnel
have secured adequate training (five hours minimum per year)
to deal with any potential dangerous conditions that may result
due to development activities. The applicant shall arrange a
visit to site by Township emergency service providers for the
purpose of orientation to the location of equipment and
materials.
(b) Should first response training become necessary, prior to
drilling, the applicant will make available an appropriate
training program for first responders This training program
will be at the sole expense of the applicant, and shall be made
available annually for the duration of the drilling activities in
the Township, and shall be in coordination with Westmoreland
County Public Safety.
(c) The cost and expense of the orientation and training shall be
sole responsibility of the applicant. The applicant shall not be
required to hold more than one site orientation and training
course annually under this subsection.
(22) The applicant shall maintain at the property and on file with the
Township Emergency Management Coordinator a current list and
the material safety data sheets (MSDS) for all hazardous chemicals
used in the drilling operations (including but not limited to type of
additives, polymers, salts, surfactants and solvents) and in any
hydraulic fracturing operations.
(23) Junk, refuse, trash or abandoned material shall not be disposed of
on site. All refuse stored on site for final off-site disposal shall be
located within a building, covered dumpster or other enclosure
designed and constructed for the proper storage of such material.
This does not include drill cuttings.
(24) Prior to beginning any work on a drill site (excluding staking,
surveying, and matters related thereto), the applicant shall submit
to the Township a copy of all permits issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP). All required
permits shall be maintained throughout the duration of the drilling
operation. Any suspension or revocation of permits by PA DEP shall
be reported to the Township and shall constitute a violation of
Township zoning approval and shall constitute an automatic
revocation of the zoning/development permit.
(25) The facility and/or its operation shall comply with all applicable
permits and requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the United States Environmental
§ 195-14 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-14
1:524
§ 195-15. Lot, area and dimensional requirements.
The following requirements shall apply in A-1 Agricultural Districts:
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Use:
Agriculture
[Amended
10-7-1998 by Ord.
No. 388]
5 acres 150 50 25 25 NA NA
Greenhouse
[Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
1 acre 150 50 25 25 45 40%
Protection Agency, and any other governmental authority having
jurisdiction over its operations and with all federal, state and local
laws, ordinance and regulations promulgated to protect the
environment or otherwise relating to environmental matters.
(26) All applicants for a special exception shall reimburse Rostraver
Township for necessary and reasonable professional consultant
fees incurred by the Township related to application for activities
authorized by this subsection. Additionally, all applicants shall
reimburse the Township for consulting fees and cost incurred in
enforcing this subsection upon a finding of violation by a District
Justice.
(27) The applicant shall grant the right of inspection to the Township for
all phases of construction and during drilling production and in the
reclamation, both in relation to the enforcement of this subsection
and pursuant to the Township of Rostraver's enforcement rights
under 58 P.S. § 601.504(b) of Pennsylvania's Oil and Gas Act162 and
any other relevant Pennsylvania statute.
(28) Federal or state law or regulation preempts ordinance
requirements that conflict with federal or state statute or
regulation. Township acknowledges that it is preempted from
regulating the operational methods of the oil and gas industry and
may only regulate land uses.
162. Editor's Note: 58 P.S. § 601.504(b) was repealed by 2012, Feb. 14, P.L. 87, No. 13, § 3. See
now 58 Pa.C.S.A. § 3254 et seq.
§ 195-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-15
1:525
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Municipal or
neighborhood
recreation
[Added 7-3-2002
by Ord. No. 462;
amended 9-1-2010
by Ord. No. 606]
20,000
square
feet
100 50 25 25 45 NA
Riding stable
[Amended
10-7-1998 by Ord.
No. 388; 9-1-2010
by Ord. No. 606]
5 acres 150 50 25 25 45 NA
Single-family
dwelling [Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
20,000#
square
feet
100 25 15 15 45 40%
Special animal
raising [Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
5 acres 150 50 25 25 45 NA
Communications
antennas that fall
under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act163
[Added 2-23-2000
by Ord. No. 421;
amended 9-5-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-81
Chicken coop
[Added 1-20-2016
by Ord. No. 667]
1 acre** Same as 75 25 25 NA NA
Chicken run/pen
[Added 1-20-2016
by Ord. No. 667;
amended 5-4-2016
by Ord. No. 675]
Standard for principal use shall apply
163. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-15 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-15
1:526
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Conditional Use:
Day-care/family * * * * * * *
Funeral home
[Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
32,000
square
feet
150 50 25 15 45 35%
Hospital facility 3 acres 200 150 150 150 45 NA
Ambulance station
[Amended
9-8-1998 by Ord.
No. 387; 9-1-2010
by Ord. No. 606]
1 acre 150 50 25 15 45 35%
Agritourism [Added
2-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 682]
5 acres 150 50 25 25 NA NA
Garden center/
commercial
greenhouse [Added
2-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 682]
5 acres 150 50 25 25 NA NA
Communications
antennas that do not
fall under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act164
and communications
towers
Subject to the requirements of § 195-81
Special Exception:165, 166, 167
164. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
165. Editor's Note: The entry for municipal recreation was repealed 7-3-2002 by Ord. No. 462.
166. Editor’s Note: The entry for garden center, amended 9-1-2010 by Ord. No. 606, was
repealed 2-15-2017 by Ord. No. 682.
167. Editor’s Note: The entry for essential or commercial communications tower, added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421, was repealed.
§ 195-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-15
1:527
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Cemetery,
mausoleum
[Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
25 acres NA 100 100 100 45 NA
Conversion
apartment
* * * * * * *
Home occupation
[Amended
6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 600]
* * * * * * *
School bus shelter Subject to requirements of § 195-14D
Group residential * * * * * * *
Mine ventilation
shaft [Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
1 acre 50 100 100 100 45 20%
Mobile home park Subject to requirements of Chapter 175, Article XVII
Motel 2 acres 200 50 50 50 45 40%
Strip mining Subject to requirements of § 195-14K
Veterinary clinic
[Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
1 acre 150 50 25 25 45 40%
Blasting [Added
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-14N
Church [Added
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483; amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
1 acre 150 50 25 25 45 40%
§ 195-15 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-15
1:528
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Public facility
[Added 4-2-2003
by Ord. No. 483;
amended 6-2-2010
by Ord. No. 601;
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
1 acre 50 50 25 25 45 40%
Outdoor recreation
[Added 4-7-2004
by Ord. No. 508;
amended 9-1-2010
by Ord. No. 606]
32,000 150 50 30 30 45 75%
Model home [Added
5-4-2005 by Ord.
No. 528]
* * * * * * *
Gas and oil drill site
[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-14S
NOTES:
NA Not applicable
# With public or private central sewer facilities approved by PADEP. In the absence of central
sewer facilities, the required minimum lot area shall be 40,000 square feet for each dwelling
unit.
* Standard for principal use shall apply
** No roosters permitted on less than five acres [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
§ 195-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-15
1:529

ARTICLE VII
The VR Village Residential District
[Added 8-7-2019 by Ord. No. 715168]
§ 195-16. Statement of purpose and use summary.
The VR Village Residential District derives its purpose and authority from
Article VII-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, including
the purposes set forth in that chapter, which are incorporated herein by
reference. The VR Village Residential District is established under this
authority to encourage urban infill and outgrowth or extension of the
existing development together with activities that are compatible and
normally associated in the Township's historic villages as empowered by §
702-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
A. Use permitted by right.
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Duplex dwelling.
(3) Ambulance station.
(4) Church.
(5) Communications antennas that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,169 subject to the requirements
of § 195-81.
(6) Educational institution, commercial and noncommercial.
(7) Essential services.
(8) Fire station.
(9) Group residential facility.
(10) Municipal or neighborhood recreation.
(11) Public facility.
(12) Private garage under 999 square feet.
B. Conditional use.
(1) Club/private club/lodge.
(2) Commercial recreation.
168. Editor's Note: Former Art. VII, A-2 Rural Residential District, as amended, was repealed
8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 575.
169. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-16
1:531
§ 195-17. Conditional use provisions.
The following conditional uses may be authorized by the Township
Commissioners pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
(3) Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,170 subject to the requirements
of § 195-81.
(4) Conversion apartments.
(5) Eating and drinking establishments.
(6) Neighborhood commercial.
(7) Personal and business services.
(8) Pet grooming.
(9) Office.
(10) Tourist home.
(11)Water-related recreation.
C. Special exception.
(1) Blasting.
(2) Commercial parking lot.
(3) Condominium.
(4) Day care (all types).
(5) Home occupation.
(6) School bus shelter.
(7) Veterinary clinic.
D. Accessory use.
(1) Uses customary to principal use.
(2) Garden shelter.
(3) Home gardening.
(4) No-impact home-based business.
(5) Private garage over 1,000 square feet.
(6) Private swimming pool.
170. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-16 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-17
1:532
A. Club/private club/lodge.
(1) The developer shall present a sketch plan that includes elevations
or architectural perspectives and illustrates that the proposed
building is architecturally compatible with the village
neighborhood which is reviewed by the Township Planning Agency.
(a) Approval of a conditional use sketch plan does not constitute a
land development approval under the Rostraver Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 175, or
the Rostraver Township Stormwater Management Ordinance,
Chapter 164.
(b) At the time of land development submission, the developer
shall meet all applicable standards, including but not limited to
the requirements for stormwater management and/or a traffic
impact study.
(2) There shall be no outdoor display of goods or material associated
with the sales service. All use activities shall be confined to the
indoors unless specifically approved by conditional use.
(3) Lighting shall conform with § 195-81.2 of this chapter.
(4) The Commissioners may limit the hours of operation as a
reasonable additional condition and safeguard.
(5) Signage shall conform with § 195-54 of this chapter.
(6) The developer shall show that parking requirements can be met on
lot or through sufficient on-street parking within 400 feet of the
proposed development. One parking space must be provided for
every four patron seats.
(7) The club shall provide the Township with its articles of
incorporation, purpose, and tax status as a fraternal organization
or nonprofit.
(8) A detailed plan that discusses any proposed distribution of alcohol
upon the premises and demonstrates compliance with all
commonwealth regulations for the sale of alcohol.
B. Commercial recreation.
(1) The developer shall present a sketch plan that includes elevations
or architectural perspectives and illustrates that the proposed
building is architecturally compatible with the village
neighborhood which is reviewed by the Township Planning Agency.
(a) Approval of a conditional use sketch plan does not constitute a
land development approval under the Rostraver Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 175, or
§ 195-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-17
1:533
the Rostraver Township Stormwater Management Ordinance,
Chapter 164.
(b) At the time of land development submission, the developer
shall meet all applicable standards, including but not limited to
the requirements for stormwater management and/or a traffic
impact study.
(2) No more than 4,000 square feet of retail, service and/or sales space
shall be permitted for each commercial recreation establishment.
(3) All storage and display of stock, equipment, refuse and other
materials shall be within enclosed main or accessory structures.
(4) Fencing may be deemed necessary for purposes of safety and
security.
(5) Parking requirements must be met per Article XVII, Parking and
Loading Requirements, of this chapter.
(6) Lighting shall conform with § 195-81.2 of this chapter.
(7) Signage shall conform with § 195-54 of this chapter.
(8) The Commissioners may limit the hours of operation as a
reasonable additional condition and safeguard.
C. Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,171 subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-81, of this chapter.
D. Conversion apartments.
(1) The purpose of this conditional use is to reasonably regulate the
conversion of large, older single-family dwellings to multiple-family
dwellings to meet the affordable housing needs of persons age 55
and older. The conversion must meet the following standards:
(a) The developer shall certify that tenancy is limited to persons
age 55 or older as defined and interpreted pursuant to the Fair
Housing Act and Housing for Older Persons Act.
(b) All applicable standards of § 195-14B of this chapter shall be
met.
E. Eating and drinking establishments.
(1) The developer shall present a sketch plan that includes elevations
or architectural perspectives and illustrates that the proposed
building is architecturally compatible with the village
neighborhood which is reviewed by the Township Planning Agency.
171. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-17 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-17
1:534
(a) Approval of a conditional use sketch plan does not constitute a
land development approval under the Rostraver Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 175, or
the Rostraver Township Stormwater Management Ordinance,
Chapter 164.
(b) At the time of land development submission, the developer
shall meet all applicable standards, including but not limited to
the requirements for stormwater management and/or a traffic
impact study.
(2) Hours of operation shall be limited from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(3) Lighting shall conform with § 195-81.2 of this chapter.
(4) Signage shall conform with § 195-54 of this chapter.
(5) Drive-through windows shall not be permitted.
(6) No eating and drinking establishment shall exceed 4,000 square
feet of gross floor area.
(7) Parking requirements must be met per Article XVII, Parking and
Loading Requirements, of this chapter.
F. Neighborhood commercial.
(1) The developer shall present a sketch plan that includes elevations
or architectural perspectives and illustrates that the proposed
building is architecturally compatible with the village
neighborhood which is reviewed by the Township Planning Agency.
(a) Approval of a conditional use sketch plan does not constitute a
land development approval under the Rostraver Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 175, or
the Rostraver Township Stormwater Management Ordinance,
Chapter 164.
(b) At the time of land development submission, the developer
shall meet all applicable standards, including but not limited to
the requirements for stormwater management and/or a traffic
impact study.
(2) There shall be no outdoor display of goods or material associated
with the sales service.
(3) Lighting shall conform with § 195-81.2 of this chapter.
(4) The Commissioners may limit the hours of operation as a
reasonable additional condition and safeguard.
(5) The developer shall show that parking requirements can be met on
lot or through sufficient on-street parking within 400 feet of the
§ 195-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-17
1:535
proposed development. Two parking spaces must be provided for
each commercial business.
(6) No newly constructed building shall be greater that 5,000 square
feet of gross floor area.
(7) Signage shall conform with § 195-54 of this chapter.
G. Personal and business services, subject to the standards and criteria of
Article VII, § 195-17F, of this chapter.
H. Pet grooming.
(1) The developer shall present a sketch plan that includes elevations
or architectural perspectives and illustrates that the proposed
building is architecturally compatible with the village
neighborhood which is reviewed by the Township Planning Agency.
(a) Approval of a conditional use sketch plan does not constitute a
land development approval under the Rostraver Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 175, or
the Rostraver Township Stormwater Management Ordinance,
Chapter 164.
(b) At the time of land development submission, the developer
shall meet all applicable standards, including but not limited to
the requirements for stormwater management and/or a traffic
impact study.
(2) Fencing may be deemed necessary by the Commissioners for
purposes of safety or security.
(3) Operational hours shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m.
(4) There shall be no pets kept on the premises overnight.
(5) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with §
195-81.2.
(6) Signage shall conform with § 195-54 of this chapter.
I. Office, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VII, § 195-17F, of
this chapter.
J. Tourist home.
(1) The developer shall present a sketch plan that includes elevations
or architectural perspectives and illustrates that the proposed
building is architecturally compatible with the village
neighborhood which is reviewed by the Township Planning Agency.
(a) Approval of a conditional use sketch plan does not constitute a
land development approval under the Rostraver Township
§ 195-17 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-17
1:536
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 175, or
the Rostraver Township Stormwater Management Ordinance,
Chapter 164.
(b) At the time of land development submission, the developer
shall meet all applicable standards, including but not limited to
the requirements for stormwater management and/or a traffic
impact study.
(2) There shall be no modifications to the external appearance of the
building (except fire escapes) which would alter its residential
character. No expansions or alterations shall be permitted which
would increase the number of rooms available for lease from that
within the existing dwelling.
(3) No event or gathering shall be permitted which involves outdoor
amplified entertainment though use of any speaker system or
sound amplification device.
(4) There shall be no more than four guest rooms. No more than two
transient guests (as defined) are permitted for each guest room,
unless specifically permitted through a UCC occupancy permit. The
intent of this use is to encourage small-scale lodging in villages
where tourism is encouraged.
(5) Lighting shall conform with § 195-81.2 of this chapter.
(6) The developer shall show that parking requirements can be met on
lot or through sufficient on-street parking within 400 feet of the
proposed development. One parking space must be provided for
each guest room.
(7) Signage shall conform with § 195-54 of this chapter.
K. Water-related recreation.
(1) The use of land and structures established under this conditional
use category shall be limited to riparian river sites.
(2) Land uses shall be limited to the following public and private
activities:
(a) Boat marinas.
(b) Cruise and excursion centers for river-oriented recreation.
(c) Bait and fishing supplies.
(3) The developer shall present a sketch plan that includes elevations
or architectural perspectives and illustrates that the proposed
building is architecturally compatible with the village
neighborhood which is reviewed by the Township Planning Agency.
§ 195-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-17
1:537
§ 195-18. Special exception provisions.
(a) Approval of a conditional use sketch plan does not constitute a
land development approval under the Rostraver Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 175, or
the Rostraver Township Stormwater Management Ordinance,
Chapter 164.
(b) At the time of land development submission, the developer
shall meet all applicable standards, including but not limited to
the requirements for stormwater management and/or a traffic
impact study.
(4) Outdoor storage areas shall not be permitted to front directly on
streets and shall be enclosed or screened, subject to the standards
and criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter.
(5) No site or lot shall be used for any purpose or business that is
considered dangerous or unsafe or that constitutes a nuisance or is
noxious or offensive by reason of emission of dust, odor, smoke,
fumes, vibration, radiation, noise or pollution potential.
(6) The total ground area of the site not covered by buildings, paved
parking, interior roadways and service areas is to be landscaped.
Yards are to be landscaped with grass or other planting materials,
and all slopes are to be covered by grass or ground cover.
(7) Site access drives and parking areas shall consist of defined
entrances and exits and shall have a minimum width of 20 feet.
(8) Any parking area with five or more spaces shall be surfaced with a
paved, dust-free surface. Where feasible, all parking and vehicular
site access shall be to the side or rear of a site. All parking areas
shall be landscaped subject to the standards and criteria of Article
XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter.
(9) No more than 4,000 square feet of retail, service and/or sales space
shall be permitted for each commercial recreation establishment.
(10) Lighting shall conform with § 195-81.2 of this chapter.
(11) Signage shall conform with § 195-54 of this chapter.
A. Blasting subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, § 195-14N,
of this chapter.
B. Commercial parking lot subject to the standards and criteria of Article
XII, § 195-38K, of this chapter.
C. Condominium, as defined in Article III of this chapter.
(1) The developer shall present a sketch plan that includes elevations
or architectural perspectives and illustrates that the proposed
§ 195-17 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-18
1:538
building is architecturally compatible with the village
neighborhood which is reviewed by the Township Planning Agency.
(a) Approval of a special exception sketch plan does not constitute
a land development approval under the Rostraver Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 175, or
the Rostraver Township Stormwater Management Ordinance,
Chapter 164.
(b) At the time of land development submission, the developer
shall meet all applicable standards, including but not limited to
the requirements for stormwater management and/or a traffic
impact study.
(2) At least two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
dwelling unit, and such space shall be within 150 feet of any
commonly used entranceway for such dwelling units.
(3) No structure shall be erected within 10 feet of another structure.
(4) The development shall provide an approved (PADEP) sanitary
sewage disposal system of sufficient size and design to adequately
serve the maximum designed capacity of the proposed residential
units in the development in lieu of connection to an approved
municipal sewage system.
(5) An approved municipal water system shall be provided to serve the
maximum designed capacity of the proposed residential units.
D. Day care (all types).
(1) The developer shall present a sketch plan that includes elevations
or architectural perspectives and illustrates that the proposed
building is architecturally compatible with the village
neighborhood which is reviewed by the Township Planning Agency.
(a) Approval of a special exception sketch plan does not constitute
a land development approval under the Rostraver Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 175, or
the Rostraver Township Stormwater Management Ordinance,
Chapter 164.
(b) At the time of land development submission, the developer
shall meet all applicable standards, including but not limited to
the requirements for stormwater management and/or a traffic
impact study.
(2) Activities shall be limited to functions normally associated with the
part-time tending of children on a for-hire or fee basis and shall not
include overnight lodging. Operational hours shall be limited to the
hours between 5:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
§ 195-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-18
1:539
§ 195-19. Lot, area and dimensional requirements.
The overall minimum lot size is 3,000 square feet in the Village Residential District.
The following requirements shall apply to the VR Village Residential
Districts:
(3) Safe off-street pickup and drop-off areas shall be provided at the
site.
(4) Outdoor play areas shall be fenced to control access to adjacent
properties and vehicular ways. This area shall be located to the side
or rear of the lot and shall not include parking or driveway areas.
(5) All licenses and certifications required by state and/or county
agencies shall be obtained as conditions precedent to granting of
an occupancy permit.
(6) Nothing in these provisions shall apply to non-hire childcare and
child-tending activities within the context of normal family and
acquaintance situations.
(7) No more than six children shall be provided day-care services at
any given time in a day-care/family home as defined in Article III of
this chapter. Day-care center, as defined in Article III of this
chapter, may be established in existing public buildings such as
churches and schools for more than six children, provided that they
meet all requirements of the Pennsylvania Departments of Public
Welfare and Labor and Industry for "centers." All approvals,
permits and licenses shall be obtained prior to granting of local
approvals.
(8) Day-care centers shall comply with the current editions of the
Uniform Construction Code (UCC) and any and all applicable state
and county regulations.
(9) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with §
195-81.2.
(10) Signage shall conform with § 195-54 of this chapter.
E. Home occupation, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, §
195-14C, of this chapter.
F. School bus shelter, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, §
195-14D, of this chapter.
G. Veterinary clinic, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, §
195-14L, of this chapter.
§ 195-18 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-19
1:540
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Yard
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min. Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Use:
Single-family
dwelling
3,000 30 15 5 5 35 80%
Duplex dwelling 5,000 50 15 5 5 35 80%
Ambulance
station
8,000 50 15 10 5 45 60%
Church 8,000 50 15 10 5 45 60%
Communications
antenna
Subject to the requirements of § 195-81
Educational
institution
commercial and
noncommercial
8,000 50 15 10 5 45 60%
Essential
services
N/A
Fire station 8,000 50 15 10 5 45 60%
Group residential
facility
5,000 50 15 5 5 35 80%
Municipal or
neighborhood
recreation
5,000 40 15 5 5 35 60%
Public facility 5,000 40 15 5 5 35 60%
Private garage
under 999 sq. ft.
3,000 30 15 5 5 35 80%
Conditional
Use:
Club/private
club/lodge
8,000 50 15 10 10 35 60%
Commercial
recreation
8,000 50 15 10 10 45 60%
Conversion
apartments
N/A
Eating and
drinking
establishments
8,000 50 15 10 10 35 60%
§ 195-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-19
1:541
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Yard
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min. Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Neighborhood
commercial
8,000 50 15 10 10 35 60%
Personal and
business services
8,000 50 15 10 10 35 60%
Pet grooming 8,000 50 15 10 10 35 60%
Office 8,000 50 15 10 10 35 60%
Tourist home 5,000 50 15 5 5 35 80%
Water-related
recreation
8,000 50 15 10 10 35 60%
Special
Exceptions:
Blasting N/A
Commercial
parking lot
8,000 50 15 10 10 N/A N/A
Condominium 5,000 50 15 5 5 35 80%
Day care (all
types)
5,000 50 15 5 5 35 80%
Home occupation N/A
School bus
shelter
N/A N/A 10 Subject to requirements of § 195-14D
Veterinary clinic 8,000 50 15 10 10 35 60%
§ 195-19 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-19
1:542
ARTICLE VIII
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
§ 195-20. Statement of purpose and use summary.
The R-1 Single-Family Residential District is established to provide for the
development and maintenance of single-family residential neighborhoods,
together with activities that are compatible and normally associated with
residential neighborhoods.
A. Use permitted by right.
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Accessory uses.
(3) Essential services
(4) Communications antennas that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,172 subject to the requirements
of § 195-81. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705173]
(5) (Reserved)
(6) Municipal or neighborhood recreation. [Added 7-3-2002 by Ord.
No. 462]
(7) No-impact home-based business. (See definition.) [Added
2-5-2003 by Ord. No. 482]
B. Conditional use.
(1) Day-care/family.
(2) Planned residential development.
(3) (Reserved)174
(4) (Reserved)175
(5) Chicken coop and chicken run/pen. [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 667]
172. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
173. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(4), regarding essential
communications antennas, and Subsection A(5), regarding commercial communications
antennas, both added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341.
174. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), which listed municipal recreation as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-3-2002 by Ord. No. 462. See now Subsection A(6).
175. Former Subsection B(4), which listed public buildings as a conditional use, as amended,
was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601. See now Subsection C(7).
§ 195-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-20
1:543
§ 195-21. Conditional use provisions.
The following conditional uses may be authorized by the Township
Commissioners pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
(6) Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,176 subject to the requirements
of § 195-81. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705]
C. Special exception.
(1) Educational institution, noncommercial. [Amended 4-2-2003 by
Ord. No. 483]
(2) Group residential facility.
(3) Home occupation.
(4) School bus shelter.
(5) Blasting. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(6) Church. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(7) Public facility. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483; amended
6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(8) Model home. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
D. Accessory use examples (not limited to the following):
(1) Garden shed/shelter.
(2) Home gardening.
(3) Private garage.
(4) Private swimming pool.
(5) Other uses customary to principal use.
A. Day-care/family, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-13A, of this chapter.
B. Planned residential development. Planned residential development may
be established to supplement zoning in order to encourage innovations
in residential development, pursuant to the standards herein and the
procedures specified in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Act 247, as amended December 21, 1988.177
176. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
177. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-20 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-21
1:544
(1) The application process for approval of planned residential
development as a conditional use shall be consistent with Act 247,
as amended, and shall consist of the following steps:
(a) An application for tentative approval shall be filed by or on
behalf of the landowner.
(b) All planning matters shall be determined by the Township
Planning Agency. [Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 468]
(c) Within 60 days after filing of the application, a public hearing
shall be held by the Township Commissioners.
(d) Within 60 days following conclusion of the public hearing, an
official written communication shall be transmitted to the
landowner which either:
[1] Grants tentative approval;
[2] Grants approval, subject to conditions; or
[3] Denies approval.
(e) Tentative approval shall not qualify a plat for recording nor
authorize the issuance of any permits.
(f) Following tentative approval, an application for final approval
may be submitted for the entire development site or
incremental parts thereof.
(g) Public hearings on applications for final approval shall not be
required, provided that the application is in compliance with
the tentative plan previously given approval.
(h) The Township Commissioners shall act on the application for
final approval within 45 days of filing.
(2) The application for tentative approval shall include the following:
(a) A location map of the site at a scale no smaller than one inch
equals 100 feet, showing boundaries, road systems and land
uses within 1/2 mile of the site perimeter.
(b) A site plan of the project which shall define the location of
proposed uses; state the acreage by proposed use; show
density of dwelling units; include street system plans for traffic
and vehicular parking; include plans for sewage disposal
system, stormwater and other utilities; delineate the location
of recreation facilities, open spaces and site amenities; and
show proposed lot lines and plat designs.
(c) Additional documentation shall include the following: the form
of organization proposed to own and maintain common
facilities and open space; the substance of covenants, grants of
§ 195-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-21
1:545
easements or other restrictions to be imposed; a written
statement by the landowner setting forth the reasons why, in
his or her opinion, a planned residential development would be
in the public interest.
(d) Application elements cited in items B(2)(a) and (b) above shall
be prepared by a registered landscape architect, architect or
civil engineer.
(3) Applications for final approval shall include any drawings,
specifications, covenants, easements, performance bonds and
other such requirements as may be specified by local officials at the
time of tentative application approval.
(4) The following requirements shall govern the approval and
development of all planned residential developments in the
Township of Rostraver.
(a) The minimum land area for a planned residential development
shall be 10 contiguous acres.
(b) The developer shall provide within the planned development, a
sanitary sewage disposal system which shall be of sufficient
size and design to collect and dispose of all sewage from all
present and projected development in the planned
development and shall be constructed and maintained in
conformity with the statutes and regulations of the State
Department of Environmental Protection and all local
regulations.
(c) The developer shall provide within the planned development a
storm drainage system which shall comply with Chapter 164 of
the Code of the Township of Rostraver to dispose of all surface
water runoff within the entire development. [Amended
7-2-2003 by Ord. No. 495]
(d) Water service from a certified public utility (water system)
shall be supplied to each structure and facility to be erected in
the development. Evidence of a commitment from said utility
shall be supplied to the Township Commissioners consistent
with Article VII of Act 247, as amended.178
(5) Permitted uses. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for any of the following purposes:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling.
(b) Townhouse units.
(c) Apartment buildings (not to exceed three stories in height).
178. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-21 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-21
1:546
(d) Public or private park or recreation which may include golf
courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, ski slope, toboggan
run, ice skating rink and similar uses approved by the
Township Commissioners.
(e) Schools.
(f) Church, parsonage or convent.
(g) Model home. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
(h) Accessory building or structure unless prohibited by
declaration of covenants of the plan. [Added 5-4-2016 by
Ord. No. 675]
(6) Within a planned residential development, the following
percentages of the total land area shall be devoted to the specified
uses listed herewith:
(a) A maximum of 80% for residential use; land devoted to
residential use shall be deemed to include housing sites and
streets, parking areas, private open spaces and courts that
abut and service residences or groups of residences.
(b) A minimum of 20% for open air recreational uses and other
usable open space. "Usable open space" shall be defined as
open areas designed and developed for use by the occupants of
the development for recreation and related leisure purposes.
These spaces shall be readily accessible and effectively
separated from automobile traffic and parking.
(7) Residential density shall not exceed four dwelling units per gross
acre of land within the development.
(a) There shall be no minimum lot size, setbacks, percentage of lot
coverage or lot width, except as specified below.
(b) Every dwelling unit shall have access to a public street, court,
walkway or other area dedicated to public use.
(c) No structure or group of related structures shall be erected
within 25 feet of any other structure or group of structures.
(d) There shall be a yard setback of at least 50 feet along the
perimeter of each planned residential development tract and
adjacent to all adjoining roads.
(e) No structure shall exceed three stories in height.
(f) There shall be no continuous structure of townhouses
containing more than six dwelling units.
(8) Open spaces between structures, including those spaces being
used as public or private recreational areas, shall be protected by
§ 195-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-21
1:547
adequate convenants running with the land or by conveyances or
dedications.
(9) In cases where the Township will not be accepting dedications of
streets, recreation areas or open spaces, the landowner shall
provide for an organization or trust for ownership and
maintenance. In the event of default, the Township may assume
control and the resulting costs may be assessed against the
properties that have right of enjoyment of these spaces and
facilities as specified by applicable state statutes (Act 247, as
amended).179
(10) The dimensions and construction of roads and parking areas within
the development, whether or not dedication to the Township is
contemplated, shall conform with all applicable Township
ordinances and regulations.
C. (Reserved)180
D. (Reserved)181
E. Chicken coop and run/pen. The keeping of female chickens is only
permitted as an accessory to any single-family dwelling. Roosters are
prohibited. Chickens must be kept in a coop, chicken run/pen, or fenced
area at all times. [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
(1) Minimum lot area shall be one acre. [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 667]
(2) Any structure over 200 square feet will need a zoning permit.
[Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
(3) Chicken coops, runs, and pens are only permitted in the rear yard.
[Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
(4) Any coop or enclosure for the chickens must be located a minimum
of 25 feet from any lot line. [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
F. Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,182 subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-81, of this chapter. [Added 9-5-2018 by
Ord. No. 705]
179. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
180. Former Subsection C, which provided for municipal recreation, was repealed 7-2-2003 by
Ord. No. 495.
181. Former Subsection D, which provided for public buildings, as amended, was repealed
6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
182. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-21 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-22
1:548
§ 195-22. Special exception provisions.
The following special exceptions may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board, pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
§ 195-23. Lot, area and dimensional requirements.
The following requirements shall apply in R-1 Single-Family Residential
Districts:
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Use:183
Municipal or
neighborhood
recreation [Added
7-3-2002 by Ord.
No. 462;
amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
10,000 100 25 20 20 45 NA
A. Educational institution, noncommercial, subject to the standards and
criteria of Article VIII, § 195-21D, of this chapter. [Amended 4-2-2003
by Ord. No. 483]
B. Group residential facility, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
VI, § 195-14F, of this chapter.
C. Home occupation, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-14C, of this chapter.
D. School bus shelter, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-14D, of this chapter.
E. Blasting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, § 195-14N,
of this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
F. Church, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, § 195-14P, of
this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483; amended 6-2-2010
by Ord. No. 601]
G. Public facility, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-14P, of this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483;
6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
H. Model home, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-14R, of this chapter. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
§ 195-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-23
1:549
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Single-family
dwelling
[Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
10,000 100 25 10 15 45 40%
Communications
antennas that fall
under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless
Broadband
Collocation Act184
[Added
2-23-2000 by
Ord. No. 421;
amended
9-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-81
Conditional Use:
Day-care/family * * * * * * *
Planned unit
residential
Subject to requirements of § 195-21B
Communications
antennas that do
not fall under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless
Broadband
Collocation Act185
[Added 9-5-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
Subject to requirements of § 195-81
Special Exception:
183. Editor's Note: The entry for municipal recreation was repealed 7-3-2002 by Ord. No. 462.
The entry for public buildings was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
184. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
185. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-23 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-23
1:550
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Educational
institution,
noncommercial
[Amended
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483;
amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
1 acre 150 50 25 25 45 40%
Group residential
facility
* * * * * * *
Home occupation * * * * * * *
School bus shelter Subject to requirements of § 195-14D
Blasting [Added
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-14N
Church [Added
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483;
amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
1 acre 150 50 25 25 45 40%
Public facility
[Added 4-2-2003
by Ord. No. 483;
amended
6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601;
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
1 acre 100 50 25 25 45 40%
Model home
[Added 5-4-2005
by Ord. No. 528]
Subject to the requirements of a single-family dwelling
NOTES:
* Standard for principal use shall apply
NA Not applicable
§ 195-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-23
1:551

ARTICLE IX
R-2 Suburban Residential District
§ 195-24. Statement of purpose and use summary.
The R-2 Suburban Residential District is established to provide for
residential neighborhoods to accommodate single-family, duplex housing
and multifamily condominium units, together with activities that are
compatible and normally associated with residential neighborhoods.
A. Use permitted by right.
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Duplex dwelling.
(3) Accessory uses.
(4) Essential services.
(5) Communications antennas that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,186 subject to the requirements
of § 195-81. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705187]
(6) (Reserved)
(7) Municipal or neighborhood recreation. [Added 7-3-2002 by Ord.
No. 462]
(8) No-impact home-based business. (See definition.) [Added
2-5-2003 by Ord. No. 482]
B. Conditional use.
(1) Day-care/family.
(2) Planned residential development.
(3) Ambulance substation. [Added 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 387]
(4) Chicken coop and chicken run/pen. [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 667]
(5) Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,188 subject to the requirements
of § 195-81. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705]
C. Special exception.
186. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
187. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(5), regarding essential
communications antennas, and Subsection A(6), regarding commercial communications
antennas, both added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341.
188. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-24
1:553
§ 195-25. Conditional use provisions.
The following conditional uses may be authorized by the Township
Commissioners pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
(1) Church, educational institution, noncommercial and public facility.
[Amended 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483; 6-2-2010 by Ord. No.
601]
(2) Group residential facility.
(3) Home occupation.
(4) School bus shelter.
(5) Condominium units.
(6) Blasting. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(7) (Reserved)189
(8) Model home. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
D. Accessory use examples (not limited to the following):
(1) Garden shelter.
(2) Home gardening.
(3) Private garage.
(4) Private swimming pool.
(5) Other uses customary to principal use.
A. Day-care/family, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-13A, of this chapter.
B. Planned residential development, subject to the standards and criteria
of Article VIII, § 195-21B, of this chapter.
C. Ambulance substation, subject to the following standards and criteria:
[Added 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 387]
(1) The site shall be no more than one mile by public road from the
entrance to a major highway.
(2) The site shall be serviced by a municipal water supply and a
Township-approved sewer system.
(3) All required county, state and federal requirements, permits and
license shall be obtained prior to the grant of conditional approval.
189. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(7), which listed a public library as a special exception
use, added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483, was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
§ 195-24 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-25
1:554
§ 195-26. Special exception provisions.
The following special exceptions may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board, pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
D. Chicken coop and run/pen. The keeping of female chickens is only
permitted as an accessory to any single-family dwelling. Roosters are
prohibited. Chicken must be kept in a coop, chicken run/pen, or fenced
area at all times. [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
(1) Minimum lot area shall be one acre. [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 667]
(2) Any structure over 200 square feet will need a zoning permit.
[Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
(3) Chicken coops, runs, and pens are only permitted in the rear yard.
[Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
(4) Any coop or enclosure for the chickens must be located a minimum
of 25 feet from any lot line. [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
E. Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,190 subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-81, of this chapter. [Added 9-5-2018 by
Ord. No. 705]
A. Church, education institution, noncommercial, and public facility,
subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, § 195-14P, of this
chapter. [Amended 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483; 6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601]
B. Group residential facility, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
VI, § 195-14F.
C. Home occupation, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-14C, of this chapter.
D. School bus shelter, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-14D, of this chapter.
E. Condominium multifamily units. Multifamily units in the R-2 District
shall only be permitted under a condominium unit ownership
arrangement, as defined in Article III of this chapter.
(1) Minimum lot size for a multifamily dwelling shall be 22,000 square
feet in area.
(2) The following design standards shall apply:
(a) No townhouse or apartment shall exceed three stories in
height.
190. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-26
1:555
(b) No townhouse structure shall contain more than six dwelling
units.
(c) No townhouse structure shall be more than 300 feet in length.
(d) No apartment structure shall be less than 40 feet or more than
300 feet in length.
(e) At least two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
each dwelling unit, and such space shall be within 150 feet of
any commonly used entranceway for such dwelling units.
(f) Buildings shall be so designed as to avoid monotonous patterns
of construction or repetitive spaces or modules between
buildings.
(g) No structure shall be erected within 25 feet of another
structure.
(h) Residential density shall not exceed six dwelling units per
gross acre of land.
(3) The development shall provide an approved (PADEP) sanitary
sewage disposal system of sufficient size and design to adequately
serve the maximum designed capacity of the proposed residential
units in the development in lieu of connection to an approved
municipal sewage system.
(4) An approved municipal water system shall be provided to serve the
maximum designed capacity of the proposed residential units.
(5) All multifamily dwelling unit development shall be subject to
preliminary site plan review and approval in accordance with the
following application requirements:
(a) Overall development plans showing:
[1] Kind, location, occupancy capacity of structures and uses;
[2] General floor plan of building;
[3] Location and identification of open space, streets and all
other means for pedestrian and vehicular circulation,
parks, recreational areas and other nonbuilding sites;
[4] Provisions for automobile parking and loading;
[5] General landscape plan; and
[6] General location and nature of public and private utilities
and community facilities and services.
F. Blasting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, § 195-14N,
of this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
§ 195-26 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-26
1:556
§ 195-27. Lot, area and dimensional requirements.
The following requirements shall apply in R-2 Suburban Residential
Districts:
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Use:
Single-family
dwelling
[Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
11,000 90 25 10 15 45 40%
Duplex dwelling
[Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606;
8-1-2018 by Ord.
No. 703]
14,000 90 25 15** 15 45 40%
Municipal
neighborhood
recreation [Added
7-3-2002 by Ord.
No. 462;
amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
11,000 90 25 20 20 45 NA
G. (Reserved)191
H. Model home, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-14R, of this chapter. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
191. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, which provided for a public library, added 4-2-2003 by
Ord. No. 483, was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
§ 195-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-27
1:557
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Communications
antennas that fall
under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless
Broadband
Collocation Act192
[Added
2-23-2000 by
Ord. No. 421;
amended
9-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-81
Conditional Use:
Day-care/family * * * * * * *
Planned residential
development
Subject to requirements of § 195-21B
Ambulance
substation [Added
9-2-1998 by Ord.
No. 387;
amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
7,500 75 25 15 10 45 30%
Communications
antennas that do
not fall under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless
Broadband
Collocation Act193
[Added 9-5-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
Subject to requirements of § 195-81
Special Exception:194
192. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
193. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
194. Editor's Note: The entry for public library, added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483, was repealed
6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
§ 195-27 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-27
1:558
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Church,
educational
institution
noncommercial,
public facility
[Amended
6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601;
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
1 acre 100 50 25 25 45 40%
Group residential
facility
* * * * * * *
Home occupation * * * * * * *
School bus shelter Subject to requirements of § 195-14D
Condominium units
[Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
22,000 120 35 20 20 45 40%
Blasting [Added
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483]
Subject to requirements of § 195-14N
Model home
[Added 5-4-2005
by Ord. No. 528]
* * * * * * *
NOTES:
* Standard for principal use shall apply
** There shall be no minimum side yard requirement at the common party wall. The minimum
side yard setback for non-common party walls (any exterior wall not owned by both parties in
common) shall be 15 feet. [Added 8-1-2018 by Ord. No. 703]
NA Not applicable
§ 195-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-27
1:559

ARTICLE X
R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District
§ 195-28. Statement of purpose and use summary.
The R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District is established to provide for
a mix of single-family and multifamily residential dwelling units in areas
of the Township which have acceptable levels of infrastructure and access
facilities.
A. Use permitted by right.
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Duplex dwelling.
(3) Accessory uses.
(4) Communications antennas that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,195 subject to the requirements
of § 195-81. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705196]
(5) (Reserved)
(6) Municipal or neighborhood recreation. [Added 7-3-2002 by Ord.
No. 462]
(7) No-impact home-based business. (See definition.) [Added
2-5-2003 by Ord. No. 482]
B. Conditional use.
(1) Planned residential development.
(2) Day-care/center.
(3) Ambulance substation. [Added 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 387]
(4) Chicken coop and chicken run/pen. [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 667]
(5) Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Broadband Collocation Act,197 subject to the requirements of §
195-81. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705]
C. Special exception.
(1) Multifamily residential dwellings, to include apartments, garden
apartments or (townhouses) row houses.
195. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
196. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(4), regarding essential
communications antennas, and Subsection A(5), regarding commercial communications
antennas, both added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341.
197. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-28
1:561
§ 195-29. Conditional use provisions.
The following conditional uses may be authorized by the Township
Commissioners pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
(2) Blasting. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(3) Model home. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
(4) Public facility. [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
D. Accessory use examples (not limited to the following):
(1) Garden shelter.
(2) Home gardening.
(3) Private garage.
(4) Private swimming pool.
(5) Other uses customary to principal use.
A. Planned residential development, subject to the standards and criteria
of Article VIII, § 195-21B, of this chapter.
B. Day-care/center.
(1) Day-care centers shall be located only in commercial, public or
semipublic institutional buildings, such as schools, churches,
governmental or similar structures that meet all requirements
specified by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare for
such activities. Day-care centers shall not be conducted in
conjunction with single-family residential dwellings. When
conducted on multifamily premises, all day-care center operators
shall be completely separate and distinct from residential uses.
(2) Activities shall be limited to functions normally associated with
part-time tending of children and shall not include overnight or
drop-in care.
(3) Operational hours shall be limited to the hours between 5:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m. [Amended 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(4) Day-care centers shall comply with the current editions of the
Uniform Construction Code (UCC) and any and all applicable state
and county regulations. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(5) All rules, requirements and guidelines promulgated in the
Regulations for Child Day-Care Centers, Chapter II, Section 8A, of
the Department of Public Welfare Social Services Manual, effective
April 2, 1978, and any amendments subsequent thereto, shall be
strictly observed. All required state licenses and certifications shall
§ 195-28 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-29
1:562
§ 195-30. Special exception provisions.
The following special exceptions may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board, pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
be obtained as conditions precedent to granting of required
Township zoning and occupancy permits.
(6) A traffic circulation plan will need to be reviewed for the safety and
orderly loading and unloading of passengers. [Added 4-2-2003 by
Ord. No. 483]
(7) An outdoor recreation area shall be provided with a minimum of
150 square feet per each individual enrolled. This area shall be
located to the side or rear of the lot and shall not include parking or
driveway areas. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(8) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2. [Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
C. Ambulance substation, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
IX, § 195-25C, of this chapter. [Added 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 387]
D. Chicken coop and run/pen. The keeping of female chickens is only
permitted as an accessory to any single-family dwelling. Roosters are
prohibited. Chicken must be kept in a coop, chicken run/pen, or fenced
area at all times. [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
(1) Minimum lot area shall be one acre. [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 667]
(2) Any structure over 200 square feet will need a zoning permit.
[Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
(3) Chicken coops, runs, and pens are only permitted in the rear yard.
[Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
(4) Any coop or enclosure for the chickens must be located a minimum
of 25 feet from any lot line. [Added 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 667]
E. Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,198 subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-81, of this chapter. [Added 9-5-2018 by
Ord. No. 705]
A. Multifamily dwellings, to include apartments, garden apartments or
(townhouses) row houses.
(1) Multifamily units in the R-3 District may be permitted under either
condominium (single unit ownership arrangement) or general
ownership.
198. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-30
1:563
§ 195-31. Lot, area and dimensional requirements.
The following requirements shall apply in the R-3 Multiple-Family
Residential District.
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Use:
Single-family
dwelling
[Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
14,000 90 25 10 15 45 40%
Duplex dwelling
[Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606;8-1-2018
by Ord. No. 703]
14,000 120 35 15 15 45 40%
Municipal or
neighborhood
recreation [Added
7-3-2002 by Ord.
No. 462;
amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
14,000 90 25 20 20 45 NA
(2) Standards and criteria specified in Article IX, § 195-26E, of this
chapter shall apply to the development of multifamily residential
dwellings.
B. Blasting, subject to the standard and criteria of Article VI, § 195-14N, of
this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
C. Model home, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 95-14R, of this chapter. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
D. Public facility, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 194-14P, of this chapter. [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
§ 195-30 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-31
1:564
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Use:
Communications
antennas that fall
under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless
Broadband
Collocation Act199
[Added 2-23-2000
by Ord. No. 421;
amended
9-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-81
Conditional Use:
Planned residential
development
[Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
Subject to requirements of § 195-21B
Day-care center
[Amended
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483; 9-1-2010
by Ord. No. 606]
32,000 100 50 25 25 45 40%
Ambulance
substation [Added
9-2-1998 by Ord.
No. 387;
amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
14,000 120 25 10 15 45 15%
199. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-31
1:565
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Use:
Communications
antennas that do
not fall under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless
Broadband
Collocation Act200
[Added 9-5-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
Subject to requirements of § 195-81
Special Exception:
Multifamily
dwelling
[Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
22,000 120 35 20 20 45 40%
Blasting [Added
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483]
Subject to requirements of § 195-14N
Public facility
[Added 6-2-2010
by Ord. No. 601;
amended
9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
1 acre 100 50 25 25 45 40%
NOTES:
* There shall be no minimum side yard requirement at the common party wall. The minimum side
yard setback for non-common party walls (any exterior wall not owned by both parties in
common) shall be 15 feet. [Added 8-1-2018 by Ord. No. 703]
NA Not applicable
200. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-31 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-31
1:566
ARTICLE XI
B-1 Special Business District
§ 195-32. Statement of purpose and use summary. [Amended
11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 717]
The B-1 Special Business District is established to provide locations for
retail-oriented businesses in conjunction with private and public services in
growth areas.
A. Use permitted by right.
(1) Bank and related financial services.
(2) Churches.
(3) Fire stations.
(4) Funeral homes.
(5) Offices.
(6) Personal and professional services.
(7) Public utility buildings.
(8) Essential services.
(9) Accessory uses.
(10) Communications antennas that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,201 subject to the requirements
of § 195-81. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705202]
(11) (Reserved)
(12) Ambulance station. [Added 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 387]
(13) Public facility. [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
B. Conditional use.
(1) Eating and drinking establishments.
(2) Ancillary residential.
(3) (Reserved)203
(4) Billboard. [Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
201. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
202. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(10), regarding essential
communications antennas, and Subsection A(11), regarding commercial communications
antennas, both added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341.
203. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), Electronic variable message sign, added 12-4-2002
by Ord. No. 475, was repealed 4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 545.
§ 195-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-32
1:567
§ 195-33. Conditional use provisions.
The following conditional uses may be authorized by the Township
Commissioners pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
(5) Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act204 and communications
towers, subject to the requirements of § 195-81.
C. Special exception.
(1) (Reserved)205
(2) Educational institution, commercial. [Amended 4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483]
(3) Shopping centers.
(4) (Reserved)206
(5) Blasting. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(6) Day-care/center. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(7) (Reserved)207
(8) Pet grooming. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
(9) Model home. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
(10) Electronic variable message sign. [Added 4-5-2006 by Ord. No.
545]
D. Accessory use.
(1) Uses customary to principal use. (See § 195-80, Design review
requirement.)
A. Eating and drinking establishments.
(1) Points of vehicular ingress and egress shall be limited to adjacent
thoroughfares having business-zoned frontage only. The angle and
siting of driveway intersections with adjacent thoroughfares shall
be based upon safe traffic movements and shall be approved only
following a positive report from the Township Engineer.
204. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
205. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1), Multifamily dwellings, was repealed 4-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 562.
206. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(4), regarding essential communications towers, added
5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341, was repealed 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341.
207. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(7), Public library, added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483, was
repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601
§ 195-32 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-33
1:568
(2) When abutting a residential dwelling, no driveways or parking
stalls shall be closer than 25 feet from the property line and shall
provide a screen planting, subject to the standards and criteria of
Article XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter. All parking areas shall be
landscaped subject to the standards and criteria of Article XVII,
§ 195-64D, of this chapter. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(3) Provisions shall be established and maintained on a continuing
basis to control and eliminate litter on and adjacent to the site.
(4) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2. [Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
B. Ancillary residential.
(1) Residential use ancillary to commercial establishments shall be
limited to one dwelling unit per commercial unit.
(2) Occupancy of the dwelling unit shall be limited to a person or
persons directly associated and involved with the business through
ownership or employment on an ongoing basis.
(3) All such dwelling units shall be situated within the primary related
commercial structure.
(4) The dwelling unit shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(a) Minimum area: 400 square feet.
(b) Each unit shall contain not less than one private bedroom and
one additional habitable room in addition to private bath,
sanitation and cooking facilities, all of which shall be
independent of the primary commercial use.
(c) Fire and safety provisions shall be adequate to meet all
applicable local and state requirements. Certification of
compliance shall be presented from the local Fire Chief or an
authorized representative thereof.
(d) In the absence of public sewerage facilities, certification shall
be obtained from the appropriate local authority that on-site
sewage disposal facilities are adequate to serve the anticipated
demands of the projected use.
C. (Reserved)208
D. Billboard, subject to the standards and criteria of Article XVI,
§ 195-58H, of this chapter. [Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
E. Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act209 and communications towers,
208. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, Electronic variable message sign, added 12-4-2002 by
Ord. No. 475, was repealed 4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 545.
§ 195-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-33
1:569
§ 195-34. Special exception provisions.
The following special exceptions may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
subject to the standards and criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-81, of this
chapter. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705]
A. (Reserved)210
B. Educational institution, commercial. [Amended 4-2-2003 by Ord. No.
483]
(1) A site plan showing proposed development of the site, including
topography, building locations, parking, traffic circulation,
landscaped area and utilities and drainage features.
(2) Ingress and egress for all site access and off-street parking shall be
situated in a manner to minimize interference with traffic
movements on adjacent street rights-of-way. No on-street parking
shall be permitted in conjunction with uses.
(3) All parking areas shall be landscaped subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter and shall provide
a screen planting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601]
(4) All state and municipal code requirements shall be met consistent
with the primary use of the site and associated activities.
C. Shopping center.
(1) A combination of retail commercial and service uses situated on a
common site and designed as an integral business center.
(a) The proposed site shall not be less than five acres in size, meet
Act 537211 and all local sewerage requirements, be under
single ownership or control and shall be developed as a single
entity for the type of commercial establishments permitted
under this chapter for the B-1 District. Permitted uses shall be
limited to those uses specified for B-1 Districts under the
provisions of this chapter for use by right and special
exception.
(b) Off-street loading, parking and signs shall be provided and
developed consistent with the requirements of Articles XVI,
209. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
210. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Multifamily dwellings, was repealed 4-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 562.
211. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 195-33 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-34
1:570
XVII and XVIII of this chapter. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601]
(c) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2. [Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
(2) The following area and bulk requirements shall apply:
(a) Site size: 217,800 square feet (5 acres).
(b) Site width: 500 feet minimum.
(c) Site coverage: 35% maximum.
(d) Distance between buildings: 30 feet minimum.
(e) Building setback line: 100 feet minimum.
(f) Side yards: 50 feet minimum.
(g) Rear yards: 50 feet minimum.
(h) Paved areas: 60% maximum.
(i) Building length: 400 feet maximum.
(j) Building height: 65 feet maximum. [Amended 12-29-2008 by
Ord. No 580]
(k) Highway access points: 300 feet minimum
(3) A site plan shall be submitted as part of the application for special
exception for review by the Zoning Hearing Board. The site plan
shall include:
(a) A survey drawn to scale prepared by a licensed professional
land surveyor, registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, showing the exact size, shape and dimensions of
the lot to be built upon;
(b) The exact size and location of all existing buildings and
structures on the lot;
(c) The exact size and location on the lot of the structure or
building proposed to be erected, moved, repaired or altered;
(d) All adjacent streets or alleys with traffic flow patterns;
(e) The proposed parking facilities, including the size,
arrangement and number of parking stalls and placement of
lighting standards;
(f) The circulation plan for all vehicles and ingress and egress
drives for all off-street parking and loading areas, both front
and rear, to ensure the prevention of blockage of vehicles
§ 195-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-34
1:571
entering and leaving the site and to provide for clean lines of
vision;
(g) Preliminary architectural engineering sketches showing plan
levels, elevations and other necessary information related to
water runoff control, slope, contours, type of building
construction, etc.;
(h) Areas to be utilized for the exterior storage of materials and
type of architectural screen to be provided; and
(i) Such other information as may be required by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
D. Essential communications tower, subject to the standards and criteria
of Article VI, § 195-14M, of this chapter. [Added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No.
341]
E. Blasting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, § 195-14N,
of this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
F. (Reserved)
G. Day-care/center, subject to the standards and criteria of Article X,
§ 195-29B, of this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
H. (Reserved)212
I. Pet grooming. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
(1) A site plan showing proposed development of the site, including
topography, building locations, parking, traffic circulation, usable
open space, landscaped area, utilities and drainage features.
(2) Provisions for all vehicular ingress and egress in conjunction with
the site shall be approved by the Township Engineer and if
applicable, PennDOT.
(3) Fencing may be deemed necessary by the Zoning Hearing Board
for purposes of safety or security.
(4) Operational houses shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m.
(5) There shall be no pets kept on the premises overnight.
J. Model home, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-14R, of this chapter. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528;
amended 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 562]
212. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, which provided for a public library, added 4-2-2003
by Ord. No. 483, was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
§ 195-34 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-34
1:572
§ 195-35. Lot, area and dimensional requirements.
The following requirements shall apply in B-1 Special Business Districts:
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Use:
Banks-related
financial services
5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Churches 43,560 150 50 15 15 40 50%
Fire stations 51,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Funeral homes 32,000 150 50 15 15 35 50%
Offices 5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Personal and
professional
services
5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Public utility
buildings
5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Essential services 5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Ambulance station
[Added 9-2-1998
by Ord. No. 387]
5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Communications
antennas that fall
under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless
Broadband
Collocation Act213
[Added
2-23-2000 by
Ord. No. 421;
amended
9-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-81
K. Electronic variable message sign, subject to the standards and criteria
of Article XVI, 195-55.1, of this chapter. [Added 4-5-2006 by Ord. No.
545]
213. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-35
1:573
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Public facility
[Added 6-2-2010
by Ord. No. 601]
5,000 50 25 15 15 35 50%
Conditional Use:
Eating and
drinking
establishment
5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Ancillary
residential
* * * * * * *
Communications
antennas that do
not fall under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless
Broadband
Collocation Act214
[Added 9-5-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-81
Special Exception:215
Shopping centers Subject to the requirements of § 195-34C
Essential
communications
tower [Added
2-23-2000 by
Ord. No. 421]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-14M
Educational
institution,
commercial
[Added 4-2-2003
by Ord. No. 483]
32,000 100 50 20 20 35 40%
Blasting [Added
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-14N
214. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
215. Editor's Note: The entry for multifamily dwellings was repealed 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 562.
The entry for public library, added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483, was repealed 6-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 601.
§ 195-35 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-35
1:574
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Day-care center
[Added 4-2-2003
by Ord. No. 483]
32,000 100 50 20 20 35 40%
Pet grooming
[Added 5-4-2005
by Ord. No. 528]
5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Model home
[Added 5-4-2005
by Ord. No. 528;
amended
4-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 562]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-14R
NOTES:
* Standard for principal use shall apply
§ 195-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-35
1:575

ARTICLE XII
B-2 Retail Business District
§ 195-36. Statement of purpose and use summary. [Amended
5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341; 8-5-1998 by Ord. No. 386]
The B-2 Retail Business District is established to provide locations for
general business and related activities for the use and convenience of
area and district consumers. Regulations for this district are intended to
generate commercial activities and associated supporting amenities, to
encourage and sustain such functions, to strengthen the local economic
base, to effectuate safe and efficient traffic and to provide necessary
parking facilities.
A. Use permitted by right.
(1) Motels.
(2) Eating and drinking establishments.
(3) Offices.
(4) Personal and professional services.
(5) Retail businesses.
(6) Commercial indoor recreation.
(7) Public facility. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(8) Fire stations.
(9) Churches.
(10) Auto sales, service and repair.
(11) Wholesale business.
(12) Mobile homes: sales, service and repair.
(13) Hospitals and clinics.
(14) Veterinary clinic. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(15) Car wash.
(16) Garden center.
(17) Public utility structures.
(18) Essential services.
§ 195-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-36
1:577
(19) Communications antennas that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,216 subject to the requirements
of § 195-81. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705217]
(20) (Reserved)
(21) Public utility transmission tower. [Added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No.
341]
(22) Ambulance station. [Added 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 387]
(23) Bank and related financial services. [Added 9-7-2005 by Ord. No.
531]
(24) Service station. [Added 11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 717]
(25) Shopping center. [Added 11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 717]
B. Conditional use.
(1) Supply yard.
(2) Ancillary residential.
(3) (Reserved)218
(4) Billboard. [Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
(5) Mini-storage facility. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
(6) (Reserved)
(7) Microbrewery/microdistillery. [Added 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 698]
(8) Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act219 and communications
towers, subject to the requirements of § 195-81. [Added 9-5-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
C. Special exception.
(1) Research and testing labs.
(2) (Reserved)220
216. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
217. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(19), regarding essential
communications antennas, and Subsection A(20), regarding commercial communications
antennas, both added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341.
218. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(3), Electronic variable message sign, added 12-4-2002
by Ord. No. 475, was repealed 4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 545.
219. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
220. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2), Multifamily dwellings, was repealed 4-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 562.
§ 195-36 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-36
1:578
§ 195-37. Conditional use provisions. [Amended 8-5-1998 by Ord.
No. 386]
(3) Educational institution, commercial. [Amended 4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483]
(4) (Reserved)221
(5) Commercial outdoor recreation. [Amended 4-7-2004 by Ord. No.
508]
(6) (Reserved)222
(7) Blasting. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(8) Day-care/center. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(9) (Reserved)223
(10) Pet grooming. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
(11) Commercial parking lot. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
(12) Model home. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
(13) Electronic variable message sign. [Added 4-5-2006 by Ord. No.
545]
D. Accessory use.
(1) Uses customary to principal use. (See § 195-80, Design review
requirement.)
A. The following conditional uses may be authorized by the Township
Commissioners pursuant to the standards and criteria specified
herewith:
(1) Supply yards.
(a) All sales inventory, supporting equipment, storage and display
functions shall be contained within all-weather structures.
(b) No activities or substances of a hazardous safety or
environmental nature shall be employed, carried or utilized as
part of any operations conducted on the site unless specifically
provided for as part of the conditional use approval.
221. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(4), which listed shopping centers as a special
exception, was repealed 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 712.
222. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(6), regarding essential communications towers, added
5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341, was repealed 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341.
223. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(9), Public library, added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483, was
repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
§ 195-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-37
1:579
(c) All traffic shall enter and exit the site via designated driveway
access points that connect with adjacent public rights-of-way.
Said access points shall be approved by local and PennDOT
officials.
(d) No storage, parking or display of products shall be permitted
in a required front, rear or side yard area.
(e) All sales lots and parking areas shall be paved with a
bituminous, concrete or similar hard surface material.
(f) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2. [Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
(g) All parking areas shall be landscaped subject to the standards
and criteria of Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter and shall
provide a screen planting, subject to the standards and criteria
of Article XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter. [Added 6-2-2010
by Ord. No. 601]
B. Ancillary residential, subject to the standards and criteria of Article XI,
§ 195-33B, of this chapter.
C. (Reserved)224
D. Billboard, subject to the standards and criteria of Article XVI,
§ 195-58H, of this chapter. [Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
E. Mini-storage facility. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
(1) Lot, area and dimensional minimum requirements shall be as
follows:
(a) Minimum lot area: 1.5 acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum front setback: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum side and rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(e) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(2) No storage shall take place outside of an enclosed building.
(3) All parking areas shall be landscaped subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter and shall provide
a screen planting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter.
(4) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2.
224. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, Electronic variable message sign, added 12-4-2002 by
Ord. No. 475, was repealed 4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 545.
§ 195-37 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-37
1:580
(5) No buildings on the same lot shall be located closer than 20 feet to
each other.
(6) No activities or substances of a hazardous safety or environmental
nature shall be employed, stored, carried or utilized as part of any
operations conducted on the site unless specifically provided for as
part of the conditional use approval.
(7) Storage units shall not be equipped with water or sanitary sewer
service.
(8) Exterior finishes of the storage buildings shall be compatible with
the exteriors of adjoining properties.
(9) Hours of operation and activities must be appropriately scheduled
to protect the operation of the surrounding community from
detrimental noise, dust, odor, vibration, light or other disturbance
or interruption.
(10) A garbage dumpster must be provided on site and must be
screened by an opaque ornamental fence, walls or evergreen
material.
(11)No business activity of any kind, other than the storage of goods,
shall be conducted within the mini-storage units by any lessee.
(12) The perimeter of the site shall be fenced with a minimum six-foothigh
fence with self-locking gate.
F. Microbrewery/microdistillery. [Added 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 698]
(1) A site plan showing proposed development of the site, including
topography, building locations, parking, traffic circulation,
landscaped area and utilities and drainage features.
(2) When abutting a residential dwelling, no driveways or parking
stalls shall be closer than 25 feet to the property line and shall
provide a screen planting, subject to the standards and criteria of
Article XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter. All parking areas shall be
landscaped subject to the standards and criteria of Article XVII,
§ 195-64D, of this chapter.
(3) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2.
(4) All sales inventory, supporting equipment, storage and display
functions shall be contained within a building.
(5) No activities or substances of a hazardous safety or environmental
nature shall be employed, carried or utilized as part of any
operations conducted on the site unless specifically provided for as
part of the conditional use approval.
§ 195-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-37
1:581
§ 195-38. Special exception provisions. [Amended 5-7-1997 by Ord.
No. 341; 8-5-1998 by Ord. No. 386]
The following special exceptions may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
(6) All traffic shall enter and exit the site via designated driveway
access points that connect with adjacent public rights-of-way. Said
access points shall be approved by local and PennDOT officials.
(7) No storage, parking or display of products shall be permitted in a
required front, rear or side yard area.
(8) Hours of operation and activities must be appropriately scheduled
to protect the operation of the surrounding community from
detrimental noise, dust, odor, vibration, light or other disturbance
or interruption.
(9) All outdoor entertainment and/or dining shall take place only
between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through
Thursday, and between 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Friday and
Saturday.
(10) The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions as part
of the conditional use per the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).
(11) The governing body may grant a modification of the requirements
of one or more provisions of this section if the literal enforcement
will exact hardship, provided that such modification will not be
contrary to the public interest and the purpose and intent of this
chapter is observed.
(a) All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall
accompany and be a part of the application. The request shall
state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, the provision or
provisions of this section involved and the minimum
modification necessary.
(b) The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning
Agency for advisory comments.
(c) The governing body and the Planning Agency shall keep a
written record of all action on all requests for modifications.
G. Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act225 and communications towers,
subject to the standards and criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-81, of this
chapter. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705]
225. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-37 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-38
1:582
A. Research and testing labs. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(1) No activities shall be permitted that involve the handling, testing,
processing or other use of waste materials resulting from
residential, municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional, mining
or agricultural operations, or from any combination of the above.
Such waste materials shall include, but not be limited to, garbage,
refuse, sludge and other discarded materials, including solid,
liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials.
(2) No activities or substances of a hazardous nature shall be
employed, stored or utilized in a manner that will constitute a
danger to the health, safety or general welfare of site occupants,
adjacent areas or the community at large. Where reasonable cause
for concern is raised by Township officials, residents or other
affected parties, the applicant for a special exception shall be
required to certify that no such conditions will be present.
(3) Such other factors and criteria may be required as the Zoning
Hearing Board deems necessary.
(4) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2. [Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
(5) All parking areas shall be landscaped subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter and shall provide
a screen planting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter. [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No.
601]
B. (Reserved)226
C. Educational institution, commercial, subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XI, § 195-34B, of this chapter. [Amended 4-2-2003
by Ord. No. 483]
D. (Reserved)227
E. Commercial outdoor recreation. [Amended 4-7-2004 by Ord. No.
508]
(1) Provisions shall be made for the safety of individuals and property,
both on-site and off-site, consistent with the projected use. All
issues of public health, safety or general welfare which pertain to
an existing or proposed recreational use or activities ancillary
thereto shall be resolved to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing
Board prior to the authorization of a special exception.
226. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Multifamily dwellings, was repealed 4-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 562.
227. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, Shopping center, was repealed 2-6-2019 by Ord. No.
712.
§ 195-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-38
1:583
(2) All state and municipal code requirements shall be met consistent
with the primary use of the site and associated structures and
activities.
(3) No on-street parking shall be permitted in conjunction with uses.
(4) Provisions for all vehicular ingress and egress in conjunction with
recreation sites shall be approved by appropriate state and
Township officials to ensure public safety and the maintenance of
unhindered and efficient traffic movements on adjacent road
systems.
(5) Lot, area and dimensional minimum requirements shall be as
follows:
(a) Minimum lot area (commercial): 32,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 150 feet at front street right-of-way line.
(c) Minimum front setback: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum side and rear yard setbacks: 30 feet.
(6) All storage and display of stock, equipment, refuse and other
materials shall be within enclosed main or accessory structures.
(7) Fencing may be deemed necessary by the Zoning Hearing Board
for purposes of safety or security.
(8) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2. [Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
F. Essential communications tower, subject to the standards and criteria
of Article VI, § 195-14M, of this chapter. [Added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No.
341]
G. Blasting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, § 195-14N,
of this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
H. Day-care/center, subject to the standards and criteria of Article X,
§ 195-29B, of this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
I. (Reserved)228
J. Pet grooming, subject to the standards and criteria of Article XI,
§ 195-34I, of this chapter. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
K. Commercial parking lot. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
(1) A site plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Agency showing
proposed development of the site, including topography, parking,
traffic circulation, landscaped area and drainage features.
228. Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, which provided for a public library, added 4-2-2003 by
Ord. No. 483, was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
§ 195-38 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-38
1:584
(2) Provisions for all vehicular ingress and egress in conjunction with
the site shall be approved by the Township Engineer and if
applicable, PennDOT.
(a) There should be not more than one entrance and exit or one
combined entrance and exit along any street frontage.
(b) At the entrance of each parking lot there shall be posted a sign
or signs, erected in compliance with the provisions of Article
XVI of this chapter, containing the rates to be charge to
prospective patrons and a statement of hours of operation of
the parking lot.
(3) No parking area, space or lot shall be located within a public rightof-
way or within 20 feet of the road cartway.
(4) No repair work, maintenance or similar service functions shall be
conducted on a vehicle on the premises.
(5) When there are more than five parking stalls proposed, the lot shall
be graded for proper drainage and surfaced with bituminous,
asphalt or concrete pavement so as to provide a durable and dustfree
surface and shall be arranged and marked as to provide for
orderly and safe parking in all seasons. Areas intended for fewer
then five vehicles shall be covered with gravel.
(a) A complete drainage and stormwater drainage plan, which
includes all storm sewers and appurtenances, along with an
approved best management practice method of disposal of all
stormwater collected, that will verify the peak
postdevelopment release rate of runoff, shall comply with the
stormwater management districts established in Chapter 164
of the Code of the Township of Rostraver, including but not
limited to any necessary agreements and/or bonding.
(b) All land disturbance activities shall be conducted in such a way
as to minimize accelerated erosion and resulting
sedimentation. Measures to control erosion and sedimentation
shall, at a minimum, meet the standards of the Westmoreland
County Conservation District and the Pennsylvania
Department of Protection.
(6) Stalls shall be provided with bumper guards or wheel stops when
necessary for safety or protection to adjacent structures or
landscaped areas. Parking spaces shall be clearly delineated by
painted lines or markers for lots accommodating five or more
spaces. The minimum dimension of each parking stall shall be of
nine feet wide by 20 feet long. Maneuvering and cross aisles shall
be a minimum of 20 feet wide for ninety-degree parking. Aisle
width for angle parking may be decreased in proportion to the
parking angle, but no aisle may be less than 12 feet in width.
§ 195-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-38
1:585
§ 195-39. Lot, area and dimensional requirements. [Amended
8-5-1998 by Ord. No. 386]
The following requirements shall apply in B-2 Retail Business Districts:
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Use:
Motel/hotel
[Amended
12-29-2008 by Ord.
No 580]
32,000 150 50 15 15 65 50%
Eating and drinking
establishment
5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Offices 5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Personal and
professional services
5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Retail business 5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
(7) Landscaping requirements, subject to the standards and criteria of
Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter. [Amended 6-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 601]
(8) Lighting standards and requirements, subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-81.2, of this chapter.
(9) Parking lot setbacks.
(a) When abutting a residential dwelling, no driveways or parking
stalls shall be closer than 25 feet from the property line and
shall provide a screen planting, subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter. [Amended
6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(b) When abutting other commercial or industrial properties, no
driveway or parking stalls shall be close than 10 feet from the
property line.
L. Model home, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-14R, of this chapter. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528;
amended 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 562]
M. Electronic variable message sign, subject to the standards and criteria
of Article XVI, § 195-55.1, of this chapter. [Added 4-5-2006 by Ord.
No. 545]
§ 195-38 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-39
1:586
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Indoor recreation 5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Public facility
[Amended
6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601]
5,000 50 25 15 15 65 50%
Fire stations 5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Churches [Amended
12-29-2008 by Ord.
No 580]
32,000 150 50 15 15 65 50%
Public utility
building
5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Essential services 5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Auto sales, service
[Amended
12-29-2008 by Ord.
No 580]
32,000 150 40 15 15 65 50%
Wholesale business
[Amended
12-29-2008 by Ord.
No 580]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 50%
Mobile home sales
[Amended
12-29-2008 by Ord.
No 580]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 50%
Hospitals and clinics
[Amended
12-29-2008 by Ord.
No 580]
32,000 150 50 15 15 65 50%
Veterinary clinic
[Amended
6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601]
5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Car wash [Amended
12-29-2008 by Ord.
No 580]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 50%
§ 195-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-39
1:587
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Garden center
[Amended
12-29-2008 by Ord.
No 580]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 50%
Ambulance station
[Added 9-2-1998
by Ord. No. 387]
5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Communications
antennas that fall
under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act229
[Added 2-23-2000
by Ord. No. 421;
amended 9-5-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-81
Banks-related
financial services
[Added 9-7-2005
by Ord. No. 531]
5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Service station
[Added 11-6-2019
by Ord. No. 717]
32,000 150 50 25 25 35 50%
Shopping center
[Added 11-6-2019
by Ord. No. 717]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 50%
Conditional Use:
Supply yard 32,000 150 50 25 25 40 50%
Ancillary residential * * * * * * *
Microbrewery/
microdistillery
[Added 6-6-2018
by Ord. No. 698]
5,000 60 25 15 15 40 50%
229. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-39 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-39
1:588
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Communications
antennas that do not
fall under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act230
and communications
towers [Added
9-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-81
Special Exception:231232
Research and testing
[Amended
12-29-2008 by Ord.
No 580]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 60%
Educational
institution,
commercial
[Amended
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483;
12-29-2008 by Ord.
No. 580]
32,000 100 50 20 20 65 40%
Shopping centers Subject to the requirements of § 195-34C
Commercial
recreation
[Amended
12-29-2008 by Ord.
No 580]
32,000 150 50 30 30 65 75%
Blasting [Added
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-14N
230. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
231. Editor's Note: The entry for multifamily was repealed 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 562. The entry
for public library, added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483, as amended, was repealed 6-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 601.
232. Editor's Note: The entry for essential communications tower, added 2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
4211, was repealed 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705.
§ 195-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-39
1:589
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min.
Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Day-care center
[Added 4-2-2003
by Ord. No. 483;
amended
12-29-2008 by Ord.
No 580]
32,000 100 50 20 20 65 40%
Pet grooming
[Added 5-4-2005
by Ord. No. 528]
5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
Commercial parking
lot [Added
5-4-2005 by Ord.
No. 528]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-38K
Model home [Added
5-4-2005 by Ord.
No. 528; amended
4-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 562]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-14R
NOTES:
* Standard for principal use shall apply
§ 195-39 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-39
1:590
ARTICLE XIIA
The MU Mixed Use District
[Added 2-4-2009 by Ord. No. 584]
§ 195-39.1. Statement of purpose and use summary. [Amended
12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658]
The MU Mixed Use District is established to provide for a wide range
of business, professional and light manufacturing uses in a campus
environment, by fostering innovative building and open space masses
resulting in an aesthetically attractive working environment. Such uses
shall be able to meet comparatively rigid specifications as to nuisance-free
performance and shall be clean, quiet and free of objectionable elements.
This district is intended to be applied in situations where, because of special
circumstances, the area is particularly suited and useful for economic
development purposes, and yet is in such close proximity to existing
residential and agricultural uses that additional controls are deemed
necessary in order to make these uses compatible with existing residential
and agricultural uses; and provide the flexibility to adapt to changes in
markets and technologies The intent of this district is also to fulfill the intent
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code by including provisions to
encourage innovation and to promote flexibility, economy and ingenuity in
development, including subdivisions and land developments. Standards are
also established to fulfill the intent of Section 605(1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code233with regard to making transitional
provisions at or near the boundaries of districts. The MU Mixed Use District
standards are established to facilitate either the unified approval of a single
large area for a planned business park development (including commercial
and residential components), or the development of smaller individual
tracts with provisions for the transition between various uses.
A. Use permitted by right.
(1) Assembly and packaging of finished goods.
(2) Bank and related financial services.
(3) (Reserved)234
(4) Educational institution, commercial and noncommercial.
(5) Essential services.
(6) Hospitals and clinics.
(7) Light manufacturing.
(8) Offices.
233. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10605(1).
234. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), which listed distribution as a use permitted by
right, was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
§ 195-39.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-39.1
1:591
(9) Personal and professional services.
(10) Printing services.
(11) Public utility buildings.
(12) Research and testing labs.
(13)Warehousing, indoor storage.
(14) Wholesale business, indoor.
(15) Public facility. [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
B. Conditional use.
(1) Planned business park.
(2) Condominium units, multiple-residential dwelling units, singlefamily
dwellings.
(3) Day-care center.
(4) Eating and drinking establishments.
(5) Hotels.
(6) Indoor and outdoor commercial recreation.
(7) Mixed commercial residential building.
(8) Limited retail use.
(9) Outdoor storage. [Added 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658]
(10) Microbrewery/microdistillery. [Added 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 698]
C. Special exception.
(1) Blasting.
(2) (Reserved)235
D. Accessory use.
(1) Uses customary to principal use. (See § 195-80, Design review
requirement.)
(2) Municipal recreation.
(3) Neighborhood recreation.
235. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2), which listed essential communications towers as a
special exception, was repealed 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705.
§ 195-39.1 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-39.2
1:592
§ 195-39.2. Conditional use provisions.
The following conditional uses may be authorized by the Township
Commissioners pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
A. Planned business park. The intent of this conditional use is to allow for
the integrated approval of a business park that includes retail, service
and/or residential components as well as permitted office and light
manufacturing uses.
(1) The minimum size for a planned business park shall be 75 acres.
(2) The park shall be generally planned around one or more central
greens or quadrangle areas, with consideration given to the
relationship of various buildings and uses to each other. However,
such greens or quadrangle areas may be located at the edge of a
proposed business park in order to facilitate greater coordination
with any neighboring public recreation area or land protected by a
conservation easement. A minimum of 10% of the total planned
business park area shall be devoted to such greens or common
passive recreational areas. This shall be in addition to any normal
required yard and setback areas or limitations upon coverage. The
purpose of this is to create a stronger sense of place, and facilitate
interaction among the employees, customers and residents of
mixed use areas. Examples of such green or quadrangle areas may
include town squares, assembly areas, and smaller landscaped or
mowed areas with amenities, such as benches, lighting, public art
and fountains. At least 75% of areas proposed for central greens or
quadrangle areas shall be free of wetland or slope areas of greater
than 5%. These areas may be privately owned, or owned and
managed by a tenant or owners' association, provided there is a
reasonable degree of access by residents, employees, and
customers.
(3) The developer shall submit a sketch plan that generally identifies
proposed areas for various permitted and conditional uses within
the district. This sketch plan need not include final dimensions and
final designs of any public or private improvements, but shall focus
upon the relationship of proposed uses to each other and the
surrounding neighborhood. If areas are specifically identified for
conditional uses, and meet all performance standards, their
subsequent development may proceed by right at a later date
without additional conditional use approval. However, no area
proposed for a conditional use may be changed to another class of
conditional use (such as commercial to residential) without
submission of another application for approval. Areas proposed for
conditional uses may be changed to permitted uses within the MU
Mixed Use District. Nothing in this section alters the right of the
Township to review and approve changes to any subdivision and
land development plan.
§ 195-39.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-39.2
1:593
(4) The total areas proposed for all listed conditional uses shall not
exceed 60% of the total planned business park area.
(5) The plan shall illustrate an internal pedestrian and vehicular access
system that facilitates travel between buildings within the planned
business park.
(6) The developer shall submit plans for any architectural guidelines or
covenants proposed to ensure a harmonious development of the
planned business park as an integral whole.
(7) The developer shall submit a sketch landscaping plan that
illustrates how landscaping will be used to buffer the proposed
park from any abutting residential areas. The Township
Commissioners may increase standards for buffering and
landscaping as a reasonable additional condition and safeguard.
(8) The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions as part
of the conditional use per the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC). [Added 12-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 658]
B. Day-care center.
(1) The combined area for all day-care center(s) in an MU District may
not exceed 5% of the total area for a planned business park,
§ 195-39.4A of this chapter, or 5% of the total area of the
originating MU Mixed Use Zoning parcel. [Amended 12-2-2015
by Ord. No. 658]
(2) Provisions shall be made for the safety of individuals and property.
All issues of public health, safety and general welfare which pertain
to the proposed use or activities ancillary thereto shall be resolved
to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners prior to the
authorization of the conditional use.
(3) Subject to the standards and criteria of Article X, § 195-29B, of this
chapter.
(4) The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions as part
of the conditional use per the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC). [Added 12-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 658]
C. Eating and drinking establishments.
(1) The combined area for all eating and drinking establishments in an
MU District may not exceed 20% of the total area for a planned
business park, § 195-39.4A of this chapter, or 20% of the total area
of the originating MU Mixed Use Zoning parcel. [Amended
12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 195-39.2 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-39.2
1:594
(2) Structures shall be architecturally and aesthetically compatible
with the character of the MU Mixed Use District.
(3) Drive-through windows shall not be permitted.
(4) Ingress and egress for all site access and off-street parking shall be
situated in a manner to minimize interference with traffic
movements on adjacent street rights-of-way.
(5) Provisions shall be made for the safety of individuals and property.
All issues of public health, safety and general welfare which pertain
to the proposed use or activities ancillary thereto shall be resolved
to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners prior to the
authorization of the conditional use.
(6) The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions as part
of the conditional use per the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC). [Added 12-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 658]
D. Hotels.
(1) The combined area total for all hotels in an MU District may not
exceed 20% of the total area for a business park, § 195-39.4A of this
chapter, or 20% of the total area of the originating MU Mixed Use
Zoning parcel. [Amended 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658]
(2) Structures shall be architecturally and aesthetically compatible
with the character of the business park.
(3) Ingress and egress for all site access and off-street parking shall be
situated in a manner to minimize interference with traffic
movements on adjacent street rights-of-way.
(4) The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions as part
of the conditional use per the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC). [Added 12-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 658]
E. Indoor or outdoor commercial recreation.
(1) The combined area total for all commercial recreation (indoor and/
or outdoor) in an MU District may not exceed 10% of the total area
for a business park, § 195-39.4A of this chapter, or 10% of the total
area of the originating MU Mixed Use Zoning parcel. [Amended
12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658]
(2) Ingress and egress for all site access and off-street parking shall be
situated in a manner to minimize interference with traffic
movements on adjacent street rights-of-way.
(3) No more than 5,000 square feet of retail, service and/or sales space
shall be permitted for each commercial recreation establishment.
§ 195-39.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-39.2
1:595
(4) All storage and display of stock, equipment, refuse and other
materials shall be within enclosed main or accessory structures.
(5) Fencing may be deemed necessary by the Board of Commissioners
for purposes of safety and security.
(6) Provisions shall be made for the safety of individuals and property.
All issues of public health, safety and general welfare which pertain
to a proposed recreational use or activities ancillary thereto shall
be resolved to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners prior
to the authorization of the conditional use.
(7) The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions as part
of the conditional use per the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC). [Added 12-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 658]
F. Condominium units, multiple-residential dwelling units, and singlefamily
dwellings.
(1) Multiple-residential dwellings units, including apartments, garden
apartments or (townhouses) row houses may be permitted under
either condominium (single-unit ownership arrangement) or
general ownership.
(2) The use of new lots for single-family dwellings may be an
appropriate land use technique for transitional areas in a planned
business park or a designated MU district. However, no new singlefamily
dwelling is permitted within 100 feet of any area proposed or
used for light industrial uses. The Commissioners may require
additional buffering between areas proposed for single-family
dwellings and other uses as a reasonable additional condition and
safeguard.
(3) The combined area for all residential uses in an MU District may
not exceed 20% of the total area for a planned business park,
§ 195-39.4A of this chapter, or 20% of the total area of the
originating MU Mixed Use zoning parcel. [Amended 12-2-2015
by Ord. No. 658]
(4) Standards and criteria of Article IX, § 195-26E, of this chapter, shall
apply to the development of multifamily residential dwelling units.
(5) No building containing more than one dwelling unit shall contain
more than four dwelling units per building, except that townhouse
units may occur in blocks of no more than six units per building.
(6) New lots proposed for single-family dwellings shall meet all lot area
and dimensional standards as identified in § 195-31 of this chapter.
(7) The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions as part
of the conditional use per the regulations of the Pennsylvania
§ 195-39.2 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-39.2
1:596
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC). [Added 12-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 658]
G. Mixed commercial residential buildings. The intent of this conditional
use is to facilitate the opportunity for greater housing opportunities and
vibrant mixed use areas. Second-story residential uses are permitted
where the first floor of a building is designed for compatible uses, such
as offices and professional or personal services.
(1) All entrance areas for residential or commercial uses shall be
clearly identified and separated.
(2) The minimum size of any second floor dwelling unit shall be at least
700 square feet.
(3) Dedicated parking shall be provided for the residential use.
(4) The combined area total for all mixed commercial residential
buildings in an MU District may not exceed 10% of the total area
for a planned business park, § 195-39.4A of this chapter, or 10% of
the total area of the originating Mixed Use Zoning parcel.
[Amended 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658]
(5) The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions as part
of the conditional use per the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC). [Added 12-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 658]
H. Limited retail use. The intent of this conditional use is to facilitate
development of retail sales at a scale to serve employees and residents
of the MU Mixed Use District and any planned business parks.
(1) No building or part of a building used for retail sales shall occupy
an area of greater than 10,000 square feet gross floor area.
(2) No fuel sales are permitted as a part of any limited retail use.
(3) No outdoor sales areas are permitted.
(4) The combined area total for all limited retail use in an MU District
may not exceed 10% of the total area for a planned business park,
§ 195-39.4A of this chapter, or 10% of the total area of the
originating MU Mixed Use Zoning parcel. [Amended 12-2-2015
by Ord. No. 658]
(5) The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions as part
of the conditional use per the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC). [Added 12-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 658]
I. Outdoor storage. The intent of this conditional use is to permit for
outdoor storage as an accessory use to a principal use in the MU Mixed
Use District. [Added 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 195-39.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-39.2
1:597
(1) The combined area for all outdoor storage in the MU District may
not exceed 20% of the total area for a planned business park,
§ 195-39.4A of this chapter, or 20% of any lot area not in a planned
business park MU Mixed Use Zoning.
(2) Outdoor storage shall not be permitted to front directly on the
street or within any front, side, or rear yard or within any required
buffer area.
(3) No outdoor storage area shall exceed 10 feet in height.
(4) All outdoor storage, including equipment/vehicle storage area,
must be screened with an opaque fencing, walls or evergreen plant
material in order to minimize visibility if the storage area is readily
visible from adjoining properties not owned by the user in
accordance with § 195-75G.
(5) A survey of the property showing all outdoor storage area,
including equipment/vehicle storage areas, with locations and
distances to property lines, the approximate number of acres to be
used for outdoor storage.
(6) No activities or substances of a hazardous safety or environmental
nature shall be employed, stored, carried or utilized as part of any
operations conducted on the site unless specifically provided for as
part of the conditional use approval.
(7) Dust, vibration, odors. All activities/operations shall be conducted
in such a manner to minimize dust, vibration or noxious odors and
shall be in accordance with § 195-74. All equipment used shall be
constructed and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor or other
harmful effects are minimized by the operations carried on at the
site to avoid injury to persons living in the vicinity and are in
compliance with § 195-74.
(8) Noise. The Township may require acoustical blankets, sound walls,
mufflers or other alternative methods to ensure compliance
depending on the location of the operation/facility(ies) to adjacent
residential properties and as more specifically set forth in § 195-74.
(9) The applicant must provide the Township with a list and description
of all equipment weighing in excess of 10 tons and identification of
the proposed routing of vehicles on Township roads. The proposed
hauling routes must be designed to minimize the impact on
collector, connector and local streets within the Township. The
Township reserves the right to designate required truck hauling
routes throughout the Township. The applicant must provide an
updated list to the Township if any changes occur.
(a) Vehicular access to a site solely via a local street is prohibited.
(b) Vehicular access to a site via a collector street is permitted.
§ 195-39.2 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-39.2
1:598
§ 195-39.3. Special exception provisions.
The following special exceptions may be authorized by the Township
Commissioners pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
(10) The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions as part
of the conditional use per the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).
J. Microbrewery/microdistillery. [Added 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 698]
(1) The combined area for all microbreweries/microdistilleries in an
MU District may not exceed 20% of the total area for a planned
business park, § 195-39.4A of this chapter, or 20% of the total area
of the originating MU Mixed Use Zoning parcel.
(2) Structures shall be architecturally and aesthetically compatible
with the character of the MU Mixed Use District.
(3) Drive-through windows shall not be permitted.
(4) All sales inventory, supporting equipment, storage and display
functions shall be contained within a building.
(5) No activities or substances of a hazardous safety or environmental
nature shall be employed, carried or utilized as part of any
operations conducted on the site unless specifically provided for as
part of the conditional use approval.
(6) All traffic shall enter and exit the site via designated driveway
access points that connect with adjacent public rights-of-way. Said
access points shall be approved by local and PennDOT officials.
(7) No storage, parking or display of products shall be permitted in a
required front, rear or side yard area.
(8) Hours of operation and activities must be appropriately scheduled
to protect the operation of the surrounding community from
detrimental noise, dust, odor, vibration, light or other disturbance
or interruption.
(9) All outdoor entertainment and/or dining shall take place only
between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through
Thursday, and between 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Friday and
Saturday.
(10) The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions as part
of the conditional use per the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).
A. Blasting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, § 195-14N,
of this chapter.
B. (Reserved)236
§ 195-39.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-39.4
1:599
§ 195-39.4. Lot, area and dimensional requirements and
performance standards.
The following requirement shall apply to all uses in the MU Mixed Use
District.
A. The intent of the MU Mixed Use District is to provide for unique
transitional opportunities in a high quality setting. For this reason, no
area of less than 25 acres shall be considered for mixed use zoning
designation. New nonresidential lots within MU Mixed Use Zoned
Areas shall be no less than 20,000 square feet.
B. The maximum impervious surface coverage, including buildings,
parking and sidewalks shall be 75%.
C. The minimum setback from any existing public roads shall be 50 feet; in
addition on existing local streets there shall consist a strip of land not
less than 25 feet in width, with earthen mound(s). Mounding shall be a
minimum four feet in height with slopes averaging 3:1 (horizontal to
vertical distance). Plantings shall be arranged and installed on earth
mounds in an irregular pattern to accentuate the physical variations in
height and alignment and achieve a more natural appearance as set
forth below. Ground cover shall be used and maintained to prevent
erosion of the earth mound. The combined height of the plant materials
and mounding shall not be less than seven feet at the time of planting.
The minimum setback from new or proposed public streets shall be 20
feet. Such setback areas must be appropriately landscaped and not
include any parking but may contain a cartway or driveway for ingress
and egress purposes. [Amended 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658]
D. A minimum forty-foot buffer area, containing a row of evergreen trees
not less than three feet in height at initial planting, shall be required to
be provided and maintained along areas abutting any residential use or
residential zoned property.
E. No buildings on the same lot shall be located closer than 20 feet to each
other.
F. The maximum permitted building height on any structure is 45 feet.
G. When the rear of any building faces a public road, a row of evergreens
of not less than three feet in height at initial planting shall be provided
between the rear of the building and the public road.
H. Any and all garbage dumpsters shall be concealed within a structure.
I. Because the MU District is meant to provide opportunities for mixed
use development opportunities in areas where there is a potential for
land use conflict with abutting residential or light commercial uses,
building designs should be compatible with the neighborhood to the
236. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which listed essential communications towers as a
special exception, was repealed 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705.
§ 195-39.4 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-39.4
1:600
maximum extent possible. A minimum of 40% of the exterior wall
construction for all structures shall be constructed of brick or split
face block or other masonry materials as approved by the Rostraver
Township Board of Commissioners. The requirement of 40% shall be
calculated by measuring all facades of the structure, excluding
openings for windows, trim, and doors and multiplying that figure by
the percentage. [Amended 2-5-2014 by Ord. No. 643]
J. Pedestrian access. A system of pedestrian access, in the form of paved
sidewalks or interior walkways, shall be provided to allow walking
between every use, structure or recreational facility. Sidewalks and
crosswalks shall be installed along public streets.
K. Parking areas. Designs shall avoid the use of excessively large,
uninterrupted parking areas. Parking lot landscaping is subject to the
standards and criteria of Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter.
Because of the mixed use character of this district, parking lots shall be
lit by full cutoff luminaries of a maximum height of 20 feet. [Amended
6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
§ 195-39.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-39.4
1:601

ARTICLE XIII
I-1 Light Industrial District237
§ 195-40. Statement of purpose and use summary.
The I-1 Light Industrial District is designed to provide sites for both
commercial and light industrial activities.
A. Use permitted by right.
(1) Research and testing labs. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(2) Business and sales offices.
(3) Public facility. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(4) Automotive: sales and service.
(5) Supply yard. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(6) (Reserved)238
(7) (Reserved)239
(8) (Reserved)240
(9) Eating and drinking establishments. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601]
(10) (Reserved)241
(11) Public utility buildings.
(12) Essential services.
(13) Ambulance station. [Added 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 387]
(14) Communications antennas that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,242 subject to the requirements
of § 195-81. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705243]
237. Editor's Note: Former Art. XIII, B-3 General Business District, adopted 7-25-1995 by Ord.
No. 300, as amended 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341, was repealed 8-5-1998 by Ord. No. 386.
Said B-3 District was absorbed by the B-2 District, and current provisions for the
combined district are included in Art. XII of this chapter.
238. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(6), which listed distribution and beverage bottling as
a use permitted by right, was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
239. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(7), which listed packaging and delivery services as a
use permitted by right, was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
240. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(8), which listed printing and publishing as a use
permitted by right, was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
241. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(10), which listed shops for custom and repair work as
a use permitted by right, was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
242. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
243. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(14), regarding essential
communications antennas, and Subsection A(15), regarding commercial communications
antennas, both added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341.
§ 195-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-40
1:603
(15) (Reserved)
(16) Fire station. [Added 10-1-2008 by Ord. No. 577]
(17) Bank. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
(18) Mini-storage facility. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
(19) Mobile home sales, service, and repair. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 654]
(20) Motel/hotel. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
(21) Retail business. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
(22) Wholesale business. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
(23) Microbrewery/microdistillery. [Added 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 698]
(24) Service station. [Added 11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 717]
(25) Shopping center. [Added 11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 717]
B. Conditional use. [Amended 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
(1) (Reserved)244
(2) Billboard.
(3) Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act245 and communications
towers, subject to the requirements of § 195-81. [Added 9-5-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
C. Special exception.
(1) Light manufacturing and fabrication.
(2) Warehouse. [Amended 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
(3) Transportation terminal. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(4) (Reserved)246
(5) Contractor's yard. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(6) (Reserved)247
(7) (Reserved)248
244. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(1), Electronic variable message sign, was repealed
4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 545.
245. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
246. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), which listed wholesale distribution as a special
exception use, was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
247. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(6), regarding essential communications towers, added
5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341, was repealed 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705.
§ 195-40 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-40
1:604
§ 195-41. Conditional use provisions. [Amended 12-4-2002 by Ord.
No. 475]
§ 195-42. Special exception provisions.
The following special exceptions may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
(8) Blasting. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(9) Educational institution, commercial. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483]
(10) Commercial parking lot. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
(11) Electronic variable message sign. [Added 4-5-2006 by Ord. No.
545]
(12) Gas and oil drill site. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
(13) Natural gas compressor station. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No.
617]
(14) Natural gas processing plant. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
(15) Staging facility. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
(16) Oil and gas water storage facility. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No.
617]
D. Accessory use.
(1) Uses customary to principal use. (See § 195-80, Design review
requirement.)
A. (Reserved)249
B. Billboard, subject to the standards and criteria of Article XVI,
§ 195-58H, of this chapter.
C. Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act250 and communications towers,
subject to the standards and criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-81, of this
chapter. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705]
A. Light manufacturing and fabrication, subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XII, § 195-37A(1), of this chapter.
248. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(7), regarding commercial communications towers,
added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341, was repealed 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705.
249. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A, Electronic variable message sign, was repealed
4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 545.
250. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-42
1:605
B. Warehouse, subject to the standards and criteria of Article XII,
§ 195-37A(1), of this chapter. [Amended 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
C. Transportation terminal, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
XII, § 194-37A(1), of this chapter. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No.
601]
D. (Reserved)251
E. Contractor's yard, subject to the standards and criteria of Article XII,
§ 195-37A(1), of this chapter. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
F. (Reserved)252
G. Blasting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, § 195-14N,
of this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
H. Educational institution, commercial, subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XI, § 195-34B, of this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by
Ord. No. 483]
I. Commercial parking lot, subject to standards and criteria of Article XII,
§ 195-38K, of this chapter. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
J. Electronic variable message sign, subject to the standards and criteria
of Article XVI, § 195-55.1, of this chapter. [Added 4-5-2006 by Ord.
No. 545]
K. Gas and oil drill site, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-14S, of this chapter. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
L. Natural gas compressor station. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
(1) A special exception shall be obtained for all natural gas compressor
stations. All applications submitted for consideration of the Zoning
Hearing Board shall include, at a minimum, the following
documentation and all other pertinent data deemed necessary to
process the application:
(a) Written permission from the property owner(s).
(b) A written description of the character of the proposed
operation, its timing and proposed duration, together with
duplicates of maps and plans submitted to state and federal
regulatory agencies or authorities for the issuance of
necessary permits.
(c) The applicant shall provide a plan for the transmission of gas
from the site. The plan will identify but not be limited to
251. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, which provided for wholesale distribution, was
repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
252. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, regarding essential communications towers, added
5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341, was repealed 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705.
§ 195-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-42
1:606
gathering lines, compressors and other mid- and downstream
facilities located within the Township and extending 800 feet
beyond the Township boundary.
(d) The applicant shall provide the Township with the name of the
person supervising the compressor operation and a phone
number where such person can be reached 24 hours a day for
each day of the week. Annually, or upon any change of relevant
circumstances, the applicant shall update such information
and provide it to the Township.
(e) The applicant shall provide the Township with a copy of the
Preparedness Prevention and Contingency Plan, as required by
and filed with the PA DEP and a copy of the SARA Title III Tier
II Chemical Inventory submitted to PENN SAFE.
(f) The applicant shall provide an outline of training program for
Township's first responders.
(g) A survey of the property showing all permanent facilities
(tanks, buildings, pads or other surface installations) with
locations and distances to property lines, the approximate
number of acres to be disturbed for development, and
identifying the floodway of the property(ies) as identified in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) prepared and approved by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
(h) A complete drainage and stormwater drainage plan, which
includes all storm sewers and appurtenances, along with an
approved best management practice method of disposal of all
stormwater collected, that will verify the peak
postdevelopment release rate of runoff, shall comply with the
stormwater management districts established in Chapter 164
of the Code of the Township of Rostraver, including but not
limited to any necessary agreements and/or bonding.
[1] If the stormwater drainage plan proved that a detention
structure is needed to maintain the peak postdevelopment
release runoff rate for that stormwater management
district in Chapter 164 of the Code of the Township of
Rostraver, agreements will need to be done to confirm that
the detention structure will remain intact after the project
is complete The Township shall obtain a bond from the
responsible party to insure compliance with this provision.
[2] In the event the Township determines that the public
interest is best served by mandating that the pond be filled
in at a reasonable time after land disturbance activities
have been substantially completed, the landowner/
developer shall complete the same at a time and in a
manner required by the Township. The Township shall
§ 195-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-42
1:607
obtain a bond from the responsible party to insure
compliance with this provision.
(2) Natural gas compressor stations shall only be permitted to occur
on property with a minimum of five contiguous acres or larger.
(3) In accordance with the appropriate Township ordinance, as
amended, driveways accessing the compressor station shall be
paved with an impervious material from the paved public street for
a distance of 50 feet into the site. The impervious material shall be
in place prior to the commencement of the compressor station.
(4) All traffic shall enter and exit the site via designated driveway
access points that connect with adjacent public rights-of-way. Said
access points shall be approved by local, county, and PennDOT
officials. Prior to initiating any work, the Township shall be
provided a copy of the highway occupancy permit prior to
commencing site development to access the site and for overweight
vehicles.
(5) All facilities, including the access road, shall be secured with a
fence, in compliance with § 195-72, with a secured gate as follows:
(a) The fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height, chain link
with green fabric mesh.
(b) The chain link fence shall have a minimum thickness of 11
gauge.
(c) Warning signs shall be install at one-hundred-foot spacing to
provide notice of the potential dangers.
(d) The site assigned address shall be clearly visible on the access
gate for emergency 911 purposes.
(e) The sign shall include the name of the operator and the
telephone number for a person responsible who may be
contacted in case of emergency pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Oil and Gas Act (PA Act 223).253
(f) For each entrance gate, the operator shall provide the
Township with a lock box and key to access the well site in case
of emergency. The location of said gate(s) shall be to the
satisfaction of the Township.
(6) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2.
(7) Dust, vibration, odors. All activities/operations shall be conducted
in such a manner to minimize dust, vibration or noxious odors and
253. Editor's Note: The Oil and Gas Act was repealed by 2012, Feb. 14, P.L. 87, No. 13, § 3. See
now Oil and Gas, 58 Pa.C.S.A. § 3201 et seq.
§ 195-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-42
1:608
shall be in accordance with § 195-74. All equipment used shall be
constructed and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor or other
harmful effects are minimized by the operations carried on at the
site to avoid injury to persons living in the vicinity and are in
compliance with § 195-74.
(8) Noise. The Township may require acoustical blankets, sound walls,
mufflers or other alternative methods to ensure compliance with
the performance standards relating to noise and as more
specifically set forth § 195-74 with respect to the location of a
proposed natural gas compressor station if such methods are
required in order to ensure such compliance. [Amended
11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 706]
As part of the special exception application, and prior to
construction, the operator shall establish the ambient or
background noise level baseline. The baseline shall be established
hourly over a seventy-two-hour period with at least one twentyfour-
hour reading on a Saturday or Sunday. A noise consultant/
engineer mutually agreed upon by the Township and owner/
operator will be responsible for determining the residual
background noise level baseline. The operator and Township will
mutually agree to the location of the sampling equipment. The
operator shall be responsible for all costs associated with the
noise consultant/engineer. The results shall be provided to the
Township.
(a) The noise generated during construction and operation of a
natural gas compressor station when measured at the property
line of adjoining properties or within 100 feet of any occupied
building on any affected property shall not exceed the greater
of the performance standards for noise set forth in
§ 195-74C(2) of the Zoning Ordinance or the ambient or
background noise level established above.
(b) Adjustments to noise limit. Adjustments to the noise limit
described in Subsection L(8)(b)[1] shall be permitted if
requested at the time of special exception hearing in
accordance with the following only during the daytime, 7:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m., per § 195-74:
Permitted Increase
(dBa)
Duration of Increase
(minutes)*
5 15
10 5
15 1
* Cumulative minutes during one hour
§ 195-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-42
1:609
The permitted increase shall be calculated using the greater
of the performance standards set forth in § 195-74C or the
ambient or background noise level established above. The
operator shall provide a computer-generated, site-specific,
noise-impact model based on the topography, vegetation and
structures of the proposed drill site within a 5,000-foot radius
from the outer boundary of the proposed oil and gas vertical
bore locations. The simulation model shall include both the
unabated noise analysis as well as several noise analyses,
including the effects of noise abatement plans.
(c) If a complaint that the operator is violating the forgoing noise
limits is received by the Township from a Township property
owner/resident who owns/occupies property impacted by noise
generated during construction, drilling, or hydraulic fracturing
activities, the Township Zoning Officer shall determine initially
whether the complaint has merit. If the complaint has merit,
the Township Zoning Officer shall notify the operator and
provide the operator with a forty-eight-hour period in which to
cure. Following the expiration of such forty-eight-hour cure
period, the Township Zoning Officer shall conduct an
inspection to determine whether the operator has established
compliance. If the Township Zoning Officer determines the
operator remains in violation of the noise limit, the operator
shall, within 24 hours following receipt of notification, begin
continuous sound monitoring for a period of 48 hours at the
property line to an occupied structure. A noise consultant/
engineer mutually agreed upon by the Township and owner/
operator shall conduct hourly testing and report the findings to
the Township. The operator shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the noise consultant/engineer. The applicant
shall report the findings to the Township and shall mitigate the
problem to the allowable level if the noise level exceeds the
allowable limits immediately after the 48 hours of sound
monitoring. If after the 48 hours of sound monitoring
determines the operator remains in violation of the noise limit,
the operation shall cease and desist until such time the noise
levels come into compliance with the allowable noise limits
established.
(9) Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor used
or on any production equipment or used in development shall not
be discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with i) an
exhaust muffler; or ii) an exhaust box The exhaust muffler or
exhaust box shall be constructed of noncombustible materials
designed and installed to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations
Moreover, all such equipment with an exhaust muffler or exhaust
box shall be maintained in good operating condition according to
manufacturer's specifications.
§ 195-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-42
1:610
(10) The compressors are required to be enclosed in a building with
doors.
(11) All permanent facilities shall be painted an earth tone color to
blend in with the surrounding area The Township may require
fencing and or landscaping to buffer the facilities from adjacent
properties in accordance with § 195-75G.
(12) All grading and filling shall be designed in compliance with
§ 195-70.
(13) A zoning permit shall not be issued for any structure located within
any floodway identified in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
prepared and approved by Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA). Oil and gas activities in the one-hundred-year
floodplain are discouraged but may be permitted if the following
provisions are met:
(a) Earth moving activities that do not materially change the
contour of the land are permitted for the purpose of pipeline
installation.
(b) There is compliance with Chapter 97 of the Code of the
Township of Rostraver.
(c) If no other area provides access to the oil or gas deposit, then
oil and gas drilling may be permitted in the floodplain. The
applicant must provide conclusive documentation that no other
location allows access to the oil or gas deposits other than a
location within the floodplain.
(d) No storage of chemicals shall be permitted within the
floodplain.
(e) Only necessary and needed structures will be permitted within
the floodplain.
(f) All structures within the flood zone shall be designed to
withstand a one-hundred-year storm event.
(g) An engineer registered in Pennsylvania and qualified to
present such documentation that structures will not cause
additional flooding on adjacent, upstream and/or downstream
properties shall provide such documentation to the Township.
(14) Permanent structures, whether principal or accessory, must comply
with the maximum height regulation of 40 feet and be in
compliance with § 195-73.
(15) A natural gas compressor station, ancillary equipment and facilities
shall be set back 600 feet from any existing structure, and 200 feet
from the nearest property line.
§ 195-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-42
1:611
(16) The applicant shall provide the Township's first responders,
through its Emergency Management Coordinator and Zoning
Officer, a copy of its Preparedness, Prevention and Contingency
(PPC) Plan. Included with the PPC Plan shall be the SARA Title III
Tier II Chemical Inventory submitted to PENNSAFE.
(a) Upon review of the PPC Plan, a meeting between all parties
will be held to discuss emergency and first response
procedures; and determine which first response personnel
have secured adequate training (five hours minimum per year)
to deal with any potential dangerous conditions that may result
due to development activities. The applicant shall arrange a
visit to site by Township emergency service providers for the
purpose of orientation to the location of equipment and
materials.
(b) Should first response training become necessary, the applicant
will make available an appropriate training program for first
responders in coordination with Westmoreland County Public
Safety.
(c) The cost and expense of the orientation and training shall be
sole responsibility of the applicant. The applicant shall not be
required to hold more than one site orientation and training
course annually under this subsection.
(17) The facility and/or its operation shall comply with all applicable
permits and requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, and any other governmental authority having
jurisdiction over its operations and with all federal, state and local
laws, ordinance and regulations promulgated to protect the
environment or otherwise relating to environmental matters.
(18) All applicants for a special exception shall reimburse Rostraver
Township for necessary and reasonable professional consultant
fees incurred by the Township related to application for activities
authorized by this subsection. Additionally, all applicants shall
reimburse the Township for consulting fees and cost incurred in
enforcing this subsection upon a finding of violation by a District
Justice.
(19) Federal or state law or regulation preempts ordinance
requirements that conflict with federal or state statute or
regulation. Township acknowledges that it is preempted from
regulating the operational methods of the oil and gas industry and
may only regulate land uses.
M. Natural gas processing plant. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
(1) A special exception shall be obtained for all natural gas processing
plants. All applications submitted for consideration of the Zoning
§ 195-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-42
1:612
Hearing Board shall include, at a minimum, the following
documentation and all other pertinent data deemed necessary to
process the application:
(a) Written permission from the property owner(s).
(b) A written description of the character of the proposed
operation, its timing and proposed duration, together with
duplicates of maps and plans submitted to state and federal
regulatory agencies or authorities for the issuance of
necessary permits.
(c) The applicant shall provide a plan for the transmission of gas
from the site. The plan will identify but not be limited to
gathering lines, compressors and other mid- and downstream
facilities located within the Township and extending 800 feet
beyond the Township boundary.
(d) The applicant shall provide the Township with the name of the
person supervising the processing plant and a phone number
where such person can be reached 24 hours a day for each day
of the week Annually, or upon any change of relevant
circumstances, the applicant shall update such information
and provide it to the Township.
(e) The applicant shall provide the Township with a copy of the
Preparedness Prevention and Contingency. Plan, as required
by and filed with the PA DEP, and a copy of the SARA Title III
Tier II Chemical Inventory submitted to PENNSAFE.
(f) The applicant shall provide an outline of training program for
Township's first responders.
(g) A survey of the property showing all permanent facilities
(tanks, buildings, pads, or other surface installations) with
locations and distances to property lines, the approximate
number of acres to be disturbed for development, and
identifying the floodway of the property(ies) as identified in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) prepared and approved by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
(h) A complete drainage and stormwater drainage plan, which
includes all storm sewers and appurtenances, along with an
approved best management practice method of disposal of all
stormwater collected, that will verify the peak
postdevelopment release rate of runoff, shall comply with the
stormwater management districts established in Chapter 164
of the Code of the Township of Rostraver, including but not
limited to any necessary agreements and/or bonding.
[1] If the stormwater drainage plan proved that a detention
structure is needed to maintain the peak postdevelopment
§ 195-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-42
1:613
release runoff rate for that stormwater management
district in Chapter 164 of the Code of the Township of
Rostraver, agreements will need to be done to confirm that
the detention structure will remain intact after the project
is complete. The Township shall obtain a bond from the
responsible party to insure compliance with this provision.
[2] In the event the Township determines that the public
interest is best served by mandating that the pond be filled
in at a reasonable time after land disturbance activities
have been substantially completed, the landowner/
developer shall complete the same at a time and in a
manner required by the Township. The Township shall
obtain a bond from the responsible party to insure
compliance with this provision.
(2) Natural gas processing plant shall only be permitted to occur on
property with a minimum of five contiguous acres or larger.
(3) In accordance with the appropriate Township ordinance, as
amended, driveways accessing the processing plant shall be paved
with an impervious material from the paved public street for a
distance of 50 feet into the site. The impervious material shall be in
place prior to the commencement of the processing plant.
(4) All traffic shall enter and exit the site via designated driveway
access points that connect with adjacent public rights-of-way. Said
access points shall be approved by local, county, and PennDOT
officials. Prior to initiating any work, the Township shall be
provided a copy of the highway occupancy permit prior to
commencing site development to access the site and for overweight
vehicles.
(5) All facilities, including the access road, shall be secured with a
fence, in compliance with § 195-72, with a secured gate as follows:
(a) The fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height, chain link
with green fabric mesh.
(b) The chain link fence shall have a minimum thickness of 11
gauge.
(c) Warning signs shall be install at one-hundred-foot spacing to
provide notice of the potential dangers.
(d) The site assigned address shall be clearly visible on the access
gate for emergency 911 purposes.
(e) The sign shall include the name of the operator and the
telephone number for a person responsible who may be
contacted in case of emergency pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Oil and Gas Act (PA Act 223).254
§ 195-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-42
1:614
(f) For each entrance gate, the operator shall provide the
Township with a lock box and key to access the well site in case
of emergency. The location of said gate(s) shall be to the
satisfaction of the Township.
(6) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2.
(7) Dust, vibration, odors. All activities/operations shall be conducted
in such a manner to minimize dust, vibration or noxious odors and
shall be in accordance with § 195-74. All equipment used shall be
constructed and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor or other
harmful effects are minimized by the operations carried on at the
site to avoid injury to persons living in the vicinity and are in
compliance with § 195-74.
(8) Noise. The Township may require acoustical blankets, sound walls,
mufflers or other alternative methods to ensure compliance with
the performance standards relating to noise and as more
specifically set forth § 195-74 with respect to the location of a
proposed natural processing plant if such methods are required in
order to ensure such compliance. [Amended 11-7-2018 by Ord.
No. 706]
As part of the special exception application, and prior to
construction, the operator shall establish the ambient or
background noise level baseline. The baseline shall be established
hourly over a seventy-two-hour period with at least one twentyfour-
hour reading on a Saturday or Sunday. A noise consultant/
engineer mutually agreed upon by the Township and owner/
operator will be responsible for determining the residual
background noise level baseline. The operator and Township will
mutually agree to the location of the sampling equipment. The
operator shall be responsible for all costs associated with the
noise consultant/engineer. The results shall be provided to the
Township.
(a) The noise generated during construction and operation of a
natural gas processing plant when measured at the property
line of adjoining properties or within 100 feet of any occupied
building on any affected property shall not exceed the greater
of the performance standards for noise set forth in
§ 195-74C(2) of the Zoning Ordinance or the ambient or
background noise level established above.
(b) Adjustments to noise limit. Adjustments to the noise limit
described in Subsection M(8)(b)[1] shall be permitted if
requested at the time of special exception hearing in
254. Editor's Note: The Oil and Gas Act was repealed by 2012, Feb. 14, P.L. 87, No. 13, § 3. See
now Oil and Gas, 58 Pa.C.S.A. § 3201 et seq.
§ 195-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-42
1:615
accordance with the following only during the daytime, 7:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m., per § 195-74:
Permitted Increase
(dBA)
Duration of Increase
(minutes)*
5 15
10 5
15 1
* Cumulative minutes during one hour.
The permitted increase shall be calculated using the greater
of the performance standards set forth in § 195-74C or the
ambient or background noise level established above. The
operator shall provide a computer-generated, site-specific,
noise-impact model based on the topography, vegetation and
structures of the proposed drill site within a 5,000-foot radius
from the outer boundary of the proposed oil and gas vertical
bore locations. The simulation model shall include both the
unabated noise analysis as well as several noise analyses,
including the effects of noise abatement plans.
(c) If a complaint that the operator is violating the forgoing noise
limits is received by the Township from a Township property
owner/resident who owns/occupies property impacted by noise
generated during construction, drilling, or hydraulic fracturing
activities, the Township Zoning Officer shall determine initially
whether the complaint has merit. If the complaint has merit,
the Township Zoning Officer shall notify the operator and
provide the operator with a forty-eight-hour period in which to
cure. Following the expiration of such forty-eight-hour cure
period, the Township Zoning Officer shall conduct an
inspection to determine whether the operator has established
compliance. If the Township Zoning Officer determines the
operator remains in violation of the noise limit, the operator
shall, within 24 hours following receipt of notification; begin
continuous sound monitoring for a period of 48 hours at the
property line to an occupied structure. A noise consultant/
engineer mutually agreed upon by the Township and owner/
operator shall conduct hourly testing and report the findings to
the Township. The operator shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the noise consultant/engineer. The applicant
shall report the findings to the Township and shall mitigate the
problem to the allowable level if the noise level exceeds the
allowable limits immediately after the 48 hours of sound
monitoring. If after the 48 hours of sound monitoring
determines the operator remains in violation of the noise limit,
the operation shall cease and desist until such time the noise
§ 195-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-42
1:616
levels come into compliance with the allowable noise limits
established.
(9) Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor used
or on any production equipment or used in development shall not
be discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with i) an
exhaust muffler; or ii) an exhaust box. The exhaust muffler or
exhaust box shall be constructed of noncombustible materials
designed and installed to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations.
Moreover, all such equipment with an exhaust muffler or exhaust
box shall be maintained in good operating condition according to
manufacturer's specifications.
(10) Compressors are required to be enclosed in a building with doors.
(11) All permanent facilities shall be painted an earth tone color to
blend in with the surrounding area. The Township may require
fencing and or landscaping to buffer the facilities from adjacent
properties in accordance with § 195-75G.
(12) All grading and filling shall be designed in compliance with
§ 195-70.
(13) A zoning permit shall not be issued for any structure located within
any floodway identified in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
prepared and approved by Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA). Oil and gas activities in the one-hundred-year
floodplain is discouraged but may be permitted if the following
provisions are met:
(a) Earth moving activities that do not materially change the
contour of the land are permitted for the purpose of pipeline
installation.
(b) There is compliance with Chapter 97 of the Code of the
Township of Rostraver.
(c) If no other area provides access to the oil or gas deposit, then
oil and gas drilling may be permitted in the floodplain. The
applicant must provide conclusive documentation that no other
location allows access to the oil or gas deposits other than a
location within the floodplain.
(d) No storage of chemicals shall be permitted within the
floodplain.
(e) Only necessary and needed structures will be permitted within
the floodplain.
(f) All structures within the flood zone shall be designed to
withstand a one-hundred-year storm event.
§ 195-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-42
1:617
(g) An engineer registered in Pennsylvania and qualified to
present such documentation that structures will not cause
additional flooding on adjacent, upstream and/or downstream
properties shall provide such documentation to the Township.
(14) Permanent structures, whether principal or accessory, must comply
with the maximum height regulation of 40 feet and in compliance
with § 195-73.
(15) A natural gas processing plant, ancillary equipment and facilities
shall be set back 600 feet from existing structure, and 200 feet
from the nearest property line.
(16) The applicant shall provide the Township's first responders,
through its Emergency Management Coordinator and Zoning
Officer, a copy of its Preparedness, Prevention and Contingency
(PPC) Plan. Included with the PPC Plan shall be the SARA Title III
Tier II Chemical Inventory submitted to PENNSAFE.
(a) Upon review of the PPC Plan, a meeting between all parties
will be held to discuss emergency and first response
procedures; and determine which first response personnel
have secured adequate training (five hours minimum per year)
to deal with any potential dangerous conditions that may result
due to development activities. The applicant shall arrange a
visit to site by Township emergency service providers for the
purpose of orientation to the location of equipment and
materials.
(b) Should first response training become necessary, the applicant
will make available an appropriate training program for first
responders in coordination with Westmoreland County Public
Safety.
(c) The cost and expense of the orientation and training shall be
sole responsibility of the applicant. The applicant shall not be
required to hold more than one site orientation and training
course annually under this subsection.
(17) The facility and/or its operation shall comply with all applicable
permits and requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, and any other governmental authority having
jurisdiction over its operations and with all federal, state and local
laws, ordinance and regulations promulgated to protect the
environment or otherwise relating to environmental matters.
(18) All applicants for a special exception shall reimburse Rostraver
Township for necessary and reasonable professional consultant
fees incurred by the Township related to application for activities
authorized by this subsection. Additionally, all applicants shall
reimburse the Township for consulting fees and cost incurred in
§ 195-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-42
1:618
enforcing this subsection upon a finding of violation by a District
Justice.
(19) Federal or state law or regulation preempts ordinance
requirements that conflict with federal or state statute or
regulation. Township acknowledges that it is preempted from
regulating the operational methods of the oil and gas industry and
may only regulate land uses.
N. Staging facility. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
(1) A special exception shall be obtained for all staging facilities. All
applications submitted for consideration of the Zoning Hearing
Board shall include, at a minimum, the following documentation
and all other pertinent data deemed necessary to process the
application:
(a) Written permission from the property owner(s).
(b) A written description of the character of the proposed
operation, its timing and proposed duration, together with
duplicates of maps and plans submitted to state and federal
regulatory agencies or authorities for the issuance of
necessary permits.
(c) The applicant shall be provided a list of all chemicals or waste
products that will be stored on site.
(d) The applicant shall provide the Township with the name of the
person supervising the processing plant and a phone number
where such person can be reached 24 hours a day for each day
of the week Annually, or upon any change of relevant
circumstances, the applicant shall update such information
and provide it to the Township.
(e) A survey of the property showing all permanent facilities
(tanks, buildings, pads, or other surface installations) with
locations and distances to property lines, the approximate
number of acres to be disturbed for development, and
identifying the floodway of the property(ies) as identified in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) prepared and approved by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
(f) No activities or substances of a hazardous safety or
environmental nature shall be employed, carried or utilized as
part of any operations conducted on the site unless specifically
provided for as part of the special exception application.
(g) The applicant must provide the Township with a list and
description of all equipment weighing in excess of 10 tons and
identification of the proposed routing of vehicles on Township
roads. The proposed hauling routes must be designed to
§ 195-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-42
1:619
minimize the impact on collector, connector and local streets
within the Township. The Township reserves the right to
designate required truck hauling routes throughout the
Township.
[1] Vehicular access to a site solely via a local residential
street is prohibited.
[2] Vehicular access to a site via a collector street is
permitted.
(h) A complete drainage and stormwater drainage plan, which
includes all storm sewers and appurtenances, along with an
approved best management practice method of disposal of all
stormwater collected, that will verify the peak
postdevelopment release rate of runoff, shall comply with the
stormwater management districts established in Chapter 164
of the Code of the Township of Rostraver, including but not
limited to any necessary agreements and/or bonding.
[1] If the stormwater drainage plan proved that a detention
structure is needed to maintain the peak postdevelopment
release runoff rate for that stormwater management
district in Chapter 164 of the Code of the Township of
Rostraver, agreements will need to be done to confirm that
the detention structure will remain intact after the project
is complete. The Township shall obtain a bond from the
responsible party to insure compliance with this provision.
[2] In the event the Township determines that the public
interest is best served by mandating that the pond be filled
in at a reasonable time after land disturbance activities
have been substantially completed, the landowner/
developer shall complete the same at a time and in a
manner required by the Township. The Township shall
obtain a bond from the responsible party to insure
compliance with this provision.
(2) Staging facilities shall only be permitted to occur on property with
32,000 square feet.
(3) In accordance with the appropriate Township ordinance, as
amended, driveways accessing the site shall be paved with an
impervious material from the paved public street for a distance of
50 feet into the site. The impervious material shall be in place prior
to the commencement of the facilities.
(4) All traffic shall enter and exit the site via designated driveway
access points that connect with adjacent public rights-of-way. Said
access points shall be approved by local, county, and PennDOT
officials. Prior to initiating any work at a site, the Township shall be
provided a copy of the highway occupancy permit prior to
§ 195-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-42
1:620
commencing site development to access the site and for overweight
vehicles.
(5) In compliance with § 187-16, the applicant of the facility and any or
all subcontractors shall execute an excess maintenance agreement
with the Township for a permit and post a bond at the paved
highway rate in favor of the Township in a form acceptable to the
Township prior to beginning any work on a drill site. The bond is to
guarantee restoration of Township roads damaged as a result of
hauling associated with the facility.
(6) No storage or parking shall be permitted in the required front, rear
or side yard area.
(7) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2.
(8) Dust, vibration, odors. All activities/operations shall be conducted
in such a manner to minimize dust, vibration or noxious odors and
shall be in accordance with § 195-74. All equipment used shall be
constructed and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor or other
harmful effects are minimized by the operations carried on at the
site to avoid injury to persons living in the vicinity and are in
compliance with § 195-74.
(9) Noise. The Township may require acoustical blankets, sound walls,
mufflers or other alternative methods to ensure compliance
depending on the location of the operations/facility(ies) to adjacent
residential properties and as more specifically set forth in § 195-74
of this chapter.
(10) The facility and/or its operation shall comply with all applicable
permits and requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, and any other governmental authority having
jurisdiction over its operations and with all federal, state and local
laws, ordinance and regulations promulgated to protect the
environment or otherwise relating to environmental matters.
(11) All applicants for a special exception shall reimburse Rostraver
Township for necessary and reasonable professional consultant
fees incurred by the Township related to application for activities
authorized by this subsection. Additionally, all applicants shall
reimburse the Township for consulting fees and cost incurred in
enforcing this subsection upon a finding of violation by a District
Justice.
(12) Federal or state law or regulation preempts ordinance
requirements that conflict with federal or state statute or
regulation. Township acknowledges that it is preempted from
regulating the operational methods of the oil and gas industry and
may only regulate land uses.
§ 195-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-42
1:621
O. Oil and gas water storage facility. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
(1) A special exception shall be obtained for all water storage facilities
that will contain frac/brine water. All applications submitted for
consideration of the Zoning Hearing Board shall include, at a
minimum, the following documentation and all other pertinent data
deemed necessary to process the application:
(a) Written permission from the property owner(s).
(b) A written description of the character of the proposed
operation, its timing and proposed duration, together with
duplicates of maps and plans submitted to state and federal
regulatory agencies or authorities for the issuance of
necessary permits.
(c) A survey of the property showing all permanent facilities
(tanks, ponds, or other surface installations) with locations and
distances to property lines, the approximate number of acres
to be disturbed for development, and identifying the floodway
of the property(ies) as identified in the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) prepared and approved by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
(d) No activities or substances of a hazardous safety or
environmental nature shall be employed, carried or utilized as
part of any operations conducted on the site unless specifically
provided for as part of the special exception application.
(e) The applicant must provide the Township with a list and
description of all equipment weighing in excess of 10 tons and
identification of the proposed routing of vehicles on Township
roads. The proposed hauling routes must be designed to
minimize the impact on collector, connector and local streets
within the Township. The Township reserves the right to
designate required truck hauling routes throughout the
Township.
[1] Vehicular access to a site solely via a local residential
street is prohibited.
[2] Vehicular access to a site via a collector street is
permitted.
(f) A complete drainage and stormwater drainage plan, which
includes all storm sewers and appurtenances, along with an
approved best management practice method of disposal of all
stormwater collected, that will verify the peak
postdevelopment release rate of runoff, shall comply with the
stormwater management districts established in Chapter 164
of the Code of the Township of Rostraver, including but not
limited to any necessary agreements and/or bonding.
§ 195-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-42
1:622
[1] If the stormwater drainage plan proved that a detention
structure is needed to maintain the peak postdevelopment
release runoff rate for that stormwater management
district in Chapter 164 of the Code of the Township of
Rostraver, agreements will need to be done to confirm that
the detention structure will remain intact after the project
is complete. The Township shall obtain a bond from the
responsible party to insure compliance with this provision.
[2] In the event the Township determines that the public
interest is best served by mandating that the pond be filled
in at a reasonable time after land disturbance activities
have been substantially completed, the landowner/
developer shall complete the same at a time and in a
manner required by the Township. The Township shall
obtain a bond from the responsible party to insure
compliance with this provision.
(2) Water storage facilities shall only be permitted to occur on property
with 20,000 square feet.
(3) In accordance with the appropriate Township ordinance, as
amended, driveways accessing the site shall be paved with an
impervious material from the paved public street for a distance of
50 feet into the site. The impervious material shall be in place prior
to the commencement of the facilities.
(4) All traffic shall enter and exit the site via designated driveway
access points that connect with adjacent public rights-of-way. Said
access points shall be approved by local, county, and PennDOT
officials. Prior to initiating any work at the site, the Township shall
be provided a copy of the highway occupancy permit prior to
commencing site development to access the site and for overweight
vehicles.
(5) In compliance with § 187-16, the applicant of the water storage
facility and any or all subcontractors shall execute an excess
maintenance agreement with the Township for a permit and post a
bond at the paved highway rate in favor of the Township in a form
acceptable to the Township prior to beginning any work on a drill
site. The bond is to guarantee restoration of Township roads
damaged as a result of hauling associated with the facility.
(6) Dust, vibration, odors. All activities/operations shall be conducted
in such a manner to minimize dust, vibration or noxious odors and
shall be in accordance with § 195-74.
(7) Complete site restoration within one year following the termination
of the use of a facility for water storage in accordance with PA DEP
regulations. Topsoil must remain on site so it can be put back
during the restoration of the site.
§ 195-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-42
1:623
§ 195-43. Lot, area and dimensional requirements.
The following requirements shall apply in I-1 Light Industrial Districts:
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Use:255256
Research and
testing
20,000 75 50 25 25 40 50%
(8) All impoundments shall be secured with a fence, in compliance with
§ 195-72, with a secured gate as follows:
(a) The fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height, chain link
with green fabric mesh.
(b) The fencing shall be in place throughout the drill operation and
until the impoundment pond is removed.
(c) The chain link fence shall have a minimum thickness of 11
gauge.
(9) The facility and/or its operation shall comply with all applicable
permits and requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, and any other governmental authority having
jurisdiction over its operations and with all federal, state and local
laws, ordinance and regulations promulgated to protect the
environment or otherwise relating to environmental matters.
(10) All applicants for a special exception shall reimburse Rostraver
Township all reasonable and necessary professional consultant fees
incurred by the Township related to application for activities
authorized by this subsection. Additionally, all applicants shall
reimburse the Township for consulting fees and cost incurred in
enforcing this subsection upon a finding of violation by a District
Justice.
(11) Federal or state law or regulation preempts ordinance
requirements that conflict with federal or state statute or
regulation. Township acknowledges that it is preempted from
regulating the operational methods of the oil and gas industry and
may only regulate land uses.
255. Editor's Note: The entries for distribution and bottling, packaging and delivery, printing
and publishing, and shops/custom, repair were repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
256. Editor's Note: The entry for essential or commercial communications tower, added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421, was repealed 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705.
§ 195-42 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-43
1:624
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Offices 5,000 60 25 15 15 40 50%
Public facility
[Amended
6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601]
5,000 60 25 15 15 65 50%
Auto sales and
service [Amended
12-29-2008 by
Ord. No 580]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 50%
Supply yard
[Amended
6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601]
20,000 75 50 25 25 40 50%
Restaurants 5,000 60 25 15 15 40 50%
Public utility
buildings
5,000 60 25 15 15 40 50%
Essential services 5,000 60 25 15 15 40 50%
Ambulance station
[Added 9-2-1998
by Ord. No. 387]
5,000 60 25 15 15 40 50%
Communications
antennas that fall
under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless
Broadband
Collocation Act257
[Added
2-23–2000 by
Ord. No. 421;
amended
9-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-81
Fire Station
[Added 10-1-2008
by Ord. No 577]
5,000 60 25 15 15 40 50%
257. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-43
1:625
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Bank [Added
4-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 654]
5,000 60 25 15 15 40 50%
Mini-storage
facility [Added
4-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 654]
32,000 100 50 25 25 40 50%
Mobile home sales,
service and repair
[Added 4-1-2015
by Ord. No. 654]
32,000 150 50 25 25 40 50%
Motel/hotel
[Added 4-1-2015
by Ord. No. 654]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 50%
Retail business
[Added 4-1-2015
by Ord. No. 654]
5,000 100 50 15 15 65 50%
Wholesale business
[Added 4-1-2015
by Ord. No. 654]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 50%
Microbrewery/
microdistillery
[Added 6-6-2018
by Ord. No. 698]
5,000 60 25 15 15 40 50%
Service station
[Added 11-6-2019
by Ord. No. 717]
20,000 100 50 25 25 65 50%
Shopping center
[Added 11-6-2019
by Ord. No. 717]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 50%
Conditional Use:
§ 195-43 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-43
1:626
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Communications
antennas that do
not fall under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless
Broadband
Collocation Act258
and
communications
towers [Added
9-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-181
Special Exception:259260
Light
manufacturing,
fabrication
20,000 75 50 25 25 40 50%
Wholesale
[Amended
4-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 654]
20,000 75 50 25 25 40 50%
Transportation
terminal
[Amended
12-29-2008 by
Ord. No 580;
6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 50%
Contractor's yard
[Amended
12-29-2008 by
Ord. No 580;
6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 50%
Blasting [Added
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-14N
258. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
259. Editor's Note: The entry for wholesale distribution was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
260. Editor's Note: The entry for essential or commercial communications tower, added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421, was repealed 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705.
§ 195-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-43
1:627
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Bldg.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Educational
institution,
commercial
[Added 4-2-2003
by Ord. No. 483;
amended
12-29-2008 by
Ord. No 580]
32,000 100 50 25 25 65 50%
Commercial
parking lot [Added
5-4-2005 by Ord.
No. 528]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-38K
Gas and oil drill
site [Added
6-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 617]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-14S
Natural gas
compressor station
[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-42L
Natural gas
processing plant
[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-42M
Staging facility
[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
32,000 150 50 25 25 40 50%
Oil and gas water
storage facility
[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
20,000 75 50 25 25 40 60%
§ 195-43 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-43
1:628
ARTICLE XIV
I-2 Heavy Industrial District
§ 195-44. Statement of purpose and use summary.
The I-2 Heavy Industrial District is designed to accommodate industrial
activities of an intrusive nature which are normally not compatible with
or detract from the viability of other uses due to high levels of traffic
generation, noise, aesthetic and related considerations.
A. Use permitted by right.
(1) Research and testing labs.
(2) Offices.
(3) Supply yards.
(4) Public facility. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(5) Light and heavy manufacturing. [Amended 4-1-2015 by Ord. No.
654]
(6) Public utility buildings.
(7) Transportation terminal. [Amended 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
(8) Warehouse. [Amended 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
(9) (Reserved)261
(10) Contractor's yard. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(11) Essential services.
(12) Ambulance station. [Adopted 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 367]
(13) Communications antennas that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,262 subject to the requirements
of § 195-81. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705263]
(14) (Reserved)
(15) Auto sales, service, and repair. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No.
654]
(16) Bank. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
261. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(9), which listed wholesale distribution as a use
permitted by right, was repealed 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654.
262. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
263. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(13), regarding essential
communications antennas, and Subsection A(14), regarding commercial communications
antennas, both added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341.
§ 195-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-44
1:629
(17) Eating and drinking establishments. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 654]
(18) Fire station. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
(19) Mini-storage facility. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
(20) Mobile home sales, service, and repair. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 654]
(21) Motel/hotel. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
(22) Retail business. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
(23) Wholesale business. [Added 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654]
(24) Microbrewery/microdistillery. [Added 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 698]
(25) Service stations. [Added 11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 717]
(26) Shopping center. [Added 11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 717]
B. Conditional use.
(1) Water-related recreation.
(2) Airport-related services. [Added 6-2-1999 by Ord. No. 408]
(3) (Reserved)264
(4) Billboard. [Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
(5) Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act265 and communications
towers, subject to the requirements of § 195-81. [Added 9-5-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
C. Special exception.
(1) Surface mining.
(2) Mine ventilation shafts.
(3) Airports.
(4) Junkyards.
(5) Waste disposal and sanitary landfill.
(6) Deep mines.
(7) (Reserved)266
264. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(3), Electronic variable message sign, added 12-4-2002
by Ord. No. 475, was repealed 4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 545.
265. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-44 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-44
1:630
§ 195-45. Conditional use provisions.
The following conditional uses may be authorized by the Township
Commissioners pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
(8) (Reserved)
(9) Blasting. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(10) Educational institution, commercial. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483]
(11) Commercial parking lot. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
(12) Electronic variable message sign. [Added 4-5-2006 by Ord. No.
545]
(13) Methadone treatment facility. [Added 7-5-2006 by Ord. No. 549]
(14) Correctional facility. [Added 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 562]
(15) Juvenile detention facility. [Added 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 562]
(16) Halfway house. [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(17) Gas and oil drill site. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
(18) Natural gas compressor station. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No.
617]
(19) Natural gas processing plant. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
(20) Staging facility. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
(21) Oil and gas water storage facility. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No.
617]
D. Accessory use.
(1) Uses customary to principal use. (See § 195-80, Design review
requirement.)
A. Water-related recreation.
(1) The use of land and structures established under this conditional
use category shall be limited to riparian river sites.
(2) Land uses shall be limited to the following public and private
activities:
(a) Boat marinas.
266. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(7), regarding essential communications towers, and
Subsection C(8), regarding commercial communications towers, both added 5-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 341, were repealed 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341.
§ 195-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-45
1:631
(b) Boat sales and servicing.
(c) Boat storage facilities.
(d) Retail sales of marine accessories, supplies and fuel.
(e) Restaurants and related food service facilities.
(f) Cruise and excursion centers.
(g) River oriented recreation.
(h) Bait and fishing supplies.
(3) All structures shall be constructed to complement the recreational
character of the district. All proposed building elevations and
materials shall be subject to the review of the Planning Agency and
approval of the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 8-7-2002 by
Ord. No. 468]
(4) Boats, trailers and related materials and articles being stored or on
view for sale shall be arranged in an orderly manner. The site of
each shall be free of clutter and supplementary storage.
(5) Outdoor storage areas shall not be permitted to front directly on
streets and shall be enclosed or screened, subject to the standards
and criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter. [Amended
6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(6) No site or lot shall be used for any purpose or business that is
considered dangerous or unsafe or that constitutes a nuisance or is
noxious or offensive by reason of emission of dust, odor, smoke,
fumes, vibration, radiation, noise or pollution potential.
(7) The total ground area of the site not covered by buildings, paved
parking, interior roadways and service areas is to be landscaped.
Yards are to be landscaped with grass or other planting materials
and all slopes are to be covered by grass or ground cover.
(8) Site access drives and parking areas shall consist of defined
entrances and exits and shall have a minimum width of 20 feet.
(9) Any parking area with five or more spaces shall be surfaced with a
paved dust-free surface. Where feasible, all parking and vehicular
site access shall be to the side or rear of a site. All parking areas
shall be landscaped subject to the standards and criteria of Article
XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No.
601]
B. Airport-related services. [Added 6-2-1999 by Ord. No. 408]
(1) The use of land and structure established under this conditional
use category shall be limited to sites within the lot lines of an
airport as of the effective date of this Subsection B.
§ 195-45 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-45
1:632
§ 195-46. Special exception provisions.
The following special exceptions may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
(2) This conditional use category shall include any specific use
permitted in any zoning district if the applicant demonstrates that
establishing that use will be a more than incidental benefit to the
operation of an airport.
(3) If the specific use proposed is permitted in any zoning district as a
conditional use, then the conditional use provisions in that district
shall apply.
(4) The lot, area and dimensional requirements applicable to any
specific use will be the most restrictive requirements set forth
elsewhere in this chapter.
C. (Reserved)267
D. Billboard, subject to the standards and criteria of Article XVI,
§ 195-58H, of this chapter. [Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
E. Communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act268 and communications towers,
subject to the standards and criteria of Article XVIII, § 195-81, of this
chapter. [Added 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705]
A. Surface mining, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-14K, of this chapter.
B. Mine ventilating shaft, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
VI, § 195-14G, of this chapter.
C. Airports, development and operation subject to the requirements of
Article XVIII, § 195-79, of this chapter.
D. Junkyards, development and operation subject to the requirements of
Chapter 112 of the Code of Ordinances of Rostraver Township.
E. Waste disposal and sanitary landfill.
(1) All activities conducted in association with and as a part of waste
disposal areas shall be in accordance with all applicable federal
and state statutes, rules and regulations.
(2) The applicant shall have obtained from appropriate state and
federal regulatory agencies or authorities permits issued in
accordance with all applicable laws and regulations for the
proposed use. In the event such permits have not been issued at the
267. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, Electronic variable message sign, added 12-4-2002 by
Ord. No. 475, was repealed 4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 545.
268. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-46
1:633
time Township special exception approval is requested, the
applicant's zoning approval shall be expressly conditioned on the
granting of necessary permits as required by the above agencies or
authorities. At the time of making application to such authorities,
the applicant shall file with the Township Secretary a copy of each
state or federal application with supporting documentation for the
proposed use.
(3) Materials transported to and processed at a waste disposal area
shall be limited to those materials and substances defined
herewith: any garbage, refuse, waste and other similar material,
including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material
resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institution establishments and community activities; but shall not
include any hazardous waste from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, sewage treatment plant
or air pollution control facility. [Amended 10-7-1998 by Ord. No.
388]
(4) A site plan shall be included in the application which delineates site
ingress and egress, use areas within the site, phasing of use areas,
location of all structures and location and description of all
required screening and fencing.
(5) No waste disposal area shall be established on a site containing
less than 40 contiguous acres.
(6) The applicant shall provide plans for transportation of materials to
the site. Said plan shall delineate access routes, provisions for
traffic control and procedures to minimize littering and overflow
problems along site access routes. Measures that will be taken to
maintain all Township roads used for primary site access shall be
specified.
(7) Bonds in amounts specified by the Board of Township
Commissioners shall be posted by the applicant to repair any
damages to roads which may result from the disposal operation.
(8) The applicant shall outline procedures to be employed to provide
for antipollution and nuisance control, the protection of area water
supplies and other applicable concerns related to the health and
safety of adjacent residential areas.
(9) For each site which is adjacent to or considered by the Zoning
Hearing Board to be visibly or environmentally detrimental to the
use of any structure used for residential, human habitation,
sleeping, cultural, social, educational, recreational, religious or
similar residential related purpose in any district, there must be
preserved a strip of land for screening purposes on any side of the
tract of land on which present or future residential or related uses
§ 195-46 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-46
1:634
are situated. The preserved strip shall be a minimum of 20 feet in
width.
(a) The required screen shall have a height adequate to achieve its
screening purpose. Plant materials used shall consist of dense
evergreen plants. They shall be of a kind, or used in such a
manner, so as to provide a continuous opaque screen within 24
months after commencement of operations in the area to be
screened. The Board of Township Commissioners shall require
that either new planting or alternative screening materials be
provided if, after 24 months, the plant materials do not provide
an opaque screen.
(b) No landfill activities, including, without limitation, storage and
sediment ponds, shall be conducted within 100 feet of a
property line or 300 feet of a dwelling. In addition, no waste
disposal shall occur within 500 feet of a dwelling. All active use
areas shall be completely enclosed by a chain link fence not
less than six feet high, with the top portion above the height of
six feet above the ground level to be constructed of barbed
wire or other appropriate material, with the entire fence being
constructed in such a manner so as to prevent the entry of
unauthorized persons onto the portion of the premises on
which the use is situated. [Added 10-7-1998 by Ord. No.
389]
F. Deep mines.
(1) Uses may include coal mining portals, tipples, cleaning plants,
conveyor systems, shops, structures and accessory facilities
normally associated with deep mining operations.
(2) The application shall include a development and operation plan.
The following information and all other data deemed appropriate
and necessary to demonstrate that the intent and purposes of this
chapter will be achieved shall be included.
(a) A description of the character, timing and duration of the
proposed operation, including maps and plans showing the
location of the site, all access routes from public roads and
area and extent of the proposed activity.
(b) The location and identity of ownership of all structures and
land uses that will or may be affected by the proposed
operation and measures that will be taken to protect all
structures, inhabitants and land uses from adverse impacts
from the proposed use.
(c) A description of plans for transportation of materials and
equipment to construct the facility.
§ 195-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-46
1:635
(d) A description of how the proposed use and facility will meet all
applicable regulations concerning construction.
(e) A site plan of the proposed facility showing all structures,
facilities, accessways, fencing and screening provisions.
(3) The applicant shall have obtained from each appropriate state and
federal regulatory agency or authority a permit issued in
accordance with all applicable state and federal laws and
regulations for the proposed use.
G. Essential communications tower or commercial communications tower,
subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, § 195-14M, of this
chapter. [Added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341]
H. Blasting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, § 195-14N,
of this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
I. Educational institution, commercial, subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XI, § 195-34B, of this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by
Ord. No. 483]
J. Commercial parking lot, subject to standards and criteria of Article XII,
§ 195-38K, of this chapter. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 528]
K. Electronic variable message sign, subject to the standards and criteria
of Article XVI, § 195-55.1, of this chapter. [Added 4-5-2006 by Ord.
No. 545]
L. Methadone treatment facility. [Added 7-5-2006 by Ord. No. 549]
(1) The facility shall not be established or operated within 1,000 feet of
an existing school, public playground, public park, residence, childcare
facility, hospital, nursing home, place of worship or place of
assembly established prior to the proposed methadone treatment
facility.
(a) A methadone treatment may be established and operated
closer than the 1,000 feet; this request shall be reviewed as a
variance and shall be heard in conjunction with the special
exception hearing. One or more public hearings by the Zoning
Hearing Board regarding the proposed facility location shall be
held following public notice. All property owners located within
1,000 feet of the proposed location shall be provided written
notice of said hearings at least 30 days prior to said public
hearings occurring. The petitioner shall be responsible for
obtaining the names and addresses of adjacent property
owner(s) at the time of application.
(2) The site shall be serviced by a municipal water supply and a
municipal sanitary sewerage system.
§ 195-46 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-46
1:636
(3) All development shall be based on a site plan subject to review of
the Township Planning Agency and approval of the Township Board
of Commissioners. The plan shall include but not be limited to
topography, parking, traffic circulation, landscaped area, outside
lighting and stormwater management controls.
(4) All required county, state and federal requirements, permits and
licenses shall be obtained prior to granting of special exception
approval.
(5) If any provision of this subsection is deemed invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, then only that provision shall be stricken
and all other provisions contained herein shall remain in full force
and effect.
(6) All parking areas shall be landscaped subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter and shall provide
a screen planting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter. [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No.
601]
M. Correctional facility. [Added 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 562]
(1) A correctional facility shall have a minimum lot area of 150 acres.
(2) Location.
(a) The facility shall not be established or operated within 1,000
feet of an existing school, public playground, public park,
residence, child-care facility, hospital, nursing home, place of
worship or place of assembly within or outside of the Township
established prior to the proposed correctional facility.
(b) A correctional facility may be established and operated closer
than the 1,000 feet; this request shall be reviewed as a
variance and shall be heard in conjunction with the special
exception hearing. One or more public hearings by the Zoning
Hearing Board regarding the proposed facility location shall be
held following public notice. All property owners located within
1,000 feet of the proposed location shall be provided written
notice of said hearings at least 30 days prior to said public
hearings occurring. The petitioner shall be responsible for
obtaining the names and addresses of adjacent property
owner(s) at the time of application.
(3) The site shall be serviced by a municipal water supply and a
municipal sanitary sewerage system.
(4) Correctional facilities shall provide a visual screen along all
property lines. The screen shall be constructed as an earth berm,
landscaped buffer yard fence and/or wall. The screen shall have a
minimum height of eight feet. No barbed wire or similar security
§ 195-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-46
1:637
fencing shall be visible from a public right-of-way or adjacent
residential dwelling.
(5) Provisions for all vehicular ingress and egress in conjunction with
the site shall be approved by the Township Engineer and if
applicable, PennDOT.
(6) All development shall be based on a site plan subject to review of
the Township Planning Agency and approval of the Township Board
of Commissioners. The plan shall include, but not be limited to,
topography, parking, traffic circulation, landscaped area, outside
lighting and stormwater management controls.
(7) All required county, state and federal requirements, permits and
licenses shall be obtained prior to granting of special exception
approval.
(8) The Zoning Hearing Board may attach additional conditions
pursuant to this section, in order to protect the public's health,
safety and welfare. These conditions may include, but are not
limited to, increased setbacks.
(9) All parking areas shall be landscaped subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter and shall provide
a screen planting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter. [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No.
601]
N. Juvenile detention facility. [Added 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 562]
(1) All development shall be based on a site plan subject to review of
the Township Planning Agency and approval of the Township Board
of Commissioners. The plan shall include, but not be limited to,
topography, parking, traffic circulation, landscaped area, outside
lighting and stormwater management controls.
(2) A detailed statement shall be provided to the Zoning Hearing Board
providing the proposed number and nature of the anticipated
occupants.
(3) A license or certification shall also be obtained from the United
States of America, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
Westmoreland County or other appropriate governmental agencies
prior to issuance of a zoning permit. If an appropriate licensing or
certifying agency does not exist, the applicant shall demonstrate to
the Zoning Hearing Board that the proposal satisfies a
demonstrative need and shall be conducted in a responsible
manner without detriment to the public’s health, safety and
welfare.
(4) The site shall be serviced by a municipal water supply and a
municipal sanitary sewerage system.
§ 195-46 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-46
1:638
(5) All parking areas shall be landscaped subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter and shall provide
a screen planting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter. [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No.
601]
O. Halfway house [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(1) Location.
(a) The facility shall not be established or operated within 1,000
feet of an existing school, public playground, public park,
residence, child-care facility, hospital, nursing home, place of
worship or place of assembly within or outside of the Township
established prior to the proposed correctional facility.
(b) A halfway house may be established and operated closer than
the 1,000 feet; this request shall be reviewed as a variance and
shall be heard in conjunction with the special exception
hearing. One or more public hearings by the Zoning Hearing
Board regarding the proposed facility location shall be held
following public notice. All property owners located within
1,000 feet of the proposed location shall be provided written
notice of said hearings at least 30 days prior to said public
hearings occurring. The petitioner shall be responsible for
obtaining the names and addresses of adjacent property
owner(s) at the time of application.
(2) All development shall be based on a site plan subject to review of
the Township Planning Agency and approval of the Township Board
of Commissioners. The plan shall include but not be limited to
topography, parking, traffic circulation, landscaped area, outside
lighting and stormwater management controls.
(3) A license or certification shall also be obtained from the United
States of America, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
Westmoreland County or other appropriate governmental agencies
prior to issuance of a zoning permit. If an appropriate licensing or
certifying agency does not exist, the applicant shall demonstrate to
the Zoning Hearing Board that the proposal satisfies a
demonstrative need and shall be conducted in a responsible
manner without detriment to the public’s health, safety and
welfare.
(4) The site shall be serviced by a municipal water supply and a
municipal sanitary sewerage system.
(5) Parking facilities shall be provided at the rate of one off-street
space for every four residents, plus one space for each employee.
All parking areas shall be landscaped subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter and shall provide
§ 195-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-46
1:639
§ 195-47. Lot, area and dimensional requirements.
The following requirements shall apply in I-2 Heavy Industrial Districts:
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Building.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Use:
Research and
testing labs
20,000 75 50 25 25 40 60%
Offices 5,000 60 25 15 15 40 60%
Supply yards
[Amended
12-29-2008 by
Ord. No 580]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 75%
Public facility
[Amended
6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601]
5,000 60 25 15 15 65 50%
Manufacturing 20,000 75 50 25 25 40 60%
Public utility
building
5,000 60 25 25 25 40 60%
a screen planting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter.
P. Gas and oil drill site, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-14S, of this chapter. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
Q. Natural gas compressor station, subject to the standards and criteria of
Article XIII, § 195-42L, of this chapter. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No.
617]
R. Natural gas processing plant, subject to the standards and criteria of
Article XIII, § 195-42M, of this chapter. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No.
617]
S. Staging facility, subject to the standards and criteria of Article XIII,
§ 195-42N, of this chapter. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
T. Oil and gas water storage facility, subject to the standards and criteria
of Article XIII, § 195-42O, of this chapter. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 617]
§ 195-46 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-47
1:640
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Building.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Transportation
terminal
[Amended
12-29-2008 by
Ord. No 580;
6-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 617]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 60%
Warehouse
[Amended
4-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 654]269
20,000 75 50 25 25 40 60%
Contractor's yard
[Amended
12-29-2008 by
Ord. No 580;
6-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 617]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 75%
Essential services 5,000 60 25 25 25 40 60%
Ambulance station
[Added 9-2-1998
by Ord. No. 387]
5,000 60 25 15 15 40 50%
Communications
antennas that fall
under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless
Broadband
Collocation Act270
[Added 2-23-2000
by Ord. No. 421;
amended
9-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-81
Auto sales, service
and repair [Added
4-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 654]
32,000 100 50 25 25 40 60%
269. Editor's Note: An entry for wholesale distribution, which immediately followed this entry,
was repealed 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654.
270. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-47
1:641
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Building.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Bank [Added
4-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 654]
5,000 60 25 15 15 40 60%
Eating and
drinking
establishment
[Added 4-1-2015
by Ord. No. 654]
5,000 60 25 15 15 40 60%
Fire station
[Added 4-1-2015
by Ord. No. 654]
5,000 60 25 15 15 40 60%
Mini-storage
facility [Added
4-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 654]
32,000 100 50 25 25 40 60%
Mobile home sales,
service and repair
[Added 4-1-2015
by Ord. No. 654]
32,000 100 50 25 25 40 60%
Motel/hotel
[Added 4-1-2015
by Ord. No. 654]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 60%
Retail business
[Added 4-1-2015
by Ord. No. 654]
5,000 100 50 15 15 65 60%
Wholesale business
[Added 4-1-2015
by Ord. No. 654]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 60%
Microbrewery/
microdistillery
[Added 6-6-2018
by Ord. No. 698]
5,000 60 25 15 15 40 50%
Service station
[Added 11-6-2019
by Ord. No. 717]
20,000 100 50 25 25 65 60%
Shopping center
[Added 11-6-2019
by Ord. No. 717]
32,000 150 50 25 25 65 60%
§ 195-47 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-47
1:642
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Building.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Conditional Use:
Water recreation 32,000 120 50 15 NA 30 NA
Communications
antennas that do
not fall under the
Pennsylvania
Wireless
Broadband
Collocation Act271
and
communications
towers [Added
9-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-81
Special Exception:272
Surface mining Subject to the requirements of § 195-14K
Mine shafts 20,000 100 50 50 50 35 40%
Airports Subject to the requirements of § 195-79
Junkyards 10 acres 500 150 150 150 40 NA
Waste disposal 40 acres 200 100 150 150 40 NA
Deep mines NA NA 100 200 200 NA NA
Blasting [Added
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-14N
Educational
institution,
commercial
[Added 4-2-2003
by Ord. No. 483;
amended
12-29-2008 by
Ord. No 580]
32,000 100 50 25 25 65 50%
271. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
272. Editor's Note: An entry for essential or commercial communications tower, added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 421, was repealed 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 705.
§ 195-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-47
1:643
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Building.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Commercial
parking lot [Added
5-4-2005 by Ord.
No. 528]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-38K
Methadone
treatment facility
[Added 7-5-2006
by Ord. No. 549]
20,000 75 50 25 25 35 50%
Correctional
facility [Added
4-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 562;
amended
12-29-2008 by
Ord. No 580]
150 acres 150 150 150 150 65 50%
Juvenile detention
facility [Added
4-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 562;
amended
12-29-2008 by
Ord. No 580]
32,000 100 50 25 25 65 50%
Halfway house
[Added 6-2-2010
by Ord. No. 601]
20,000 75 50 25 25 35 50%
Gas and oil drill
site [Added
6-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 617]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-14S
Natural gas
compressor station
[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-42L
Natural gas
processing plant
[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-42M
§ 195-47 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-47
1:644
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min.
Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Building.
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Staging facility
[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
32,000 150 50 25 25 40 50%
Oil and gas water
storage facility
[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
20,000 75 50 25 25 40 60%
NOTES:
NA Not applicable
§ 195-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-47
1:645

ARTICLE XV
I-3 Mixed Industrial - Services District
[Added 3-22-1996 by Ord. No. 312]
§ 195-48. Statement of purpose and use summary.
The I-3 Mixed Industrial - Services District is designed to accommodate
services or industrial activities of the types permitted in the I-2 District
and to permit adult-oriented entertainment and businesses, commercial
recreation, hotels and motels and eating and drinking establishments.
A. Uses permitted by right.
(1) All uses permitted by right in the I-2 District.
(2) (Reserved)273
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Water-related recreation.
(2) Adult businesses.
(3) (Reserved)274
(4) Billboard. [Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
C. Special exception.
(1) Those uses permitted as special exceptions in the I-2 District.
(2) (Reserved)275
(3) (Reserved)276
(4) Electronic variable message sign. [Added 4-5-2006 by Ord. No.
545]
(5) Water treatment and storage facility. [Added 5-2-2012 by Ord.
No. 627]
D. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses customary to principal use.
273. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), which listed eating and drinking establishments as
a use permitted by right, was repealed 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654.
274. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(3), Electronic variable message sign, added 12-4-2002
by Ord. No. 475, was repealed 4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 545.
275. Editor's Note: Former Subection C(2), which listed hotel and motel as a special exception,
was repealed 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654.
276. Editor's Note: Former Subection C(3), which listed commercial recreation as a special
exception, was repealed 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654.
§ 195-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-49
1:647
§ 195-49. Conditional use provisions.
The following conditional uses may be authorized by the Township
Commissioners pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
A. Water-related recreation. This use shall be subject to all standards and
criteria applicable to water-related recreation as are set forth in
§ 195-45A of this chapter.
B. Adult businesses. This use shall be subject to the following express
standards and criteria and to any other standards and criteria generally
applicable to all conditional uses:
(1) Adult businesses may be established only in an I-3 District.
(2) Persons or owners who intend to open an adult business must
obtain from Rostraver Township a license to operate such an
enterprise and must pay an investigation fee to Rostraver Township
as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners. In addition, such persons or owners must supply to
the Township detailed information as to the ownership and
financing as required on the licensing application form. This form
can be obtained at the office of the Township Secretary.
(3) No adult business can be located within 500 feet of a preexisting
residence, school, hospital, day-care center, nursing home,
sanitarium, retirement or convalescent home, group home,
personal care home, public park, church, establishment which is
licensed to and does sell alcoholic beverages or other adult
business.
(4) No adult business can be located within 1,000 feet of an area zoned
residential.
(5) An adult business shall be initially licensed, where it has met all
ordinance requirements, through December 31 of the year in which
the license is issued. For each year thereafter that the adult
business intends to continue its business as an adult commercial
enterprise, it must seek from the office of the Secretary of
Rostraver Township a renewal of this license. The application for
renewal is due in the Secretary's office no later than November 1 of
the year preceding the year for which the license renewal is sought.
The lack of a license or the failure to seek license renewal on a
timely basis shall be a proper basis for the Township to deny or
revoke an occupancy permit to an adult business.
(6) Any adult business found to be in violation of the Rostraver
Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended, shall be subject to the
enforcement penalties provided for in the Rostraver Township
Zoning Ordinance and/or the Municipalities Planning Code.277
277. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-49 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-49
1:648
§ 195-50. Special exception provisions.
The following special exceptions may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board pursuant to the standards and criteria specified herewith:
(7) All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2. [Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
(8) All parking areas shall be landscaped subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XVII, § 195-64D, of this chapter and shall provide
a screen planting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
XVIII, § 195-75G, of this chapter. [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No.
601]
C. (Reserved)278
D. Billboard, subject to the standards and criteria of Article XVI,
§ 195-58H, of this chapter. [Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
A. Surface mining, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-14K, of this chapter.
B. Mine ventilating shaft, subject to the standards and criterion of Article
VI, § 195-14G, of this chapter.
C. Airports, development and operation subject to the requirements of
Article XVIII, § 195-79, of this chapter.
D. Junkyards, development and operation subject to the requirements of
Chapter 112 of the Code of Ordinances of Rostraver Township.
E. Waste disposal and sanitary landfill, subject to the requirements of
Article XV, § 195-46E, of this chapter.
F. Deep mines, subject to the requirements of Article XV, § 195-46F, of
this chapter.
G. (Reserved)279
H. (Reserved)280
I. Blasting, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI, § 195-14N,
of this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
J. Educational institution, commercial, subject to the standards and
criteria of Article XI, § 195-34B, of this chapter. [Added 4-2-2003 by
Ord. No. 483]
278. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, Electronic variable message sign, added 12-4-2002 by
Ord. No. 475, was repealed 4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 545.
279. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding commercial recreation, was repealed
4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654.
280. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, regarding hotels and motels, was repealed 4-1-2015
by Ord. No. 654.
§ 195-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-50
1:649
K. Electronic variable message sign, subject to the standards and criteria
of Article XVI, § 195-55.1, of this chapter. [Added 4-5-2006 by Ord.
No. 545]
L. Methadone treatment facility, subject to the standards and criteria of
Article XIV, § 195-46L, of this chapter. [Added 7-5-2006 by Ord. No.
549]
M. Correctional facility, subject to the standards and criteria of Article XIV,
§ 195-46M, of this chapter. [Added 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 562]
N. Juvenile detention facility, subject to the standards and criteria of
Article XIV, § 195-46N, of this chapter. [Added 4-4-2007 by Ord. No.
562]
O. Halfway house, subject to the standards and criteria of Article XIV,
§ 195-46O, of this chapter. [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
P. Gas and oil drill site, subject to the standards and criteria of Article VI,
§ 195-14S, of this chapter. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
Q. Natural gas compressor station, subject to the standards and criteria of
Article XIII, § 195-42L, of this chapter. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No.
617]
R. Natural gas processing plant, subject to the standards and criteria of
Article XIII, § 195-42M, of this chapter. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No.
617]
S. Staging facility, subject to the standards and criteria of Article XIII,
§ 195-42N, of this chapter. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
T. Oil and gas water storage facility, subject to the standards and criteria
of Article XIII, § 195-42O, of this chapter. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 617]
U. Water treatment and storage facility. [Added 5-2-2012 by Ord. No.
627]
(1) A special exception shall be obtained for all water treatment and
storage facilities that will treat and/or store nonpotable water,
including but not limited to brine and frac water. All applications
submitted for consideration of the Zoning Hearing Board shall
include, at a minimum, the following documentation and all other
pertinent data deemed necessary to process the application:
(a) Written permission from the property owner(s).
(b) A written description of the character of the proposed
operation, its timing and proposed duration, together with
duplicates of maps and plans submitted to state and federal
regulatory agencies or authorities for the issuance of
necessary permits.
§ 195-50 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-50
1:650
(c) A survey of the property showing all permanent facilities
(tanks, ponds, or other surface installations) with locations and
distances to property lines, the approximate number of acres
to be disturbed for development, and identifying the floodway
of the property(ies) as identified in the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) prepared and approved by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
(d) No activities or substances of a hazardous safety or
environmental nature shall be employed, carried or utilized as
part of any operations conducted on the site unless specifically
provided for as part of the special exception application.
(e) The applicant must provide the Township with a list and
description of all equipment weighing in excess of 10 tons and
identification of the proposed routing of vehicles on Township
roads. The proposed hauling routes must be designed to
minimize the impact on collector, connector and local streets
within the Township. The Township reserves the right to
designate required truck hauling routes throughout the
Township.
[1] Vehicular access to a site solely via a local residential
street is prohibited.
[2] Vehicular access to a site via a collector street is
permitted.
(f) A complete drainage and stormwater drainage plan, which
includes all storm sewers and appurtenances, along with an
approved best management practice method of disposal of all
stormwater collected, that will verify the peak postdevelopment
release rate of runoff shall comply with the
stormwater management districts established in Chapter 164
of the Code of the Township of Rostraver,281 including but not
limited to any necessary agreements and/or bonding.
[1] If the stormwater drainage plan proved that a detention
structure is needed to maintain the peak post-development
release runoff rate for that stormwater management
district in Chapter 164 of the Code of the Township of
Rostraver, agreements will need to be done to confirm that
the detention structure will remain intact after the project
is complete. The Township shall obtain a bond from the
responsible party to insure compliance with this provision.
[2] In the event the Township determines that the public
interest is best served by mandating that the pond be filled
in at a reasonable time after land disturbance activities
have been substantially completed, the landowner/
281. Editor's Note: See Ch. 164, Stormwater Management.
§ 195-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-50
1:651
developer shall complete the same at a time and in a
manner required by the Township. The Township shall
obtain a bond from the responsible party to insure
compliance with this provision.
(g) The applicant shall provide the Township with a copy of the
Preparedness Prevention and Contingency Plan (PPC), as
required by and filed with the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, and a copy of the SARA Title III Tier
II Chemical Inventory submitted to PENNSAFE.
(h) The applicant shall provide an outline of the training program
for Township's first responders.
(2) Water treatment and storage facilities shall only be permitted to
occur on property with a minimum of 20,000 square feet.
(3) In accordance with the appropriate Township ordinance, as
amended, driveways accessing the site shall be paved with an
impervious material from the paved public street for a distance of
50 feet into the site. The impervious material shall be in place prior
to the commencement of the facilities.
(4) All traffic shall enter and exit the site via designated driveway
access points that connect with adjacent public rights-of-way. Said
access points shall be approved by local and PennDOT officials.
Prior to initiating any work at the site, the Township shall be
provided a copy of the highway occupancy permit prior to
commencing site development to access the site and for overweight
vehicles.
(5) In compliance with § 187-16, the applicant of the water treatment
and storage facility and any or all subcontractors shall execute an
excess maintenance agreement with the Township for a permit and
post a bond at the paved highway rate in favor of the Township in a
form acceptable to the Township prior to beginning any work on a
drill site. The bond is to guarantee restoration of Township roads
damaged as a result of hauling associated with the facility.
(6) Dust, vibration, odors. All activities/operations shall be conducted
in such a manner to minimize dust, vibration or noxious odors and
shall be in accordance with § 195-74.
(7) Complete site restoration within one year following the termination
of the use of a facility for water treatment and storage in
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection regulations. Topsoil must remain on site so it can be put
back during the restoration of the site.
(8) The facility and/or its operation shall comply with all applicable
permits and requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the United States Environmental
§ 195-50 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-50
1:652
§ 195-51. Lot, area and dimensional requirements.
The following requirements shall apply in I-3 Mixed Industrial - Services
Districts:
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Building
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Use:
Eating and drinking
establishments
5,000 60 25 15 15 35 50%
All other uses
permitted by right
in the I-2 District
Subject to the applicable requirements for such use set forth in § 195-47
Conditional Use:
Water-related
recreation
32,000 120 50 15 NA 30 NA
Adult business 5,000 60 25 25 15 35 50%
Special Exception:282
All other uses
permitted as special
exceptions in the I-2
District
Subject to the applicable requirements for such use set forth in § 195-47
Protection Agency, and any other governmental authority having
jurisdiction over its operations and with all federal, state and local
laws, ordinances and regulations promulgated to protect the
environment or otherwise relating to environmental matters.
(9) All applicants for a special exception shall reimburse Rostraver
Township all reasonable and necessary professional consultant fees
incurred by the Township related to application for activities
authorized by this Subsection U. Additionally, all applicants shall
reimburse the Township for consulting fees and costs incurred in
enforcing this Subsection U upon a finding of violation by a District
Justice.
(10) Federal or state law or regulation preempts ordinance
requirements that conflict with federal or state statute or
regulation. The Township acknowledges that it is preempted from
regulating the operational methods of the oil and gas industry and
may only regulate land uses.
282. Editor's Note: Entries regarding commercial recreation and hotel and motel, which
immediately followed this heading, were repealed 4-1-2015 by Ord. No. 654.
§ 195-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-51
1:653
Use Category
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Min. Front
Setback
(ft. from
ROW)
Min.
Side
Yard
(ft.)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(ft.)
Max.
Building
Height
(ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Blasting [Added
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-14N
Educational
institution,
commercial [Added
4-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 483; amended
12-29-2008 by
Ord. No 580]
32,000 100 50 25 25 65 50%
Gas and oil drill site
[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-14S
Natural gas
compressor station
[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-42L
Natural gas
processing plant
[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
Subject to the requirements of § 195-42M
Staging facility
[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
32,000 150 50 25 25 40 50%
Oil and gas water
storage facility
[Added 6-1-2011
by Ord. No. 617]
20,000 75 50 25 25 40 60%
Water treatment
and storage facility
20,000 75 50 25 25 40 60%
NOTES:
NA Not applicable
§ 195-51 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-51
1:654
ARTICLE XVI
Sign Requirements
§ 195-52. Authority.
Signs may be erected and maintained only when in compliance with the
provisions of this article and any and all other ordinances and regulations
of this Township which may be applicable.
§ 195-53. Exclusions.
The following signs shall be permitted in all districts and shall not be subject
to the provisions of this article unless otherwise specifically cited herein:
§ 195-54. Permitted signs: A-1, VR, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts.
[Amended 8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 575; 8-7-2019 by Ord. No. 715]
In the A-1, VR, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, the following requirements shall
apply.
A. Signs of a duly constituted local, state or federal governmental body,
including traffic or similar safety and regulatory devices, legal notices,
railway warning signals, memorial signs or tablets (no zoning permit
required).
B. Small signs with a surface area not exceeding three square feet,
displayed for the direction or convenience of the public, which identify
landmarks, parking areas, convenience facilities and similar features
(no zoning permit required).
C. One temporary non-lighted sign on a construction site, not exceeding
an area of 48 square feet, denoting engineer, architect, contractor or
funding agencies and related information regarding the development
(no zoning permit required).
A. The following signs shall be permitted:
(1) Permanent identification sign: [Amended 4-7-2004 by Ord. No.
508]
(a) One permanent identification sign for each dwelling unit,
which may cite the name of the occupant, address and other
distinguishing features of the structure or property. Such signs
shall not exceed one square foot in area (no zoning permit
required).
(b) One permanent subdivision/development identification sign
may be erected at one entrance into the property or plan,
which shall only be illuminated with full cutoff luminaries. The
maximum sign area shall not exceed 24 square feet and shall
be landscaped with shrubs and/or ground cover under the
entire area beneath the sign.
§ 195-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-54
1:655
(2) One temporary non-lighted real estate sign pertaining to the sale,
lease, hire or rental of property on which the sign is displayed, not
to exceed six square feet in area (no zoning permit required).
(3) One announcement sign designating professional uses, group
residential facilities, day-care or home occupations, provided that
all such signs shall be limited to three square feet in area.
(4) One permanent announcement sign erected by churches, schools,
hospitals, cemeteries, municipal facilities or similar permitted
uses, which may include any appropriate message, provided that
the area of such sign shall not exceed 24 square feet in area.
(5) Temporary signs advertising a garage sale, street fair or other
temporary noncommercial activity or a temporary sign directing
persons to the location of such noncommercial activity. Signs can
be erected no earlier than one week of the activity and not located
within any road right-of-way. Signs must be removed within 24
hours of termination of the activity and shall not exceed three
square feet in area. (No zoning permit is required.) [Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord. No. 606]
(6) Signs relating to the sale of farm products, produced on the
premises in A-1 Districts, shall be limited to a total of two such
signs that do not exceed a cumulative total of 20 square feet in
area. Stationary signs and billboards shall be regarded as
structures within the meaning of this chapter. Advertising display
on a barn or other building or surface shall be included as
stationary signs (no zoning permit required).
(7) Temporary signs relating to the sale of agricultural products
produced on the premises in residential districts shall be limited to
a total of two such signs that do not exceed a cumulative total of 20
square feet in area. Such signs shall be displayed only when
seasonal sales are taking place and removed when not applicable
(no zoning permit required).
(8) Signs for municipal and neighborhood recreation shall be
established in accordance with the following requirements:
[Amended 7-3-2002 by Ord. No. 462]
(a) Signs shall be limited to the immediate site.
(b) Signs shall relate only to the activities at the immediate site.
(c) There shall be no more than two signs at each business site.
(d) Individual signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.
(e) Signs mounted or painted on a wall, canopy or other portion of
a principal site structure shall not protrude more than 18
inches beyond the wall on which said signs are mounted.
§ 195-54 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-54
1:656
§ 195-54.1. Permitted signs: MU Mixed Use District. [Added
2-4-2009 by Ord. No. 584]
In the business park district, the following requirements shall apply.
B. Signs in all agricultural, village and residential districts shall be located
a minimum distance of four feet from the street or road right-of-way if
no sidewalk exists and four feet from the inside edge of the walk, if such
a walk exists. [Amended 8-7-2019 by Ord. No. 715]
C. No pole sign or ground sign shall exceed five feet at its highest point
above ground level. No sign shall be mounted on a building above the
eave line of a roof or extend above a public sidewalk or vehicular rightof-
way. [Amended 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
A. The following signs shall be permitted:
(1) Signs advertising the sale or rental or development of property.
(2) Signs indicating the location of premises.
(3) Signs advertising business conducted or services conducted on the
premises.
B. Business signs not to exceed one square foot of sign area for each one
linear foot of lot frontage up to a maximum total sign area of 120 square
feet.
C. Individual business signs shall not exceed 60 square feet in area.
D. No sign shall face an adjoining residentially zoned district and/or
residentially used lot located outside of the business park.
E. No business sign shall exceed a height of 35 feet above ground level.
F. Signs shall be located at a minimum distance of 10 feet from the street
right-of-way line.
G. No sign shall be mounted on a building above the eave line of a roof or
extend above a vehicular right-of-way.
H. All illuminated signs shall only be lit with full cutoff luminaries or by
means that do not produce light trespass.
(1) Illuminated signs shall be reviewed as part of a photometric plan
submitted at the time of land development.
I. Planned business park identification signs.
(1) A maximum of two permanent identification signs (freestanding
pole and/or ground sign) may be erected in a planned business
park.
(2) Freestanding pole signs shall be no higher than 35 feet above
grade level.
§ 195-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-54.1
1:657
§ 195-55. Permitted signs: B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2 and I-3 Districts.
[Amended 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 388]
In the business and industrial districts, the following requirements shall
apply.
(a) A decorative landscaped strip shall be located immediately
under the freestanding sign and extend a minimum of three
feet from the sign in all directions.
(b) Two flowering trees with minimum of six feet in height shall be
planted within the required landscaped strip.
(3) Ground signs shall not exceed eight feet at their highest point
above ground level and shall be landscaped with shrubs and/or
ground cover under the entire area beneath the sign.
(4) The total area of each permitted business park identification sign
shall not exceed 120 square feet. This sign may include an
identification of more than one tenant, but total square area may
not be increased beyond that permitted under this section.
A. The following signs shall be permitted:
(1) Signs advertising the sale or rental or development of property.
(2) Signs indicating the location of premises.
(3) Signs advertising business conducted or services, material or
equipment for sale on the premises.
(4) (Reserved)283
(5) (Reserved)284
(6) No sign shall face an adjoining residentially zoned district and/or
residentially used lot. [Amended 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
(7) Signs indicating only time and/or temperature and gasoline pricing.
[Added 2-1-2006 by Ord. No. 539]
B. Signs shall be located a minimum distance of 10 feet from the street
right-of-way line and any abutting property lines. The setback shall be
considered as all parts of the sign and supporting structures. All areas
between the sign and setback from an abutting right-of-way and/or
property line shall be suitably landscaped per § 195-75E. [Amended
9-1-2010 by Ord. No. 606]
283. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(4), regulating the maximum sign area of business
signs, as amended, was repealed 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 712.
284. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(5), regulating the maximum sign area of individual
signs, as amended, was repealed 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 712.
§ 195-54.1 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-55
1:658
§ 195-55.1. Electronic variable message sign. [Added 12-4-2002 by
Ord. No. 475; amended 4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 545; 4-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 644; 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 712]
An electronic variable message sign may be permitted as a permitted use
in B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2 and I-3 Districts after submission and review by the
Planning Agency, and provided that all of the following requirements are
met:
C. No sign shall be mounted on a building above the eave line of a roof or
extend above a public sidewalk or vehicular right-of-way. [Amended
10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 390; 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
D. Sign height shall be subject to the following regulations: [Added
12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
(1) No pole sign or ground sign shall exceed 25 feet at its highest point
above ground level.
(2) Consideration may be given by the Zoning Hearing Board for a lot
within a one-hundred-foot radius of the right-of-way of Interstate
70 and/or Route 51 to increase the sign height, not to exceed 50
feet at its highest point above ground level, and a landscaping strip
will be required for the increase in sign height:
(a) A decorative landscaped strip shall be located immediately
under the sign and extend a minimum of three feet from the
sign in all directions.
(b) A hedge or other durable planting of at least three feet in
height shall extend the entire length of the required
landscaped strip.
(c) Two flowering trees with a minimum of six feet in height shall
be planted within the required landscaped strip.
A. Information content shall be alphabetic, numeric, and/or still images
only. No animation is permitted. [Amended 2-5-2014 by Ord. No.
643]
B. Sign change of message shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) (Reserved)285
(2) The time interval used to change from one complete message to the
next complete message shall be a maximum of one second.
(3) There shall be no appearance of visual dissolve or fading, in which
any part of one electronic message appears simultaneously with
any part of a second electronic message.
285. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(1), which required that all messages remain
unchanged for a minimum of one minute, was repealed 4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 545.
§ 195-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-55.1
1:659
§ 195-56. Signs in shopping centers and integrated industrial areas.
[Amended 9-1-2010 by Ord. No. 606]
Business identification/plaza development identification signs established
for shopping centers and integrated industrial areas shall meet the
following criteria:
(4) There shall be no appearance of flashing, sudden bursts of light or
change in intensity of light, and no appearance of animation.
[Amended 4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 545]
(5) Any illumination, intensity or contrast of light level shall remain
constant.
C. The hours of operation for an electronic variable message sign closer
than 275 feet in radius from a dwelling shall be limited to the hours of
6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. [Amended 4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 545;
4-2-2014 by Ord. No. 644; 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 712]
D. An electronic variable message sign shall not exceed one square foot of
sign area for each 10 linear feet of lot frontage up to a maximum sign
area of 80 square feet. [Amended 4-2-2014 by Ord. No. 644;
2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 712]
E. The maximum height of an electronic variable message sign is 25 feet.
F. The sign shall not project over or be located within a public right-ofway.
G. The sign shall be located a minimum distance of 10 feet from the street
right-of-way line.
H. Only one permanent message board or an electronic variable message
sign shall be permitted on a lot and no temporary/portable signs will
permitted on a lot once an electronic variable message sign is utilized
on that lot, regardless of how many tenants occupy the lot.
I. (Reserved)286
A. Number of signs per each development center, park or plaza:
[Amended 9-1-2010 by Ord. No. 606]
(1) One freestanding pole sign; or one freestanding ground sign at
facilities constructed on an area of 50 acres or less.
(2) A total of two freestanding signs (pole or ground signs) at a facility
constructed on an area in excess of 50 acres.
B. Total combined maximum area of all freestanding pole signs and/or
ground signs:
286. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection I, regarding requests for modifications to the
requirements of this section, as amended, was repealed 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 712.
§ 195-55.1 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-56
1:660
§ 195-57. Portable or mobile signs.
Portable or mobile signs and other similar advertising displays may be
used for special sales, announcement and related purposes, subject to the
following provisions:
(1) One hundred square feet at facilities with highway frontage of 50
linear feet or less.
(2) For facilities with highway frontage of between 51 linear feet and
250 linear feet, the following requirements shall apply:
(a) Fifty-one to 100 linear feet: sign area of 200 square feet.
(b) One hundred one to 150 linear feet: sign area of 300 square
feet.
(c) One hundred fifty-one to 250 linear feet: sign area of 400
square feet.
(3) Five hundred square feet maximum at facilities with highway
frontage in excess of 250 linear feet.
C. (Reserved)287
D. Signs shall be located a minimum distance of 25 feet from the street
right-of-way line.
E. The top of a pole sign or ground sign shall be no higher that 25 feet
above grade level. Consideration may be given by the Zoning Hearing
Board for a lot within a one-hundred-foot radius of the right-of-way of
Interstate 70 and/or Route 51 to increase the sign height, not to exceed
50 feet at its highest point above ground level, and a landscaping strip
will be required for the increase in sign height [§ 195-55D(2)(a) through
(c)]. [Amended 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
F. No sign shall be set closer than 50 feet of a rear or side property line.
A. Display area of such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet.
B. No portion of the sign or its supporting structure shall occupy a public
right-of-way.
C. All lighting and illumination restrictions which apply to displays, signs
and structures under this chapter shall apply.
D. Permits for the placement of such signs shall be issued for a maximum
of 30 consecutive days and may be renewed no more than one time
during any consecutive one-hundred-eighty-day period.
287. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, regarding maximum sign area of individual tenant
signs, as amended, was repealed 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 712.
§ 195-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-57
1:661
§ 195-58. General standards.
The following standards shall apply to signs in all zoning districts of the
Township.
E. A temporary sign advertising the location of a new business in the B-1,
B-2, MU, I-1, I-2 or I-3 District shall be permitted on the property on
which the business will be located once a zoning permit has been issued
for that property. Signs can be erected no earlier than 30 days prior to
the opening of the business and cannot be located within any road
right-of-way. The sign must be removed or a permit issued for the sign
within 24 hours after the thirty-day period and shall not exceed three
square feet in cumulative area. (No zoning permit is required.) Prior to
the sign being erected, the Township Zoning Officer must be notified of
the installation of the temporary sign. [Amended 9-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 606]
A. No sign shall be located or constructed to obstruct or interfere with any
traffic control signal, sign, device or intersection sight triangle.
B. All signs shall be constructed of durable materials; shall be kept in good
condition and repair; and shall not be permitted to become unsightly or
dilapidated.
C. No sign shall be permitted that is deemed to constitute a hazard of any
kind.
D. The following types of signs are prohibited in all zoning districts:
[Amended 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
(1) Illuminated sign(s) involving the movement or causing the illusion
of movement or flashing.
(2) Sign(s) or device(s) with flashing, moving or similar lighting or
animation.
(3) Snipe sign(s).
(4) Rotating sign(s).
(5) Sign(s) placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers which are
parked on a public right-of-way, public property or private property,
for two or more consecutive days, so as to be visible from a public
right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a business
or activity. This does not include those vehicle signs on a vehicle
that serve as identification for a company vehicle.
E. A sign shall be removed within 30 days when the circumstances that led
to its erection no longer apply or if safety violations occur.
Circumstances that dictate sign removal shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
(1) The creation of a safety hazard.
§ 195-57 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-58
1:662
(2) Dilapidation.
(3) Vacancy or termination of the subject business for more than 90
days.
(4) Legal transfer of ownership of a property that involves a change of
name or business activity.
(5) The completion of an event, business transaction or other activity
for which the sign was originally installed.
(6) Any illegality under the provisions of this chapter or regulation of a
duly constituted governmental authority.
F. (Reserved)
G. Signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) All lighting and illumination of signs shall conform to regulations
regarding traffic hazards as specified in local and state regulations
and shall not cause undue distraction, confusion or hazard.
(2) (Reserved)288
H. Business signs not located on the premises, i.e., billboard, of the
business or industry that they advertise shall be permitted as a
conditional use in B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2 and I-3 Districts when approved by
the Rostraver Township Board of Commissioners, after submission and
review by the Planning Agency, and provided that all of the following
requirements are met: [Amended 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 388;
12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
(1) Subject matter on the sign shall be limited to advertising products,
services or attractions available within 10 miles of the location of
the sign.
(2) Signs shall be permitted only in those districts zoned for business
and industrial uses (B-1, B-2, I-1 and I-2 and I-3).
(3) The sign shall be limited to 500 square feet in sign face area per lot,
including those signs composed of multiple slats or panels.
(4) Signs shall not project over or be located within public rights-ofway.
(5) The sign shall not be illuminated in any manner that has a potential
of causing undue distraction, confusion or hazard to vehicular
traffic.
(6) Signs advertising the same business and its products, services, and
attractions shall not be closer than 1/2 mile from one another.
288. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G(2), which provided height and placement regulations
for signs, was repealed 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475.
§ 195-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-58
1:663
§ 195-58.1. Sign measurement. [Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
(7) A billboard/off-premises sign is only permitted on a lot that does not
have any other signs on the lot. Only one billboard/off-premises
sign is permitted per lot.
(8) No off-premises sign/billboard shall be closer than 500 feet in
radius from a dwelling.
(9) A sign shall be located a minimum distance of 10 feet from the
street right-of-way line.
(10) Landscaping requirements:
(a) A decorative landscaped strip shall be located immediately
adjoining the supporting structure of the billboard/off-premises
sign and extending a minimum of five feet from the sign in all
directions.
(b) A hedge or other durable planting of at least three feet in
height, shall extend the entire length and breadth of the
required landscaped strip.
(c) The rear side of a single-faced billboard/off-premises sign shall
be of one color and screened by existing or natural landscaping
materials or by planting of evergreen trees at least six feet tall.
(d) Two flowering trees a minimum of six feet in height shall be
planted within the required landscaped strip.
I. Any trees, bushes or shrubs required by this chapter or other Township
ordinances where a sign is located, which die, shall be promptly
removed and replaced with new trees, bushes or shrubs of like kind and
equality. [Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
A. Sign face area.
(1) The area of sign face enclosed in frames or cabinets shall be
determined based on the outer dimensions of the frame or cabinet
surrounding the sign face. Sign area shall not include foundations,
supports and other essential structures that do not serve as a
backdrop or border to the sign.
(2) When a sign shall be on a base material and attached without a
frame, such as a wood or plastic panel, the dimensions of the base
material shall be used unless it is clear that part of the base
contains no sign, related display or decoration.
(3) When signs shall be constructed of individual pieces or letters
attached to a building wall, sign area shall be determined by a
perimeter drawn around all the pieces or letters.
B. Double-faced signs.
§ 195-58 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-58.1
1:664
§ 195-59. Permits.
(1) Any sign may be doubled-faced, provided that it has two parallel
surfaces that are opposite and matching in size and shape and are
not over 12 inches apart.
(2) The sign shall be considered as one sign and only one face shall be
used to calculate the total size of the sign.
(3) Should the two surfaces deviate from being parallel or should they
differ in size or shape, the sign shall be considered as two signs and
both sides will be used to calculate the total size of the sign.
C. Multiple slats or panel signs.
(1) A sign face that changes by means of flipping of slats or panels
encased in a stationary frame or cabinet.
(2) The sign shall be considered as one sign and only one face shall be
used to calculate the total size of the sign.
A. A separate zoning permit shall be required for the erection of signs
under this chapter, except that no permit shall be required for the
following exclusions:
(1) Signs specified under § 195-53 of this chapter.
(2) Signs specified under § 195-54A(1)(a), (2), (5), (6) and (7) of this
chapter. [Amended 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
(3) A zoning permit waiver may be applied for in lieu of a zoning permit
for the replacement of an existing permitted sign face, after
submission and review by the Zoning Officer. The sign face area to
be replaced shall be identical to the square footage approved on
the original permit. [Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 475]
B. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a drawing to
scale showing the proposed sign, the size, general characteristics,
method of illumination, the exact location of the sign in relation to the
lot and structure involved and other data as may be required by the
Zoning Officer.
C. A fee shall accompany each application for a permit. Such fees shall be
established by resolution of the Township Board of Commissioners.
§ 195-58.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-59
1:665

ARTICLE XVII
Parking and Loading Requirements
§ 195-60. Procedure.
An application for a zoning permit for a new or enlarged building, structure
or use shall include therewith a plot plan drawn to scale and fully
dimensioned, showing off-street parking and loading facilities to be
provided in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 195-61. Extent of control.
A. At the time of the erection of any main building or structure or when
any such building or structure is enlarged or increased in capacity or
when any private or public facility use permitted under this chapter is
established, permanent off-street parking and loading spaces shall be
provided as specified herein.
B. Required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use for
which it is provided. An adjacent lot that is guaranteed for the use of offstreet
parking during the life of the use for which the parking is
provided may be permitted, provided that guaranties in legal form are
acceptable to the Township Commissioners on the advice of the
Township Solicitor.
C. Where more than one use occupies a given lot, building or structure,
off-street parking equal to the sum of that required for each use shall be
required.
D. No parking area, space or lot shall be located within a public right-ofway
or within 20 feet of the road cartway.
E. Only parking facilities accessory to permitted agricultural or residential
uses shall be located in any A-1, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District. [Amended
8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 575]
(1) Off-street parking facilities accessory to permitted uses in any
agricultural or residential district in accordance with the
requirements of this article shall be used solely for the parking of
vehicles of the occupants of the land or structures to which such
facilities are accessory or by guests, employees or clients of said
occupants.
(2) No land shall be used for commercial or industrial truck or
equipment loading, storage or parking activities in any A-1, R-1,
R-2 or R-3 District, except for permitted farm-related activities in
an A-1 District. [Amended 8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 575]
(3) Accessory off-street parking on a residential lot for one currently
state licensed and inspected commercial vehicle having a capacity
of one ton or less, used off-site by a resident for commercial
purposes, may be permitted in A-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts when
§ 195-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-61
1:667
§ 195-62. Schedule of minimum requirements for off-street
parking. [Amended 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 388; 7-3-2002 by Ord. No.
462; 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 468; 7-5-2006 by Ord. No. 549; 6-2-2010
by Ord. No. 601]
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in the various zoning districts
as specified herewith:
Use Parking Spaces Required
Residential Uses
Single-family dwelling and duplex 2 per dwelling unit
Multifamily dwelling 2 per dwelling unit, unless limited to
persons over the age of 55 or onebedroom
units, then 1.25 spaces per
dwelling unit
Mobile home parks 2.5 per dwelling unit
Institutional Uses
Churches, auditoriums, indoor
assembly places
1 per each 3 seats or 1 per each four
persons permitted in maximum
occupancy
Stadiums, sports arenas and
places of outdoor assembly
1 per each 4 seats
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the following
performance standards and requirements: [Amended 8-6-2008
by Ord. No. 575]
(a) Said parking shall be utilized solely and exclusively for a
vehicle operated on an ongoing basis by a current site resident.
No disabled vehicle and no vehicle normally utilized and
operated for business purposes less than bimonthly may be
stored or parked under the terms of this chapter provision.
(b) No repair work, maintenance or similar service functions shall
be conducted on the vehicle at the premises.
(c) No portion of the off-street parking site shall be within a street
right-of-way.
(d) In addition to the foregoing requirements, such parking shall
conform to any further requirements and conditions as may be
prescribed by the Township Commissioners for the protection
of residential properties adjacent to and in the vicinity of the
proposed parking area.
F. Any off-street parking facility, other than for residential purposes, for
more than five vehicles shall be graded for proper drainage and
surfaced to provide a durable and dust-free surface.
§ 195-61 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-62
1:668
Use Parking Spaces Required
Schools 1 per each teacher and staff, plus 1 for
each 4 classrooms, plus 1 for each 2
students age 16 and over
Group residential facilities 1 per each staff on the largest shift,
plus one per each 4 beds
Hospitals 3.2 per each bed
Commercial Uses
Auto sales and service, trailer
sales and similar outdoor sales
1 per 5,000 square feet developed lot
area for vehicle display and 1 per 300
square feet customer service area, to a
required maximum of 30 designated
customer parking spaces
Convenience store/service
stations
1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Hotels 1.2 per guest room
Funeral homes and mortuaries 25 for the first parlor or viewing room,
plus 10 per each additional viewing
room
Indoor commercial recreation One per each 3 persons in maximum
occupancy
Outdoor commercial recreation 1 per each 2,500 square feet of lot
area developed and used for the
recreational activity
Golf courses One per each three greens
Medical and dental office 8 spaces per doctor
Professional offices, banks and
public facilities
1 per each 250 square feet of gross
floor area
Eating and drinking
establishments
1 per each 2 patron seats
Retail stores/shopping centers 1 per each 400 square feet of gross
floor area
Building materials and supply
yards
1 per each 800 square feet of gross
floor area
Furniture stores and wholesale
businesses
1 per each 800 feet of gross floor area
Microbrewery/Microdistillery
[Added 6-6-2018 by Ord. No.
698]
1 per each 2-patron occupant load
Industrial Uses
§ 195-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-62
1:669
Use Parking Spaces Required
Business parks, light
manufacturing, manufacturing,
research and testing labs,
contractor's yard, transportation
terminals warehouses/storage and
any other related industrial uses
1 per each employee on largest shift
plus one visitor space per each 10,000
square feet of gross floor area
NOTES:
For any use not specified above, the Township Commissioners, after
recommendations by the Planning Agency, shall determine the parking
requirements for the proposed use and the amount of parking thus
determined shall be the off-street parking requirement.
§ 195-63. Schedule of requirements for off-street loading.
In any district, in connection with a building or building group or part
thereof that is to be occupied by commercial, public, industrial or other uses
that rely on delivery or distribution of materials or merchandise, there shall
be provided and maintained, on the same lot with such buildings, off-street
loading berths in accordance with the following standards:
Uses
Floor Area
(total square feet)
Minimum Required
Off-Street Loading
Berths
Schools — 1
Retail and service
commercial
Under 3,500
Over 3,500
0
1
Wholesale commercial Under 10,000
Over 10,000
1
2
Warehousing or storage Under 10,000
For each additional
20,000 or fraction
thereof
1
1 additional
§ 195-64. Standards for off-street parking and loading areas.
A. General standards.
(1) When determination of the required number of off-street spaces for
parking or loading results in a fractional space, any fraction of 1/2
or more shall be interpreted as a whole space.
(2) In no case shall the public right-of-way be used for loading or
unloading of material or for meeting a required parking facility.
§ 195-62 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-64
1:670
(3) Loading and unloading facilities and parking lots shall be designed
so that vehicles are not required to back onto the street right-ofway.
(4) Nonresidential parking areas, parking accessways, driveways and
loading areas shall be sited at a minimum distance of 10 feet from
all property lines and right-of-way lines. This area shall be
maintained as a buffer area as defined by § 195-75E. Where
commercial or industrial land uses abut an A-1, R-1, R-2 or R-3
District, no such vehicular areas shall be closer than 25 feet to an
adjacent residential parcel. This area shall be maintained as a
buffer area as defined by § 195-75E. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 601]
(5) All lighting used to illuminate off-street loading and parking areas
shall be designed and utilized in compliance with § 195-81.2.
[Amended 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
B. Off-street parking standards.
(1) A required off-street parking space for an individual auto shall be a
minimum dimension of nine feet wide by 20 feet long. Maneuvering
and cross aisles shall be 20 feet wide for ninety-degree parking.
Aisle width for angle parking may be decreased in proportion to the
parking angle, but no aisle may be less than 12 feet in width.
(2) Driveways may be included as meeting the requirement for parking
spaces for single-family and two-family dwellings.
(3) Whenever possible, parking areas and lots shall be level, except for
necessary drainage purposes. If parking spaces are provided in
areas which exceed five-percent slope, all such spaces shall be
parallel to the contour lines of the area.
(4) All off-street parking areas shall be graded for proper drainage
and, except for single-family use, if for five vehicles or more shall
be surfaced with a bituminous, asphaltic or concrete pavement so
as to provide a durable and dustless surface and shall be so
arranged and marked as to provide for orderly and safe parking in
all seasons. Areas intended for fewer than five vehicles shall be
covered with gravel, cinders or other appropriate material in
commercial and industrial districts.
(5) Parking spaces for other than single-family use shall be clearly
delineated by painted lines or markers for lots accommodating five
or more spaces.
(6) Stalls shall be provide with bumper guards or wheel stops when
necessary for safety or protection to adjacent structures or
landscaped areas.
§ 195-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-64
1:671
(7) Surface drainage shall be connected to the existing or proposed
storm drainage system.
C. Off-street loading standards.
(1) Off-street loading and unloading space with driveway access from a
street or highway, in conformance with Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation Standard Driveways, shall be provided on each
lot as required in § 195-63.
(2) Each loading and unloading space:
(a) Shall be at least 14 feet wide, 60 feet long and shall have at
least a fifteen-foot vertical clearance; and
(b) Shall have off-street maneuvering area sufficient for the
intended use.
D. Parking lot landscaping. The use of plantings and landscaping within
parking lots can reduce the velocity of stormwater runoff, purify runoff,
promote energy conservation by reducing urban heat islands, delineate
driving lanes, create stormwater infiltration landscaping and negate
the potential for land use conflict. [Added 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601]
(1) Screen planting for parking lots for more than five vehicles that
abut a single-family dwelling or an A-1, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District shall
be screened with Type I or Type II screening as defined by
§ 195-75G of this section.
(2) Buffer area.
(a) Nonresidential parking areas, parking accessways, driveways
and loading areas shall be sited at a minimum distance of 10
feet from all property lines and right-of-way lines. This area
shall be maintained as a buffer area as defined by § 195-75E.
(b) Where commercial or industrial land uses abut an A-1, R-1, R-2
or R-3 District, no such vehicular areas such as parking areas,
parking accessways, driveways and/or loading areas shall be
closer than 25 feet to an adjacent residential parcel. This area
shall be maintained as a buffer area as defined by § 195-75E.
(3) Interior planting islands.
(a) A planting island of at least 160 feet for every 15 parking stalls.
(b) Planting islands at least 10 lineal feet in width as a means to
delineate pedestrian walkways or the edge of a parking area
from a driveway.
(c) A planting island of at least 10 lineal feet in width that serves
as a dividing line between double rows of angled or
perpendicular parking stalls.
§ 195-64 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-64
1:672
(4) Perimeter landscaping. To prevent two or more adjacent parking
lots from becoming one large expanse of paving, a buffer area shall
be provided at least 10 feet wide with one tree and three shrubs for
each 35 feet of perimeter. This does not preclude driveway access
between sites.
(5) All buffer areas and interior planting islands shall be maintained
with at least one shade tree for each five parking spaces. The
balance of the landscaped areas may be maintained in shrubs,
annuals or grass. All trees shall be planted at least four feet from
the edge of buffer or island to protect them from car bumpers. All
shade trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height or two-inch
caliper at planting. All plantings/vegetation shall be replaced
within six months of death.
§ 195-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-64
1:673

ARTICLE XVIII
Supplementary Regulations
§ 195-65. General application.
The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to such exceptions, additions
or modifications as herein provided by the following supplementary
regulations.
§ 195-66. Additional dwellings and structures.
A. Residential lots and subdivided parcels shall have no structure, in
addition to the principal structure on the same lot, used for dwelling
purposes, except as provided in §§ 195-29 and 195-30A of this chapter.
B. Where a lot is used for a permitted nonresidential purpose, more than
one principal nonresidential structure may be located upon the lot, but
only when such structures conform to all land use, lot coverage and
yard requirements for the district in which it is located.
C. Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted only when in
conjunction with a primary building on any lot, tract or parcel of land in
VR, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts; and only when in conjunction with a
primary building or permitted use activity in A-1, B-1, B-2, MU, I-1, I-2
and I-3 Districts. [Amended 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 388; 7-5-2006
by Ord. No. 549; 2-4-2009 by Ord. No. 584; 8-7-2019 by Ord. No.
715]
D. No building in the rear or to the side of a main building on the same lot
may be used for living purposes in a residential district.
E. One additional single dwelling unit to be occupied by a relative, a hired
helper or employee may be permitted in an A-1 District on an active
working farm, provided that the farm is in excess of 10 acres.
F. If a structure is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or act
of God, the owner must indicate his intent to repair, rebuild, reconstruct
or abandon within 90 days of the occurrence. If the structure is to be
abandoned, within 180 days of his indication of intent, the owner must
completely raze the structure and backfill all depressions in order to
prevent it from becoming a neighborhood nuisance or safety hazard.
G. The Zoning Officer may grant a permit for a period not to exceed six
months, renewable once, for the temporary placement of a mobile
home, travel trailer, pickup coach or motorized home to be used for
living or housekeeping purposes under the following circumstances:
(1) The mobile home, travel trailer, pickup coach or motorized home is
placed on a parcel that contains a single-family dwelling that was
rendered uninhabitable by fire, storm, explosion or act of God and
the applicant for the permit had been occupying the single-family
dwelling as his primary residence at the time of the adversity;
§ 195-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-66
1:675
§ 195-67. Agriculture and husbandry.
§ 195-68. Area and yard requirements.
(2) The single-family dwelling is in the process of repair or
reconstruction at the time the permit is requested or will be under
repair or reconstruction within a reasonable period of time
thereafter; and
(3) The temporary living unit is equipped with adequate provisions for
sanitation and is properly anchored to withstand normal weather
conditions.
A. Home gardening is a permitted accessory use in all VR, R-1, R-2 and R-3
Districts. Temporary roadside stands for the seasonal sale of locally
grown agricultural products are permitted but must be set back at least
15 feet from the cartway. All stands must be removed when not in use.
At least three off-street parking spaces must be provided in addition to
those required under regulations for residential parking. (See
§ 195-62A.) [Amended 8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 575; 8-7-2019 by Ord.
No. 715]
B. Agricultural uses shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The movement and keeping of livestock and/or poultry shall be
limited by a fence or other method of enclosure. [Amended
4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(2) The operations shall be managed and operated solely by the
individuals residing on the premises.
(3) No agricultural accessory building shall be located within 150 feet
of a property line. [Amended 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
(4) Storage of manure or odor- or dust-producing substances shall not
be permitted within 150 feet of a property line. [Amended
4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 483]
C. Roadside stands for the sale of produce and related farm products
produced on-site in A-1 Districts shall conform to the following
minimum standards:
(1) Structures shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet from the highway
right-of-way line.
(2) A minimum of five off-street parking spaces must be provided in
addition to those required under regulations for primary site uses.
(3) All parking spaces shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the highway
cartway.
(4) Structures shall not exceed 10 feet in height and shall not exceed
300 square feet in area.
§ 195-66 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-68
1:676
§ 195-69. Driveway regulations.
§ 195-70. Environmental protection.
A. Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by any other provisions of this
chapter, the Zoning Hearing Board may permit erection of a dwelling on
any lot (in a district where permitted by this chapter) separately owned
or under contract of sale and containing at the time of the passage of
this chapter an area or width smaller than that required for a singlefamily
dwelling.
B. No lot area, though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of
record, shall be reduced in area so that the yard lot area per family, lot
width, building area or other requirements of this chapter are not
maintained, public utilities companies excepted.
C. Side and rear yard. All structures, whether attached to the principal
structure or not, including porches, garages, carports, balconies,
platforms and/or accessory structures above normal grade level, shall
not project into any minimum side or rear yard as established by the
principal structure. [Amended 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
D. Front yard.
(1) All structures, whether attached to the principal structure or not,
including porches, garages, carports, balconies, platforms and/or
accessory structures above normal grade level, shall not project
into any minimum front yard as established by the principal
structure.289 [Amended 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
(2) Video satellite dish installations shall be established to the rear of
the front building line, and no portion of the unit or its mounting
shall be situated within any required minimum side or rear lot. No
portion of the unit or its mounting shall be attached in any manner
to another structure or building.
(3) Lots having frontage on more than one street shall provide the
required building setback on every street.
A. Driveways shall be designed in such a manner that would prevent the
driveway material and associated stormwater from entering onto a
public road.
B. Driveways for commercial and industrial uses shall have a minimum
width of 20 feet unless specified otherwise by applicable regulations.
C. Access drives to and from off-street parking, loading and vehicle service
areas along public rights-of-way shall consist of well-defined separate
or common entrances and exits.
289. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 3b, Addition of a porch, roof extension or platform,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 392.
§ 195-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-70
1:677
A. No earthmoving, excavation or filling that has a potential of creating
adverse environmental circumstances, such as erosion, slip-slide areas,
subsidence, watercourse changes, air or water pollution or similar
conditions, shall be undertaken until a zoning permit has been issued by
the Zoning Officer. [Amended 9-7-2005 by Ord. No. 531]
B. The applicant for a permit to proceed with earthmoving, excavation or
filling shall obtain all permits and authorizations required by local and
any other county, state and federal governmental agencies having
jurisdiction over such matters prior to approval of a zoning permit by
local authorities. [Amended 9-7-2005 by Ord. No. 531]
C. Normal agricultural activities, commonly and routinely engaged in by
farm and residential residents in the municipality, shall not be
considered excavations and shall not require permits.
D. The grading of any earth in excess of 5,000 square feet by cut or fill
shall comply with to the following standards: [Amended 9-3-1997 by
Ord. No. 360; 9-7-2005 by Ord. No. 531; 3-1-2006 by Ord. No.
542]
(1) Any toe of slope for a cut or fill with a height of greater than six feet
shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from the property line.
(2) All cut/fill slopes shall be benched at the minimum requirements
listed below in Table No. 1.
TABLE No. 1
Type of Cut/Fill
Maximum Height
Between Benches
(feet)
Minimum Width
of Benches
(feet)
Earth 15 10
Fill 15 10
Major cuts in shale 15 10
Major cuts in
sandstone
30 15
Major cuts in
limestone
35 15
(3) The grading of any earth by cut or fill shall not exceed a slope of
3:1.
(a) Should a slope in excess 3:1 and greater than six feet in height
be necessary, the property owner shall prepare and file a soils
report with all boring logs prepared by a registered
professional engineer certifying to the slope's stability or, in
the alternative, a retaining structure with a minimum of a fourfoot
chain link fence shall be designed and certified by a
§ 195-70 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-70
1:678
§ 195-71. Essential services.
Essential services, as defined in this chapter, shall be permitted in all zoning
districts, subject to restrictions on design, yard area, setback and height as
specified in this chapter.
§ 195-72. Fences and hedges.
registered professional engineer in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(b) Any cut or fill greater than six feet in height and in excess of a
3:1 slope shall have a minimum four-foot chain link fence
erected at the top of the slope through its entire length.
E. All lands steeper than 10 to 1 slope, from which structures or natural
cover have been removed or otherwise destroyed, shall be
appropriately graded and seeded within a reasonable time of such
clearance activity. The phrase "a reasonable time" shall be interpreted
to be within two weeks during the growing season and shall be rigidly
applied to construction activities in order to accomplish the intent of
keeping erosion to an absolute minimum.
F. (Reserved)290
G. All earthmoving activity shall comply with the erosion and
sedimentation control amendment to the Pennsylvania Clean Streams
Law of 1937, P.L. 1987 and P.L. 177,291 all requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and other
applicable federal, state, county or local agency or authority having
enforcement jurisdiction.
A. The location, nature, type of materials and height of walls, hedges and
fences shall be such that they will not hinder the appropriate
development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value
thereof. No fence or wall shall extend within the right-of-way of any
street. No fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery shall be placed or be allowed
to grow in such a manner as to impede vision at intersecting streets or
from driveways on the owner's lot or on an adjacent lot. The height of
such objects is restricted to three feet within a triangular area formed
by the center lines of intersecting streets and a line joining points on
the street lines and equidistant from the point of intersection. This
distance shall be 75 feet from the corner.
B. In the following zoning districts, VR, R-1, R-2, R-3 and A-1, no fence
shall exceed 6 1/2 feet in height along any rear yard or side yard and
four feet in height along any front yard between the street right-of-way
290. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, regarding land disturbance within 50 feet of the
center line of natural drainage courses, was repealed 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 707.
291. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.901 et seq.
§ 195-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-72
1:679
§ 195-73. Height regulations.
§ 195-74. Performance standards.
and the building line. [Amended 8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 575;
8-7-2019 by Ord. No. 715]
C. In B-1 and B-2 Zoning Districts, no fence shall exceed 6 1/2 feet in
height along any yard line when said lot is used in a commercial nature.
[Amended 8-5-1998 by Ord. No. 386]
D. In the Industrial I-1, I-2 and I-3 Zoning Districts, no fence shall exceed
10 feet in height along any yard line when said lot is used in an
industrial nature. [Amended 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 388]
E. In the MU Mixed Use Zoning District, no fence shall exceed 10 feet in
height along any yard line. [Added 2-4-2009 by Ord. No. 584;
amended 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658]
A. Measurement of height shall be the vertical height from the average
elevation of finished grade at the front of the structure to:
(1) In case of flat-roof structures: the highest point of coping.
(2) In case of mansard-roof structures: the deckline of roof.
(3) In case of gable or hipped roof: the average height of roof.
B. A habitable attic shall be counted as a story.
C. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to flagpoles,
church spires, belfries, domes or similar projections not used for human
occupancy, nor to chimneys, ventilations, skylights, water tanks, public
utility facilities, bulkheads, silos and other necessary mechanical and
operational apparatus usually carried above the roof level. [Amended
5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341]
D. The only height limitations of this chapter which shall apply to
commercial antennas and communications towers are those set forth in
§§ 195-14M and 195-81. [Added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341]
A. All land use activities shall comply with the requirements of this
section. The Township may require evaluation by a qualified consultant
whose cost for services shall be borne by the applicant, in cases where
issues develop over the need for or the adequacy of compliance.
B. Fire prevention. Fire prevention and fire control equipment acceptable
to standards of the Board of Fire Underwriters or other appropriate
regulatory agency shall be readily available where any activity involves
the handling of flammable or explosive materials.
C. Steady-state noise emanated from stationary equipment. Steady-state
noise emanating from stationary equipment or sources, which will
§ 195-72 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-74
1:680
persist during indefinite or periodic intervals of time over a period of
more than three consecutive days onto adjacent real properties or to
a receiving property within any district within the Township, shall not
exceed the maximum noise levels prescribed in this section. [Amended
12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658]
(1) No person shall cause or permit any steady-state sound to emanate
from a source property which exceeds the levels set forth in
Subsection C(2) of this section when measured at the following
locations:
(a) Within 100 feet of any occupied building located in any district;
or [Amended 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658; 11-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 706]
(b) At any point along the boundary line between the source
property and the receiving property in any district. [Amended
8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 575; 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658]
(2) Maximum permissible noise levels are:
(a) Daytime (7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.): 70 dBA. [Amended
12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658]
(b) Nighttime (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.): 60 dBA. [Amended
12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658]
(c) Low level frequency noise: 55dBC. [Added 11-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 706]
(3) Sound measurements made to determine compliance with the
conditions and standards of this section shall be made using a
sound level meter which conforms to Type 1 or Type 2 as specified
in ANSI Specifications S1, 4-1971.
(4) The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions for those
circumstances involving equipment generating noise as part of a
conditional use or special exception. As part of a conditional use
and/or special exception, and prior to construction, the Township
may require the applicant/operator to establish the ambient or
background noise level baseline. The baseline shall be established
hourly over a seventy-two-hour period with at least one twentyfour-
hour reading on a Saturday or Sunday. A noise consultant/
engineer mutually agreed upon by the Township and owner/
operator will be responsible for determining the residual
background noise level baseline. The operator and Township will
mutually agree to the location of the sampling equipment. The
operator shall be responsible for all costs associated with the noise
consultant/engineer. The results shall be provided to the Township.
[Added 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658; amended 11-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 706]
§ 195-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-74
1:681
§ 195-75. Storage and screening.
D. Odor. No malodorous gas or matter that is discernible on any adjoining
lot or property shall be permitted except for normal farm operations
carried on in the A-1 District.
E. Air pollution. No pollution of air by flyash, dust, smoke, vapors or any
substance that is harmful to health, animals, vegetation or other
property shall be permitted.
F. Erosion. No erosion by wind or water that will carry objectionable
substances onto neighboring properties shall be permitted.
G. Water pollution. Water pollution in violation of any standards
established by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection shall not be permitted.
A. No lot or premises may be used as a storage area or dump for garbage,
junk automobiles, appliances or storage or collection of any other
miscellaneous items except as provided for in appropriate articles of
this chapter or other applicable Township statutes.
B. No vehicle or motorized equipment that is disabled, from which the
wheels or engine have been removed, is not in operating condition or
does not have a current motor vehicle license and inspection sticker
attached shall be placed, parked or stored for a period exceeding 30
days in any district, nor shall any owner or occupant of the property in
any district permit said property to be used for the parking or storage of
such vehicles or equipment. The foregoing shall not prohibit the rental
of space in a private or public garage or permitted public parking lot,
repairs in a permitted garage in a commercial or industrial district or
storage of vehicles in a junkyard. This regulation is not meant to apply
to operable antique motor vehicles, farm tractors, racers and other
vehicles not requiring state inspection.
C. Any material stored outside an enclosed structure being used for
commercial or industrial purposes, as an incidental part of the primary
operation, shall be screened by opaque ornamental fencing, walls or
evergreen plant material in order to minimize visibility if the storage
area is readily visible from adjoining properties not owned by the user.
Materials shall not be deemed to include operable vehicles.
D. The required screen shall have a height adequate to achieve its
purpose. Plant materials used for screening shall consist of dense
evergreen plants. They shall be of a kind or used in such a manner so as
to provide a continuous opaque screen within 24 months after
commencement of operations in the area to be screened. The governing
body shall require that either new planting or alternative screening be
provided if, after 24 months, the plant materials do not provide an
opaque screen.
§ 195-74 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-75
1:682
E. Landscaping in commercial and industrial districts adjacent to public
rights-of-way shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Any part or portion of a site that is being occupied and that is not
used for buildings, loading or parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks
and designated storage areas shall be planted with an all-season
ground cover and shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs in
accordance with an overall landscape plan. A replacement program
for nonsurviving plants shall be included.
(2) (Reserved)292
F. Mobile recreational vehicles, such as travel trailers, pickup coaches,
motorized homes and boat trailers, may be parked or stored in A-1, R-1,
R-2 and R-3 Districts subject to the following requirements: [Amended
8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 575]
(1) At no time shall such parked or stored camping and recreation
equipment (authorized mobile homes excepted) be used for
residential purposes.
(2) Parking and storing of camping and recreational equipment shall
be limited to the interior of automobile garages, other available onlot
accessory buildings or to that portion of the lot to the rear of the
principal building line.
(3) If topographic conditions are such that compliance with the
parking or storage requirement of this regulation would cause
inconvenience or undue hardship, then parking to the front of the
building line is permitted as a variance by the Zoning Hearing
Board so long as the vehicular view of traffic is not obstructed.
(4) Owner of camping and recreational equipment shall reside on the
same lot. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 617]
G. Screen planting. The following screen plantings shall be employed
where required by conditional use, special exception or any
supplementary regulation of the Township Zoning Ordinance, or may be
required as a reasonable additional condition and safeguard pursuant
to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.293 [Added 6-2-2010
by Ord. No. 601]
(1) Type I Screening: to consist of double or triple rows of dense habit
pyramidal-type conifer trees planted at oblique lines to one another
so that a continuous screen is provided. All trees shall be a
minimum of six feet in height at the time of planting in the case of a
double row, and four feet in the case of a triple row. Trees which die
shall be replaced within six months. Spacing shall be 10 feet to 12
292. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(2), regarding single parking areas with 25 or more
spaces, was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 601.
293. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-75
1:683
§ 195-76. Single-unit mobile home installation.
Individual mobile homes, not a part of a mobile home park, that are installed
where permitted on private land as single-family residential dwellings shall
comply with all regulations for conventional dwelling houses with respect to
size, setback and side lines of the district in which it will be sited and shall
meet the following additional requirements:
feet. As an alternative to the conifer tree rows, the developer
shall maintain a fifty-foot-wide buffer area of natural vegetation
sufficient for complete screening. In permitting this option, the
developer may be required to submit photographic or planimetric
evidence of the plant density and plant or tree types. Such natural
buffer shall be in addition to any required side or rear yard
requirements.
(2) Type II: A Type II screen shall consist of an opaque fence at least
6.5 feet in height in all zoning districts other than the MU district
which shall have an opaque fence of at least 10 feet in height and
installed at the required rear or side yard setback lines. On the
outside perimeter of the fence, a planting strip equal to the width of
the required yard area shall be installed. The developer shall plant
at least 10 coniferous or four deciduous trees per 100 lineal feet of
perimeter area. Coniferous trees shall be a minimum of six feet tall,
and deciduous trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper at
planting. [Amended 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 658]
(3) Alternate screening plans: The Township may consider alternative
forms of screening submitted as a part of any application, provided
such plans are prepared by a registered landscape architect and
can be shown to meet the purposes of complete and opaque
screening, preservation of rural or scenic neighborhood character
and facilitation of natural stormwater management. Such alternate
landscaping plans shall be reviewed by the planning agency for
recommendation prior to consideration by the Township
Commissioners or Zoning Hearing Board.
(4) All screen plantings shall be replaced within six months of death to
maintain a continuous dense screen.
A. The mobile home shall be installed to conform with all front yard, side
yard and rear yard setback lines applicable to housing in the district.
B. The mobile home shall be installed upon and securely fastened to a
frost-free foundation, basement or footer.
C. An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be erected around
the entire base of any mobile home not mounted on an enclosed
foundation or basement. Such enclosure shall provide sufficient
ventilation to inhibit decay and deterioration of the structure.
§ 195-75 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-76
1:684
§ 195-77. Subsidiary regulations.
§ 195-78. Transient vendors.
Transient vendors, when authorized under applicable state and Township
regulations and by affected property owners, may be permitted to sell
products subject to the following:
D. The mobile home shall be connected to both public water and sewer
systems, if available. If not, the owner shall provide a potable water
supply and shall provide a septic system which meets all standards of
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
E. Any garage, utility shed or other accessory building constructed on the
tract shall conform with the standards applicable to such structures for
the applicable zoning district. All accessory structures shall be
designed and constructed of materials that are aesthetically compatible
with the principal unit.
F. Any single on-lot mobile home shall meet the specifications for
manufacture of mobile homes as set forth in United States Standards
Institute, Standards for Mobile Homes, USA Standard A 119.1-1969,
NFPA No. 501B-1968, and any subsequent modification or amendment
of such standards. Applicable state standards shall also be met. No
room or floor area addition shall be made to the primary mobile home
unit except for additions that are aesthetically compatible with the unit.
[Amended 1-7-1998 by Ord. No. 388]
A. Floodplain zoning regulations. All development within flood-prone
areas of Rostraver Township shall conform to applicable requirements
of the Zoning Ordinance of the Township of Rostraver and the
applicable requirements of Rostraver Township Ordinance No. 355,
adopted July 3, 1997.294 [Amended 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 388]
A. Activities shall be restricted to B-2, I-1, I-2 and I-3 Districts. [Amended
10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 388]
B. Temporary structures, signs and vehicles used for the sales activity
shall be situated a minimum distance of 20 feet from the highway
cartway. Said structures, signs and vehicles shall be removed during
periods when sales operations are not in progress.
C. Minimum clear sight lines of 500 feet along the highway approaches to
the sales site shall be maintained from both directions.
D. Off-street parking shall be available at a minimum distance of 20 feet
from the highway cartway.
E. A minimum of five off-street parking spaces shall be provided.
294. Editor's Note: See Ch. 97, Floodplain Management.
§ 195-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-78
1:685
§ 195-79. Airport zoning provisions.
F. Signs relating to the sale of products shall be limited to a total of four.
Individual signs shall not exceed 10 square feet in area.
G. Signs shall not be placed within 20 feet of the highway cartway and
shall be within 500 feet of the sales site.
A. Statement of purpose.
(1) This section of the Rostraver Township Zoning Ordinance regulates
and restricts the height of structures and objects of natural growth,
the density of residential development and otherwise regulates the
use of property in the vicinity of the Rostraver Airport by creating
appropriate zones and establishing the boundaries thereof;
providing for changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such
zones; defining certain terms used herein; and referring to the
maps that are incorporated in and made a part of this chapter.
(2) Obstructions and high densities of residential use have the
potential for endangering the lives and property of users of the
Rostraver Airport and property or occupants of land in its vicinity;
obstructions may affect existing and future instrument approach
minimums of the airport; and obstructions may reduce the size of
areas available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft
thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the Rostraver Airport
and the investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared that:
(a) The creation or establishment of obstructions have the
potential for being public nuisances and injuring the region
served by the Rostraver Airport;
(b) The development of and potential for concentrated areas of
housing in the immediate vicinity of the Rostraver Airport
poses potential threats to the safety of inhabitants.
(c) It is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety
and general welfare that the creation or establishment of
obstructions and population concentrations that are a hazard
to air navigation or human life be prevented; and
(d) The prevention of these obstructions and population
concentrations should be accomplished to the extent legally
possible, by the exercise of the police power, without
compensation.
B. Special definitions. The following definitions shall apply in
interpretation and application of airport safety control provisions:
AIRPORT — Rostraver Airport
AIRPORT ELEVATION — 1,230 feet above mean sea level.
§ 195-78 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-79
1:686
APPROACH SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on the
extended runway center line, extending outward and upward from the
end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone
height limitation slope set forth in § 195-79C. In plan the perimeter
of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach
zone.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES —
These zones are set forth in § 195-79C.
CONICAL SURFACE — A surface extending outward and upward from
the periphery of the horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION — An obstruction determined to have
a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the
navigable airspace.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones
set forth in this section and shown on the maps incorporated herein, the
datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plan 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides
with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth or other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in § 195-79C.
PRIMARY SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on a runway.
When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary
surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; or when the
runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard surface,
the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the
primary surface is set forth in § 195-79C. The elevation of any point on
the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on
the runway center line.
RUNWAY — A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and
takeoff of aircraft along its length.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES — These surfaces extend outward at
ninety-degree angles to the runway center line and the runway center
line extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot
vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where
they intersect the horizontal surface.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to
be used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross
weight and less.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of
aircraft using visual approach procedures.
C. Establishment of airport control zones. In order to carry out the
provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established
certain zones that include all of the land lying beneath the approach
§ 195-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-79
1:687
surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical surfaces
as they apply to the Rostraver Airport. These airport zones are shown
as an overlay on the Official Zoning Map kept on file by officials of the
Township of Rostraver, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, which is
made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the following
zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive
height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined
as follows:
(1) Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone. The inner edge of this
approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and
is 250 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to
a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the
primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line
of the runway.
(2) Transitional zones: slope seven feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and the approach surface and extending to a height of 150
feet above the airport elevation which is 1,230 feet above mean sea
level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height
limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at
the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface and
extending to where they intersect the conical surface.
(3) Horizontal zone: established at 150 feet above the airport elevation
or at a height of 1,380 feet above mean sea level.
(4) Conical zone: slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet
above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet
above the airport elevation; here: 1,580 feet.
(5) Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this section or chapter shall
be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any
structure or growth of any tree to a height up to 50 feet above the
surface of the land.
D. Use restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter,
no use may be made of land or water within any airport zone
established by this section which creates electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and
aircraft; makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and others; results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport;
impairs visibility in the vicinity of the airport; creates bird strike
hazards; or otherwise in any way endangers or interferes with the
landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
E. Nonconformance.
(1) The regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not be construed
to require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of
§ 195-79 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-79
1:688
any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the
effective date of this chapter or otherwise interfere with the
continuance of nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall
require any change in the construction, alteration or intended
use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was
begun prior to the effective date of this section and is diligently
prosecuted.
(2) Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of
this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or
tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and
maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be
deemed necessary by municipal, state or federal airport officials to
indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the
presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall
be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the official
body responsible for their placement.
F. Future uses.
(1) Except as specifically provided hereunder, no material change shall
be made in the use of land and no structure shall be erected or
otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a zoning
permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted consistent
with the requirements of § 195-79. Each application for a zoning
permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired,
with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether
the resulting use or structure would conform to the regulations
herein prescribed. No permit for a use inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter shall be granted unless a variance has
been approved in accordance with § 195-97C.
(a) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
conical zone, no permit shall be required for any structure less
than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when
because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, such
structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for
such zones.
(b) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of
the runway, no permit shall be required for any structure less
than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when
such structure would extend above the height limit prescribed
for such approach zones.
(c) Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any
construction or alteration of any structure in excess of any of
the height limits established by this chapter.
§ 195-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-79
1:689
§ 195-80. Design review requirement.
(2) Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a
nonconforming use or structure to become a greater hazard to air
navigation than it was on the effective date of this chapter or any
amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit
is made.
(3) Requests for variances. Any request for a variance in accordance
with § 195-97C of this chapter shall be accompanied by a
determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the
effect of the proposal of the operation of air navigation facilities
and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Additionally, no
application for a variance to the requirements of this chapter may
be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board unless a copy of the
application has been furnished to the appropriate Rostraver Airport
official or owners for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the
requested variance. If the appropriate Rostraver Airport official
does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the
Zoning Hearing Board may act on its own to grant or deny said
application.
(4) Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted
may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of
this chapter and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so
conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in
question to install, operate and maintain, at the owner's expense,
such markings and lights as may be necessary.
A. All zoning applications for development or modification of sites in
business (B1, B-2 and MU) or industrial (I-1, I-2 and I-3) Districts shall
be submitted to the Rostraver Township Planning Agency for design
review prior to approval by the Zoning Officer (uses by right), Township
Board of Commissioners (conditional uses) or the Zoning Hearing
Board (special exceptions). All zoning applications for redevelopment or
modification of sites in the Village Residential District (VR) other than
for a residential dwelling or essential services as permitted by use shall
be submitted to the Rostraver Township Planning Agency for design
review prior to approval by the Zoning Officer (uses by right), Township
Board of Commissioners (conditional uses) or the Zoning Hearing
Board (special exceptions). [Amended 8-5-1998 by Ord. No. 386;
10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 388; 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 468; 5-4-2005
by Ord. No. 528; 2-4-2009 by Ord. No. 584; 8-7-2019 by Ord. No.
715]
B. Zoning applications shall include data and drawings in sufficient detail
for evaluation and review of:
(1) Site location and physical characteristics.
§ 195-79 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-80
1:690
§ 195-81. Requirements and standards for communications
facilities. [Added 5-7-1997 by Ord. No. 341; amended 9-5-2018 by
Ord. No. 705]
(2) Building locations: on-site and adjacent thereto.
(3) Structure design and related amenities.
(4) Accessory uses: storage, structures, parking, etc.
(5) Site access and adjacent traffic considerations.
(6) On-site circulation.
(7) Landscaping plan.
(8) Drainage, utility and other support requirements.
(9) Initial and projected use potential.
(10) Any additional data deemed appropriate and necessary by the
Planning Agency to evaluate the proposed development.
[Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 468]
(11) Stormwater management plan which complies with Chapter 164 of
the Code of the Township of Rostraver. [Added 7-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 495]
(12) Outdoor lighting plan. [Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
A. General and specific requirements for communications antennas. The
following regulations shall apply to all communications antennas,
except those operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator:
(1) Standard of care. All communications antennas shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including but not limited to the
most recent editions of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, and
National Electrical Code. Communications antennas shall at all
times be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and repair
by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the
same shall not endanger the life of any person or any property in
the Township.
(2) Permitted in all zoning districts. Communications antennas are
permitted pursuant to this zoning ordinance in all zoning districts
throughout the Township, so long as they comply with all of the
terms and conditions of this zoning ordinance.
(3) Historic areas. To the extent permitted by state and federal law, no
communications antenna may be located upon any property, or on a
building or structure, that is listed on either the National or
§ 195-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-81
1:691
Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places (either inside or outside
the public rights-of-way), or that is deemed by the Township to be
of specific historical significance.
(4) Wind. Communications antenna structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in
addition to the standard designed by the American National
Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of
the Electronics Industry Association, and Telecommunications
Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as amended).
(5) Aviation safety. Communications antennas shall comply with
§ 195-79 of the Township zoning ordinance and all federal and state
laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(6) Public safety communications and other communications services.
Communications antennas shall not interfere with public safety
communications or the reception of broadband, television, radio or
other communication services enjoyed by occupants of nearby
properties.
(7) Radio frequency emissions. A communications antenna shall not,
by itself or in conjunction with other antennas and/or
communications towers, generate radio frequency emissions in
excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including but
not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin
65 entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for
Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as
amended.
(8) Removal. In the event that use of a communications antenna is
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Township of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use
shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned communications
antennas, or portions of communications antennas, shall be
removed as follows:
(a) All abandoned or unused communications antennas and
related equipment shall be removed within two months of the
cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is
approved by the Township.
(b) If the communications antenna or related equipment is not
removed within two months of the cessation of operations at a
site, or within any longer period approved by the Township, the
communications antenna and/or related equipment may be
removed by the Township. As security, the Township reserves
the right to the salvage value of any removed communications
antenna and/or related equipment, if such communications
antenna and/or related equipment are not removed by the
owner within the specific time frame enumerated in this
chapter.
§ 195-81 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-81
1:692
(9) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a
communications antenna shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Township, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against any
and all claims for personal injury, including death, and property
damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or connected
with any act or omission of the person, its officers, agents,
employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the
communications antenna. Each person that owns or operates a
communications antenna shall defend any actions or proceedings
against the Township in which it is claimed that personal injury,
including death, or property damage was caused by the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of a
communications antenna. The obligation to indemnify, hold
harmless and defend shall include, but not be limited to, the
obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages,
reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and
all other costs of indemnification.
(10) Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
(a) The communications antenna shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
(b) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the facility in order to promote the safety and security of the
Township's residents.
(c) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the
best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
(11) Removal, replacement and modification.
(a) To the extent permitted by law, the removal and replacement of
communications antennas and/or related equipment for the
purpose of upgrading or repairing the communications
antenna is permitted, so long as such repair or upgrade does
not substantially change the overall size of the wireless
support structure.
(b) To the extent permitted by law, any material modification to a
communications antenna shall require notice to be provided to
the Township, and possible supplemental permit approval to
the original permit or authorization.
B. Regulations for specific applications. The following regulations shall
apply only to communications antennas or other communications
facilities installations that fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
§ 195-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-81
1:693
Broadband Collocation Act295 and/or the mandatory-approval provisions
of the FCC's October 2014 Report and Order, as amended:
(1) Permit required. Communications antenna applicants proposing
changes to an existing communications tower, base pad, related
equipment, or communications antenna that do not substantially
change the dimensions of the existing wireless support structure or
otherwise fall under the WBCA or pertinent provisions of the FCC's
October 2014 Report and Order, shall obtain a building permit from
the Township. In order to be considered for such a permit, the
applicant must submit a permit application to the Township in
accordance with applicable permit policies and procedures.
(2) Timing of approval for applications that fall under the WBCA and/or
FCC's October 2014 Report and Order, as amended. Within 30
calendar days of the date that an application for a communications
antenna is filed with the Township, the Township shall notify the
applicant in writing of any information that may be required to
complete such application. Within 60 calendar days of receipt of a
complete application, the Township shall make its final decision on
whether to approve the application and shall advise the applicant in
writing of such decision.
(3) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Township's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a
communications antenna or $1,000, whichever is less.
C. Additional regulations for communications antennas that do not fall
under the WBCA. In addition to the regulations enumerated in
§ 195-81A, the following regulations shall apply to communications
antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act or the mandatory-approval provisions of the FCC's
October 2014 Order and Report, as amended:
(1) Prohibited on certain structures. Communications antennas shall
not be located on any single-family dwelling or townhome.
(2) Conditional use approval required. Any applicant proposing the
construction of a new communications antenna, or a material
modification to an existing antenna, shall first obtain a zoning
permit and conditional use authorization from the Township Board
of Commissioners. New constructions, modifications, and
replacements that fall under the WBCA, or the applicable
provisions of the FCC's October 2014 Report and Order, shall not
be subject to the conditional use process. The conditional use
application, and accompanying documentation, shall demonstrate
that the proposed facility complies with all applicable provisions in
this section of the Township of Rostraver zoning ordinance.
295. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-81 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-81
1:694
(3) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s) and/
or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the communications
antenna and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any
potential violations of the terms and conditions of these
communications antenna provisions. The applicant and/or owner of
the communications antenna shall reimburse the Township for all
costs of the Township's consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation
and consultation in connection with these activities.
(4) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Township's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a
communications antenna, as well as inspection, monitoring, and all
other related costs.
(5) Development regulations. Communications antennas shall be colocated
on existing wireless support structures subject to the
following conditions:
(a) The total height of any wireless support structure and mounted
communications antenna shall not exceed 20 feet above the
maximum height permitted in the underlying zoning district.
(b) In accordance with industry standards, all communications
antenna applicants must submit documentation to the
Township justifying the total height of the communications
antenna. Documentation shall be analyzed in the context of
such justification on an individual basis.
(c) If the applicant proposes to locate the related equipment in a
separate building, the building shall comply with the minimum
requirements for the applicable zoning district, and
landscaping shall be required to screen as much of the
equipment building as possible. The screening method chosen
by the applicant shall comply with the requirements
established in § 195-75 of the Township of Rostraver Zoning
Code.
(6) Security fence. A security fence shall surround any separate
communications equipment building in compliance with § 195-72 of
the Township zoning ordinance.
(7) Noncommercial usage exemption. Township residents utilizing
satellite dishes and antennas for the purpose of maintaining
television, phone, radio and/or Internet connections at their
respective residences, as well as amateur radio operators, shall be
exempt from the regulations enumerated in this section of the
zoning ordinance.
(8) Design regulations. Communications antennas shall employ stealth
technology or shall be treated to match the wireless support
§ 195-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-81
1:695
structure to which they are mounted in order to minimize aesthetic
impact. The application of the stealth technology/color treatment
chosen by the applicant shall be subject to the approval of the
Township.
(9) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any
communications antenna to ensure compliance with the provisions
of the zoning ordinance and any other provisions found within the
Township Code or state or federal law. The Township and/or its
agents shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a
communications antenna is located, upon reasonable notice to the
operator, to ensure such compliance.
(10) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a communications
antenna shall provide the Township with a certificate of insurance,
naming the Township as an additional insured, and evidencing
general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000
per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the
communications antenna.
D. Additional regulations applicable to all communications antennas
located in the public rights-of-way ("ROW"). In addition to the
regulations enumerated in § 195-81A, the following regulations shall
apply to communications antennas located in the public rights-of-way:
(1) Co-location. Communications antennas in the ROW shall be colocated
on existing infrastructure, such as existing utility poles or
light poles. If co-location is not technologically or economically
feasible, the applicant, with the Township's approval, shall locate
its communications antennas on existing poles or freestanding
structures in the public rights-of-way that do not already act as
wireless support structures.
(2) Conditional use approval required. Any applicant proposing the
construction of a new communications antenna shall first obtain
conditional use authorization from the Township Board of
Commissioners. New constructions, modifications, and
replacements that fall under the WBCA, or the applicable
provisions of the FCC's October 2014 Report and Order, shall not
be subject to the conditional use process. The conditional use
application, and accompanying documentation, shall demonstrate
that the proposed facility complies with all applicable provisions in
the Township of Rostraver zoning ordinance.
(3) Design requirements.
(a) To the extent permitted by state and federal law,
communications antenna installations located above the
surface grade in the public ROW, including, but not limited to,
those on streetlights and utility poles, shall consist of
equipment components that are no more than six feet in height
§ 195-81 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-81
1:696
and that are compatible in scale and proportion to the
structures upon which they are mounted. All equipment shall
be the smallest and least visibly intrusive equipment feasible.
(b) Communications antennas and related equipment shall be
treated with stealth technology by the communications
antenna owner and/or applicant to match the wireless support
structure upon which they are mounted, and may be required
to be painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually compatible
with the support structure upon which they are mounted.
(4) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all communications antennas in the ROW based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and
manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of
the Township and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(5) Equipment location. Communications antennas and related
equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by
the Township. In addition:
(a) Ground-mounted related equipment shall be located between
the sidewalk and the curb. For reasons of safety and aesthetics,
such equipment shall neither protrude onto the curb, nor
obstruct the sidewalk.
(b) Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible,
through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to
the satisfaction of the Township.
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(d) Graffiti on any wireless support structures or any related
equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner.
(e) Any proposed underground vault related to communications
antennas shall be reviewed and is subject to approval by the
Township Board of Commissioners.
(6) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within two months following
written notice from the Township, or such longer period as the
Township determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, the owner of a communications
antenna in the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or
§ 195-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-81
1:697
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
communications antenna when the Township, consistent with its
police powers and applicable Public Utility Commission
regulations, shall have determined that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(b) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in
the ROW;
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(d) An emergency as determined by the Township.
E. General and specific requirements for all communications towers. The
following regulations shall apply to all communications towers,
excluding any noncommercial tower that is owned and operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio operator.
(1) Standard of care. All communications towers shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the
most recent editions of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code,
Electrical Code, as well as the accepted and responsible
workmanlike industry practices of the National Association of
Tower Erectors. At all times, communications towers shall be kept
and maintained in good condition, order and repair by qualified
maintenance and construction personnel, so that the same shall not
endanger the life of any person or any property in the Township.
(2) Notice. Upon submission of an application for a communications
tower and the scheduling of the mandatory public hearing before
the Township, the applicant shall mail notice to all owners of every
property within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The applicant shall
provide proof of the notification to the Township.
(3) Conditional use authorization required. Communications towers
are permitted by conditional use in certain zoning districts, at a
height necessary to satisfy their function in the applicant's wireless
communications system. No applicant shall have the right under
these regulations to erect a tower to the maximum height specified
in this section unless it proves the necessity for such height. The
applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed communications
tower is the minimum height necessary for its service area.
§ 195-81 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-81
1:698
(a) Prior to the Township Board of Commissioners' consideration
of a conditional use application authorizing the construction
and installation of a communications tower, it shall be
incumbent upon the applicant for such conditional use
approval to prove to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Township Board of Commissioners that the applicant cannot
adequately extend or infill its communications system by the
use of equipment such as redoes, repeaters, communications
antennas, and other similar equipment installed on existing
structures, such as utility poles or their appurtenances and
other available tall structures. The applicant shall further
demonstrate that the proposed communications tower must be
located where it is proposed in order to serve the applicant's
service area and that no other viable alternative location
exists.
(b) The conditional use application shall be accompanied by a
propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed tower
or other communication facilities and equipment, a description
of the type and manufacturer of the proposed transmission/
radio equipment, the frequency range (megahertz band)
assigned to the applicant, the power in watts at which the
applicant transmits, and any relevant related tests conducted
by the applicant in determining the need for the proposed site
and installation.
(c) The conditional use application shall be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed
communications tower complies with all state and federal laws
and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(d) Where the communications tower is located on a property with
another principal use, the applicant shall present
documentation to the Township Board of Commissioners that
the owner of the property has granted an easement for the
proposed communications tower and that vehicular access will
be provided to the facility.
(e) The conditional use application shall be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed
communications tower complies with all applicable provisions
in this chapter.
(4) Engineer inspection. Prior to the Township Board of
Commissioners' issuance of a permit authorizing construction and
erection of a communications tower, a structural engineer
registered in Pennsylvania shall issue to the Township a written
certification of the proposed communications tower's ability to
meet the structural standards offered by either the Electronic
Industries Association or the Telecommunication Industry
Association and certify the proper construction of the foundation
§ 195-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-81
1:699
and the erection of the structure. This certification shall be
provided during the conditional use proceedings before the
Township Board of Commissioners or, at a minimum, be made as a
condition attached to any approval given such that the certification
be provided prior to issuance of any zoning permits.
(5) Visual appearance. All communications towers and related
equipment shall be aesthetically and architecturally compatible
with the surrounding environment and shall maximize the use of a
like facade to blend with the existing surroundings and neighboring
buildings to the greatest extent possible. The Township Board of
Commissioners shall consider whether its decision upon the subject
application will promote the harmonious and orderly development
of the zoning district and/or surrounding area involved; encourage
compatibility with the character and type of development existing
in the area; benefit neighboring properties by preventing a
negative impact on the aesthetic character of the community;
preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site to the greatest
possible extent; and encourage sound engineering and
construction principles, practices and techniques.
(6) Co-location and siting. An application for a new communications
tower shall first demonstrate that the proposed communications
tower cannot be accommodated on land or structures owned by the
Township of Rostraver. If such accommodation is not possible, the
applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed tower cannot be
sited on structures already approved for the placement of wireless
facilities. The Township Board of Commissioners may deny an
application to construct a new communications tower if the
applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount a
communications antenna on an existing structure. The applicant
shall demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall structures,
buildings, and towers within a one-quarter-mile radius of the site
proposed, sought permission to install a communications antenna
on those structures, buildings, and towers and was denied for one
of the following reasons:
(a) The proposed antenna and related equipment would exceed
the structural capacity of the existing building, structure or
tower, and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
(b) The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for
that existing building, structure, or tower and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(c) Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to accommodate
the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended
function.
§ 195-81 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-81
1:700
(d) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached
with the owner of such building, structure, or tower.
(7) Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible under
applicable state and federal law, any applicant proposing the
modification of an existing communications tower, which
substantially changes the overall height of such wireless support
structure, shall first obtain a zoning permit from the Township.
(8) Gap in coverage or capacity. The applicant must demonstrate that a
significant gap in wireless coverage or capacity exists in the
applicable area and that the type of communications tower being
proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill that gap. The
existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage or capacity
shall be a factor in the Township Board of Commissioners' decision
on an application for approval of a communications tower.
(9) Additional communications antennas. The applicant shall provide
the Township with a written commitment that it will allow other
service providers to co-locate communications antennas on
communications towers where technologically and economically
feasible. To the extent permissible under federal and state law, the
owner of a communications tower shall not install any additional
communications antennas without obtaining the prior written
approval of the Township.
(10)Wind. All communications towers shall be designed to withstand
the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in addition to
the standard designed by the American National Standards
Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the
Electronics Industry Association and Telecommunications Industry
Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222), as amended.
(11) Height. In all zoning districts, the maximum height of any
communications tower located outside the ROW shall be 150 feet.
Communications towers in the ROW shall not exceed a height of 40
feet, unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Township
Board of Commissioners that it cannot infill its gap in coverage or
capacity at such height.
(12) Related equipment. Either one single-story wireless
communications equipment building not exceeding 250 square feet
in area, or up to five boxes placed on a pad not exceeding 10 feet by
20 feet in area housing related equipment or a base station, may be
located on the site for each unrelated company sharing space on
the communications tower.
(13) Public safety communications and other communications services.
No communications tower shall interfere with public safety
communications or the reception of broadband, television, radio or
other communication services enjoyed by occupants of nearby
properties.
§ 195-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-81
1:701
(14) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
(a) A communications tower shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
(b) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the communications tower in order to promote the safety and
security of the Township's residents, and utilize the best
available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
(15)Radio frequency emissions. A communications tower shall not, by
itself or in conjunction with other communications towers or
antennas, generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the
standards and regulations of the FCC, including but not limited to,
the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled
"Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure
to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(16) Historic buildings or districts. To the extent permitted by state and
federal law, no communications tower may be located upon any
property, or on a building or structure, that is listed on either the
National or Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places (either inside
or outside the public rights-of-way), or that is deemed by the
Township to be of local historic significance.
(17) Signs. All communications towers shall post a sign in a readily
visible location identifying the name and phone number of a party
to contact in the event of an emergency. The only other signage
permitted on the communications tower shall be those required by
the FCC, or any other federal or state agency.
(18) Lighting. No communications tower shall be artificially lighted,
except as required by law. If lighting is required, the applicant shall
provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as
unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state
and federal regulations. The applicant shall promptly report any
outage or malfunction of FAA-mandated lighting to the appropriate
governmental authorities and the Township Manager.
(19) Noise. Generators shall be located below grade and suitably
soundproofed so that noise volumes measured at all property lines
do not exceed levels as outlined in § 195-74 of the Zoning Code of
the Township of Rostraver, or by state law.
(20) Aviation safety. Communications towers shall comply with all
federal and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(21) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant and/or
expert necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the communications
tower and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any
§ 195-81 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-81
1:702
potential violations of the terms and conditions of these provisions.
The applicant and/or owner of the communications tower shall
reimburse the Township for all costs of the Township's
consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation in
connection with these activities.
(22) Timing of approval pursuant to FCC regulations, as amended.
Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a
communications tower is filed with the Township, the Township
shall notify the applicant in writing of any information that may be
required to complete such application. All applications for
communications towers shall be acted upon within 150 days of the
receipt of a fully completed application for the approval of such
communications tower, and the Township shall advise the applicant
in writing of its decision.
(23) Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming communications towers
which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or
cause may be repaired and restored at their former location, but
must otherwise comply with the terms and conditions of this
section.
(24) Removal. In the event that use of a communications tower is
planned to be discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice
to the Township of its intent to discontinue use and the date when
the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned
communications towers, or portions of communications towers,
shall be removed as follows:
(a) All unused or abandoned communications towers and related
equipment shall be removed within two months of the
cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is
approved by the Township.
(b) If the communications tower and/or related equipment is not
removed within two months of the cessation of operations at a
site, or within any longer period approved by the Township, the
communications tower and related equipment may be removed
by the Township and the cost of removal assessed against the
owner of the communications tower. As security, the Township
reserves the right to the salvage value of any removed
communications tower and/or related equipment, if such
communications tower and/or related equipment are not
removed by the owner within the time frames enumerated in
this chapter.
(c) Any unused portions of communications towers, including
antennas, shall be removed within two months of the time of
cessation of operations. The Township must approve all
replacements of portions of a communications tower
previously removed.
§ 195-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-81
1:703
(25) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Township's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a
communications tower, as well as related inspection, monitoring,
and related costs.
(26)FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a communications
tower over 40 feet in height shall submit a copy of its current FCC
license, including the name, address, and emergency telephone
number for the operator of the facility.
(27) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a communications
tower greater than 40 feet in height shall provide the Township
with a certificate of insurance naming the Township as an
additional insured, and evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence covering the communications tower. Each person that
owns or operates a communications tower 40 feet or less in height
shall provide the Township with a certificate of insurance naming
the Township as an additional insured, and evidencing general
liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount
of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering each communications
tower.
(28) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a
communications tower shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Township, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against any
and all claims for personal injury, including death, and property
damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or connected
with any act or omission of the person, its officers, agents,
employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the
communications tower. Each person that owns or operates a
communications tower shall defend any actions or proceedings
against the Township in which it is claimed that personal injury,
including death, or property damage was caused by the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the
communications tower. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless
and defend shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay
judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys'
fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of
indemnification.
(29) Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a communications
tower shall contain a seal and signature of a professional structural
engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 195-81 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-81
1:704
(30) Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the
construction or placement of a communications tower, the
applicant shall provide to the Township financial security sufficient
to guarantee the construction of the communications tower. Said
financial security shall remain in place until the communications
tower is fully constructed. Should the communications tower be
abandoned by the owner and/or operator, and not removed within
two months of such abandonment, the Township shall have the
authority to remove the communications tower and sell all of its
pieces, as well as related equipment, used in the operation of the
communications tower, in order to recover the cost of said removal.
F. Additional requirements for communications towers located outside the
public rights-of-way. In addition to the regulations enumerated in
§ 195-81E, the following regulations shall apply to communications
towers located outside the public rights-of-way:
(1) Development regulations.
(a) Communications towers outside the public rights-of-way are
permitted via conditional use in the following zoning districts:
[1] A-1 Agricultural District.
[2] B-1 Special Business District.
[3] B-2 Retail Business District.
[4] I-1 Light Industrial District.
[5] I-2 Heavy Industrial District.
(b) Sole use on a lot. A communications tower shall be permitted
as a sole use on a lot, provided that the underlying lot meets
the minimum size specifications set forth in the Township
Zoning Code.
(c) Combined with another use. A communications tower may be
permitted on a property with an existing use, or on a vacant
parcel in combination with another use, except residential,
subject to the following conditions:
[1] The existing use on the property may be any permitted use
in the applicable district, and need not be affiliated with
the communications tower.
[2] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with the
requirements for the applicable zoning district and shall
be the area needed to accommodate the communications
tower and guy wires, the equipment building, security
fence, and buffer planting if the proposed communications
tower is greater than 40 feet in height.
§ 195-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-81
1:705
[3] Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between the
base of a communications tower and any adjoining
property line or street right-of-way line shall be equal to
100% of the height of the communications tower. The
underlying lot must be large enough to accommodate
related equipment and all other features typically found
within the immediate area of a communications tower.
(2) Design regulations.
(a) The communications tower shall employ the most current
stealth technology available in an effort to appropriately blend
into the surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic
impact. Application of the stealth technology chosen by the
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Township
Board of Commissioners.
(b) To the extent permissible by law, any height extensions to an
existing communications tower shall require prior approval of
the Township.
(c) Any proposed communications tower shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate
both the applicant's communications antennas and comparable
antennas, for the maximum amount of future users based on
the size of the proposed communications tower.
(d) Any communications tower over 40 feet in height shall be
equipped with an anti-climbing device, as approved by the
manufacturer.
(3) Surrounding environs.
(a) The applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation, trees
and shrubs located within proximity to the communications
tower shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(b) The applicant shall submit a soil report to the Township Board
of Commissioners complying with the standards of Appendix I:
Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222, as amended, to
document and verify the design specifications of the
foundation of the communications tower, and anchors for guy
wires, if used.
(4) Fence/screen. Any communications tower shall be surrounded by a
fence and/or screen in compliance with § 195-72 of the Township
zoning ordinance.
(5) Related equipment.
(a) Ground-mounted related equipment associated to, or
connected with, a communications tower shall be placed
§ 195-81 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-81
1:706
underground or screened from public view using stealth
technologies or plant screening, as described herein.
(b) All related equipment shall be architecturally designed to
blend into the environment in which it is situated and shall
meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying
zoning district.
(c) Upon application for a communications tower, information
shall be provided, detailing the contents of the proposed
equipment building servicing the proposed communications
tower. The information shall include, but not be limited to, the
type and quantity of oil, gasoline, batteries, propane, natural
gas or any other fuel stored within the building. Information
shall also be submitted which demonstrates that any
hazardous materials stored on site, including but not limited to
fuel sources, shall be housed to minimize the potential for any
adverse impact on adjacent land uses. Materials safety data
sheets for any hazardous material stored or utilized in the
equipment building shall be submitted to the municipality. The
use of fuels and hazardous materials shall also be consistent
with any federal, state or municipal requirements regarding
the same.
(6) Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall
be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service access to
communications towers. The access road shall be a dust-free, allweather
surface for its entire length. Maximum use of existing
roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent
practicable. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to
assure minimal visual disturbance and minimize soil erosion.
Where applicable, the communications tower owner shall present
documentation to the Township that the property owner has
granted an easement for the proposed facility.
(7) Parking. For each communications tower greater than 40 feet in
height, there shall be two off-street parking spaces.
(8) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any
communications tower to ensure compliance with the zoning
ordinance and any other provisions found within the Township
Code or state or federal law. The Township and/or its agents shall
have the authority to enter the property upon which a
communications tower is located at any time, upon reasonable
notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
G. Additional requirements for communications towers located within the
public ROW. In addition to the regulations enumerated in § 195-81E, the
following regulations shall apply to communications towers located in
the public rights-of-way:
(1) Location and development standards.
§ 195-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-81
1:707
(a) Communications towers in the ROW shall not exceed a height
of 40 feet.
(b) Communications towers shall not be located in the front facade
area of any structure.
(c) Communications towers shall be permitted along certain roads
by conditional use throughout the Township, regardless of the
underlying zoning district. A listing of such roads is kept on file
at the Township Zoning Office and is adopted via resolution of
the Township Board of Commissioners.
(2) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all communications towers in the ROW based on public
safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and
manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of
the Township and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(3) Equipment location. Communications towers and related
equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by
the Township. In addition:
(a) Ground-mounted related equipment shall be located between
the sidewalk and the curb. For reasons of safety and aesthetics,
such equipment shall neither protrude onto the curb, nor
obstruct the sidewalk.
(b) Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible,
through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to
the satisfaction of the Township Board of Commissioners.
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend
in with the surrounding area.
(d) Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment shall be
removed at the sole expense of the owner.
(e) Any underground vaults related to communications towers
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township Board of
Commissioners.
(4) Design regulations.
(a) A communications tower shall employ the most current stealth
technology available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the stealth technology chosen by the applicant
§ 195-81 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-81
1:708
shall be subject to the approval of the Township Board of
Commissioners.
(b) To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any
height extensions to an existing communications tower shall
require prior approval of the Township Board of
Commissioners, and shall not violate the provisions described
herein.
(c) A communications tower shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the
applicant's communications antennas and comparable
antennas for the maximum amount of future users based on the
size of the proposed communications tower.
(d) The siting and construction of communications towers and
related equipment along the Township's streets and sidewalks
shall not impact the Township's obligations outlined in the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA),296 as amended.
(e) The base of a communications tower shall not impede
pedestrian walkways or extend into the cartway.
(5) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Township, or such longer period as the Township
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of a communications tower in the
ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any communications tower
when the Township, consistent with its police powers and
applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall determine
that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably
necessary under the following circumstances:
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(b) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(d) An emergency as determined by the Township.
(6) Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as
described in this section, every communications tower in the ROW
is subject to the Township's right to fix annually a fair and
reasonable fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such
compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the
296. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 195-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-81
1:709
§ 195-81.1. Recreation facilities regulations. [Added 7-3-2002 by
Ord. No. 462]
§ 195-81.2. Outdoor lighting. [Added 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508;
amended 9-1-2010 by Ord. No. 606; 8-7-2019 by Ord. No. 715]
All nonresidential exterior light fixtures, except lighting for residential and
agricultural uses in A-1, VR, R-1, R-2 and R-3 streetlighting and associated
traffic safety devices provided by a public utility or governmental entity
within a public right-of-way, shall comply with the following standards:
Township's actual ROW management costs, including, but not
limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of
all reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW
management activities by the Township. The owner of each
communications tower shall pay an annual fee to the Township
to compensate the Township for the Township's costs incurred in
connection with the activities described above.
A. In cases where fencing is deemed necessary for purposes of safety,
security or design, the installation, material and design of fencing shall
be subject to the recommendations of the Planning Agency. [Amended
8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 468]
B. Loudspeakers and similar sound devices for entertainment shall be
prohibited if the sound carries to adjacent parcels for dwelling, public
assembly, education or institutional purposes.
C. All lighting shall be designed and utilized in compliance with
§ 195-81.2. [Amended 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 508]
D. All parking and sign requirements of this chapter (Articles XVI and
XVII) shall apply.
A. Outdoor luminaire design.
(1) For lighting horizontal tasks such as private drives, sidewalks,
entrances and parking areas, full cutoff luminaries shall be used.
(2) Luminaries shall be equipped with light directing and/or shielding
devices such as shields, visors, skirts or hoods to redirect offending
light distribution and/or reduce direct or reflected glare.
(3) Light fixture height, including mounting base, shall not exceed the
following: [Amended 9-1-2010 by Ord. No. 606; 2-5-2014 by
Ord. No. 643; 8-7-2019 by Ord. No. 715]
§ 195-81 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-81.2
1:710
Zoning District Maximum Height
A-1 Agricultural, R-1, R-2, R-3
Residential Districts
15 feet above finished
grade
B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2 and I-3 Districts 35 feet above finished
grade
MU and VR Districts 20 feet above finished
grade
B. Glare control.
(1) Glare control shall be accomplished primarily through the proper
selection and application of lighting equipment. Only after those
means have been exhausted shall vegetation, fences or similar
methods be considered acceptable for reducing glare.
(2) Neither the direct nor reflected light from any exterior lighting
fixture shall create a disabling glare that would be a potential
traffic hazard for motor vehicles on public roads.
(3) No exterior lighting fixture shall have any blinking, flashing or
fluttering lights or other illuminating devices which have a
changing light intensity, brightness or color. Deliberately induced
sky-reflected glare, caused by the use of searchlights, beacon light
or laser source lights for advertising or entertainment purposes, is
prohibited.
(4) The Zoning Officer may require that lighting be controlled by
automatic timing devices to extinguish light sources during specific
periods to mitigate the adverse consequences of light pollution
when such action is necessary to protect adjacent properties and
uses.
§ 195-81.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-81.2
1:711

ARTICLE XIX
Nonconforming Uses
§ 195-82. When permitted.
Subject to the provisions of this article, a use of building or land existing
at the time of the enactment of this chapter may be continued even though
such use does not conform to the provisions of these regulations for the
district in which it is located.
§ 195-83. Unsafe structure.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any portion of a building or structure declared unsafe by a
proper authority.
§ 195-84. Alterations.
A nonconforming building or structure may be altered, improved or
reconstructed. Said alteration, improvement or reconstruction shall be
permitted only if it is a normal, natural or consistent growth of the same
character as that of the use existing at the time of passage of this chapter.
§ 195-85. Restoration.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing,
rebuilding and continued use of any nonconforming building or structure
damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or act of God, provided that
reconstruction or repair is commenced within one year from the date of
occurrence of the damage.
§ 195-86. Extension.
A. A nonconforming use may be extended as a special exception subject to
the following:
(1) The extension becomes an attached part of the main structure and
does not utilize any additional or adjoining land area other than the
original parcel.
(2) The extension does not encroach upon the yard and height
requirements of the district in which the nonconforming use is
located.
(3) The extension is for the purpose of expanding the same
classification of nonconforming use in existence at the time of
ordinance adoption.
B. Extension of a lawful use to any portion of a nonconforming building or
structure that existed prior to the enactment of this chapter shall not be
deemed an extension of such nonconforming use.
§ 195-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-87
1:713
§ 195-87. Changes.
No nonconforming building, structure or use shall be changed to another
nonconforming use, except that a nonconforming building, structure or use
may be changed to another nonconforming use of equal or more restricted
classification as a variance, after public hearing, subject to the standards
imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board, to reasonably assure that the
changes will not adversely affect the public interest.
§ 195-88. Abandonment.
A nonconforming use of a building or land that has been abandoned or
discontinued shall not thereafter be returned to a nonconforming use. A
nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned as follows:
§ 195-89. Unlawful use not authorized.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorization for or approval
of the continuance of the use of a structure or premises in violation of
zoning regulations in effect at the time of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 195-90. District changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one district to another district of a different classification,
the foregoing provisions shall apply to any nonconforming use conditions
created therein.
A. When the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent.
B. When the characteristic equipment and furnishings of the
nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and have not
been replaced by similar equipment within 90 days, unless other facts
or circumstances show a clear intention to resume the nonconforming
use.
C. When a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of 12
months or for 18 months during any three-year period.
D. When it has been replaced by a conforming use.
E. When it has been changed to another use under permit from the Zoning
Hearing Board.
§ 195-87 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-90
1:714
ARTICLE XX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 195-91. Zoning Officer.
§ 195-92. Zoning permit.
A. The Zoning Officer shall administer and enforce this chapter, including
the receiving of applications, the inspection of premises and the issuing
of zoning permits. No zoning permit shall be issued by said officer
except where the provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
The Zoning Officer shall meet the qualifications established by the
Township.
(1) The duties of the Zoning Officer shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
(a) Receive applications required by the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Inspect premises.
(c) Issue zoning permits and certificates of occupancy.
(d) Maintain records of all official duties.
(2) All permits issued by the Zoning Officer shall be in accordance with
the literal provisions of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of
Rostraver, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, and shall not hold any
elective office in the Township.
A. No building or structure, including mobile home, shall be erected,
added to or structurally altered until a permit therefor has been issued
by the Zoning Officer. All applications for zoning permits shall be in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, and unless upon
written order of the Zoning Hearing Board, no such zoning permit shall
be issued for any building where said construction, addition or
alteration for use thereof would be in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter. Remodeling or improvement of an existing building that
does not alter the basic structure, create additional lot area coverage or
change the use of the parcel or building is exempt from this specific
requirement. A zoning permit shall be required prior to any of the
following:
(1) The erection, construction or structural alteration of any building,
structure, dwelling or portion thereof.
(2) The moving of a structure into the districts or from one place in the
district to another.
(3) The change in use of structure or land.
§ 195-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-92
1:715
(4) The change or extension of a nonconforming use or structure.
B. There shall be submitted with all applications for zoning permits two
copies of a layout or plot plan drawn to scale showing the actual
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location of the
building on the lot and accessory buildings to be erected and other such
information as may be deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer to
determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
C. No permit shall be required for the following:
(1) An accessory structure having not more than 200 square feet of
floor area. However, all such structures shall comply with all yard,
area and setback requirements.
(2) Minor repairs or maintenance.
(3) Nonstructural remodeling as specified in § 195-92A of this chapter.
D. Zoning permits issued for the purpose of permitting construction,
reconstruction, alterations, repairs, use or the like shall automatically
expire 12 months from the date of issue. Prior to the continuance of the
activity, use or change for which the original permit was used, a new
zoning permit must be obtained. If, however, the construction,
alteration, reconstruction, repairing, use or the like has been
proceeding in a constant and regular manner and, due to the extent and
size of the subject project, it is impossible for the applicant to complete
said process prior to the expiration of 12 months or because of an act of
nature, no new permit must be obtained. However, the applicant must
advise the Zoning Officer of said expiration and advise as to the reason
for failure to complete within the specified time period. In the event
that said applicant fails to notify the Zoning Officer of said failure to
complete, then said permit shall immediately expire and no further
activity may take place unless a new permit is obtained.
E. If, after the issuance of a zoning permit, no construction or other
process is instituted, said permit shall terminate immediately 12
months from the date of issuance as stated above.
F. A copy of the permit shall be posted on the premises for public
inspection during the prosecution of the work and until completion of
the same.
G. The Zoning Officer shall have the right to revoke or suspend an issued
zoning permit for any unauthorized change or use and/or any
incomplete or incorrect information or error in the processing of the
application. [Added 7-7-2004 by Ord. No. 518]
§ 195-92 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-93
1:716
§ 195-93. Conditional use permit.
An application for a zoning permit for a conditional use in any zoning
district where such a use is allowed shall be filed with the Zoning Officer,
and it shall:
§ 195-94. Occupancy permit.
A. Identify and describe the property, its location and the present use
being made of the property.
B. Reasonably describe present improvements and any intended additions
and changes to be made if the conditional use is granted.
C. Disclose the conditional use for which the application is being made
and, by plan, map and description, show how the property, as it may be
improved, meets or will meet the standards and criteria required in the
Zoning Ordinance for such conditional use.
D. (Reserved)297
E. The Township Commissioners may authorize conditional uses pursuant
to express standards and criteria specified in this chapter for said uses
and may attach such additional conditions and safeguards as it may
deem necessary.
F. The Township Board of Commissioners shall hold a public hearing,
pursuant to public notice, on the conditional use within 45 days of filing
of the application after it is reviewed by the Township Planning Agency.
[Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 468]
G. The Zoning Officer shall be under a duty of issuance of a permit or
order indicating the action of the Township Commissioners as a result
of the hearing by said Commissioners on the application and shall notify
the applicant.
H. Any affected party of any person having a legal interest in the property
may, within 30 days following such order having been issued, appeal the
same to Westmoreland County Court of Common Pleas, in accord with
the Judicial Code [42 Pa.C.S.A. § 933(c)(1)] and the Municipal Planning
Code (Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988).298
A. Upon completion of the authorized new construction, alteration,
remodeling, change of use of building or land under the provisions of a
zoning permit, such building shall not be occupied until an occupancy
permit has been issued by the Zoning Officer. Written request to the
Zoning Officer shall be processed within one week of receipt of the
request of the proposed use, provided that the use is in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter and other effective and applicable
297. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, which provided for action upon an application by the
Planning Commission, was repealed 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 468.
298. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-94
1:717
§ 195-95. Temporary permits.
ordinances. The Zoning Officer's refusal to issue an occupancy permit
shall include a written statement to the applicant containing reasons
for such denial.
B. Occupancy permits are required for the following:
(1) Occupancy of a new building.
(2) Occupancy and use of a building hereafter moved or altered so as
to require a zoning permit.
(3) Change in the use of an existing building other than to a use of the
same type.
(4) Occupancy and use of vacant land.
(5) Change in the use of land except to another use of the same type.
(6) Any change in use of a nonconforming use.
C. Occupancy permits shall state that the building or the proposed use of a
building or land complies with all provisions of this chapter and all
other ordinances of the Township.
D. No occupancy permit shall be issued until such time as the applicant
has applied for the same, paid the application fee and the premises
have been inspected by the Zoning Officer or his delegate and,
thereafter, a determination has been made that the premises are in
compliance with this chapter.
E. No premises, structure or land use activity requiring a zoning permit
shall be used or occupied until such time as an occupancy permit has
been granted. If the applicant desires to make use of the premises or
project prior to its completion, the same is strictly prohibited until such
time as an application has been made for an occupancy permit and all
rules and regulations pertaining thereto and as contained herein have
been determined by the Zoning Officer to have been met.
F. If the project has not been completed and a partial use or occupation of
the premises is desired by the applicant, the applicant must first make
application to the Zoning Officer. Once the Zoning Officer has
determined compliance for the limited or partial use intended, said
applicant may use and/or occupy the premises; however, nothing
contained in this provision shall be interpreted or used as an excuse or
viewed as a waiver of any of the other terms contained hereinabove
pertaining to the expiration of any and all certificates for purposes of
completion of the original project.
A. Temporary permits shall be required as indicated herein where it is
intended that a temporary or seasonal use shall be located anywhere
within the Township for a limited period of time.
§ 195-94 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-95
1:718
§ 195-96. Fees.
§ 195-97. Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Temporary permits for the following uses are limited to a one-week
period renewable for a maximum of four weeks during any one calendar
year or as follows:
(1) Selling of Christmas trees in commercial districts or at churches,
schools, clubs and lodges: a maximum of four weeks.
(2) Carnival, circus or street fairs: a maximum of one week.
(3) Mobile amusements and lighting equipment for promotion,
advertisement and grand openings: a maximum of two weeks.
C. Temporary structures used in conjunction with construction work shall
be permitted only during the period that construction work is in
progress. Temporary permits shall be issued for a three-month period
and are renewable only at the discretion of the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. Temporary permits for basement or foundation structures shall be
issued for six-month periods, renewable for a maximum of three years
at the discretion of the Zoning Hearing Board.
E. No temporary permit shall be issued for any temporary use where said
use would violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
A. The Township Commissioners shall determine and adopt a schedule of
fees, charges and expenses, as well as the collection procedure for
permits, variances, special exceptions, conditional uses, amendments
and other matters pertaining to this chapter. Said schedule of fees shall
be posted in the office of the Township Secretary.
B. The Township Commissioners shall be empowered to reevaluate the fee
schedule from time to time and make adjustments as deemed
appropriate. Any such alterations shall not be considered an
amendment to this chapter and may be adopted by resolution of the
Township Commissioners at any legally advertised public meeting.
C. Application for permits, approvals and other related matters pertaining
to this chapter shall be accompanied by the designated fee and such
other documentation specified by this chapter or considered necessary
by the appropriate reviewing authorities or agencies.
A. Creation, appointment and organization. The membership of the Zoning
Hearing Board shall consist of three residents of the municipality
appointed by the governing body. Members of the Board may receive
compensation for the performance of their duties, as may be fixed by
the governing body, but in no case shall the rates of compensation
exceed that paid to the governing body. Their terms of office shall be
three years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member
§ 195-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-97
1:719
shall expire each year. The Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify
the governing body of any vacancies that occur. Appointments to fill
vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members
of the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold no other office in the
municipality.
B. Alternate members. The governing body may appoint one to three
residents of the municipality to serve as alternate members of the
Zoning Hearing Board. Their terms shall be three years. Any alternate
may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall
not be entitled to vote as a member of the Board, nor be compensated,
unless designated by the Chairman of the Board as a voting alternate
member pursuant to Section 906 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (Act 247, 1968, as amended by Act 170, 1988).299
Alternate members may hold no other office in the municipality.
C. Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Zoning Hearing Board
shall be as set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code, as it may be
amended from time to time. [Amended 7-2-2003 by Ord. No. 495]
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide appeals from any
order, requirements, decision or determination made by the Zoning
Officer in the administration of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide all matters
referred to or upon which it is required to pass under this chapter
and other applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide appeals where it
is alleged by the appellant that the Zoning Officer has failed to
follow prescribed procedures or has misinterpreted or misapplied
any provision of a valid ordinance or map or any valid rule or
regulation governing the action of the Zoning Officer.
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear challenges to the validity of a
zoning ordinance or map. In all such challenges, the Board shall
decide all contested questions and shall make findings on all
relevant issues of fact which shall become part of the record on
appeal to the court.
(5) The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where
it is alleged that the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inflict
unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The Board may by rule
prescribe the form of application and may require preliminary
application to the Zoning Officer. The Board may grant a variance,
provided that the following findings are made where relevant in a
given case:
299. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10906.
§ 195-97 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-97
1:720
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions
peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary
to enable the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use by development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance will represent the minimum variance that
will afford relief.
(6) The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize special exceptions where
the governing body in the Zoning Ordinance has made provision for
such procedures pursuant to express standards and criteria. The
Board may attach such additional conditions and safeguards as it
may deem necessary.
D. Procedure. The procedure of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be
governed by the provisions of applicable laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and such rules, not inconsistent therewith, as the Board
may adopt. In general, the procedure for appeal from action of the
Zoning Officer shall be as follows:
(1) Any appeal from the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance shall be
taken by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
with the Zoning Hearing Board a notice of appeal, specifying the
grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all of the documentary material
constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken.
(2) The appellant shall, at the time of filing his appeal, pay to the
Township a fee as determined by the governing body to defray or
help defray the required advertising costs.
(3) Each case as provided for under this chapter shall be heard and/or
tried on its merits at a public hearing. All hearings shall be
conducted in accordance with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,300 with
respect to such proceedings. Notice of such hearing shall be given
300. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-97
1:721
§ 195-98. Amendments.
by publishing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township
in accordance with applicable law. Written notice shall be given
to the applicant, the Zoning Officer and such other persons as the
Township Commissioners shall designate by ordinance. The Board
shall give the notices required by law to all parties in interest
and they may adjourn any hearing for the purpose of giving such
further notice.
(4) In addition, written notice of said hearings shall be conspicuously
posted on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the
hearing.
(5) Hearings shall be held within 60 days from the date of the
applicant's request, unless an extension of time has been agreed to
in writing by the applicant.
(6) The Planning Agency shall furnish all pertinent narrative material,
maps, charts, and other data relative to the problem for reference
by all concerned. The Board may adjourn any hearing for the
purpose of reviewing such data as may be pertinent to the problem
and request interpretation of said data by the Township Planner.
[Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 468]
(7) The Board shall decide each case within 45 days after the last
hearing or as otherwise specified by appropriate statute. A copy of
the final decision or finding shall be delivered to the applicant
personally or mailed to him/her not later than the day following its
date. Notice thereof shall be given to all parties in interest. The
Board's decision shall be immediately filed in its office and be a
public record. In the exercise of its functions upon such appeals or
upon exceptions, the Board may, in conformity with law, reverse or
affirm wholly or partly or modify the order, requirement, decision
or determination appealed from or make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as it determines.
(8) Where the Board fails to render a decision within the period
required or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days from
the date of the applicant's request for hearing, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the
applicant has agreed, in writing or on the record, to an extension of
time.
(9) Any person, officer or agency of the municipality that is aggrieved
by any decision of the Board may appeal therefrom within 30 days
to the Court of Common Pleas as provided by law.
A. Whenever the public necessity, convenience or general welfare
indicates, the governing body may, by ordinance in accordance with
applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, amend,
§ 195-97 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-98
1:722
supplement or change the regulations, restrictions, boundaries or
classifications of buildings, structures and land, as the same are
established by this chapter or may hereafter be made a part thereof.
(1) Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the governing
body shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice.
In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map
change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted
by the municipality at points deemed sufficient by the municipality
along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested
citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at least one week
prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) (Reserved)301
(3) If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the governing body shall hold another
public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote
on the amendment.
(4) At least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment by
the governing body, the municipality shall submit the proposed
amendment to the Westmoreland County Planning Commission for
recommendations.
(5) Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the
Zoning Ordinance shall be forwarded to the County Planning
Commission.
B. Applications of petitions for any change or amendments to existing
zoning district shall be made to the Planning Agency and shall be
accompanied by a fee as determined by the governing body, payable to
the Township of Rostraver, and shall be deposited in the General Fund.
This fee is for the purpose of defraying the costs of preparing the
necessary plats, maps, data, legislation, notices and all official
publications required by the Township and shall not be refundable even
if the application is disapproved by the governing body.
C. The Township Commissioners may from time to time, on their own
motion or petition, after public notice and hearing, amend the
regulations and districts herein established, but no amendment shall
become effective unless the same shall have first been submitted to the
Rostraver Township and Westmoreland County Planning Commissions
for review and said Commissions shall have been allowed a period of at
least 30 days for consideration and report.
301. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), which provided for Planning Commission action on
amendments not submitted by the Planning Commission, was repealed 8-7-2002 by Ord.
No. 468.
§ 195-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-98
1:723
D. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of a zoning ordinance or map, or any provision thereof, which
prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an
interest may submit a curative amendment to the governing body with a
written request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard
and decided.
(1) The governing body shall commence a hearing thereon within 60
days of the request. The curative amendment and challenge shall
be referred to the Rostraver Township and Westmoreland County
Planning Commissions for review and comment and notice of the
hearing thereon shall be given as provided in § 195-98A of this
chapter.
(2) If the Township Commissioners do not accept a landowner's
curative amendment brought in accordance with this subsection
and a court subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the
court's decision shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for the
entire zoning ordinance and map, but only for those provisions
which specifically relate to the landowner's curative amendment
and challenge.
(3) The governing body may determine that a validity challenge has
merit and may accept a landowner's curative amendment, with or
without revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment that will
cure the challenged defects. The governing body shall consider the
curative amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by
the landowner and shall also consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of the
ordinance or map;
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood plains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and
any adverse environmental impacts; and
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
§ 195-98 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-98
1:724
§ 195-99. Interpretation, purpose and conflict.
The interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health,
safety, morals and general welfare. This chapter is not intended to interfere
with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances of the
E. If the Township Commissioners determine that the Zoning Ordinance or
any portion thereof is substantially invalid, it shall take the following
actions.
(1) Declare by formal action the Zoning Ordinance or portions thereof
substantively invalid and propose to prepare a curative amendment
to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days following such
declaration and proposal, the governing body shall:
(a) By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to the
Zoning Ordinance to correct the declared invalidity.
(2) Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal,
enact a curative amendment to validate or reaffirm the validity of
the Zoning Ordinance.
F. Zoning amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of proposed
enactment is given. The notices shall include the time and place of the
meeting at which passage will be considered and a reference to a place
within the Township where copies of the proposed ordinance or
amendment may be examined either without charge or for a charge not
greater than the cost thereof. The governing body shall publish the
proposed ordinance or amendment in one newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality not more than 60 days nor less than
seven days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed ordinance or
amendment shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a
brief summary, prepared by the Municipal Solicitor and setting forth all
the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township at the time the public notice is
published.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the
Westmoreland County Law Library.
(3) In the event that substantial changes are made in the proposed
amendment, before voting upon enactment, the governing body
shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise, in one
newspaper of general circulation in the Township, a brief summary
setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail, together with a
summary of the amendments.
§ 195-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-99
1:725
Township of Rostraver, provided that where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of building or premises or upon the height of a
building or requires larger open spaces than are imposed by other such
rules, regulations or ordinances, the provision of this chapter shall prevail.
§ 195-100. Remedies.
In case any structure or land is or is proposed to be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained and/or used in violation of
this chapter or any regulations made pursuant thereto, the Township
Commissioners, in addition to specifically authorizing the Zoning Officer
to obtain enforcement and in addition to other remedies, may institute in
the name of the municipality, by itself or through the Zoning Officer, any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such
building structure, land or use or to prevent in or about such premises any
act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
§ 195-101. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
Rostraver Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by Rostraver Township
as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
Rostraver Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute
a separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there has
been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
person, partnership or appropriation violating this chapter to have believed
that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed
to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter,
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All
judgments, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees collected for the violation
of this chapter shall be paid over to Rostraver Township.
§ 195-99 ROSTRAVER CODE § 195-101
1:726
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
412 Not adopted
413 Not adopted
414 11-3-1999 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
415 11-24-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
416 11-24-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
417 11-24-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
418 12-29-1999 Appropriation NCM
419 12-29-1999 2000 tax levy NCM
420 1-26-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
421 2-23-2000 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
422 2-23-2000 Sewers: Sweeney-Fellsburg-
Pollock Run drainage area
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. II
423 Voided
424 3-22-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
425 4-5-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
426 4-5-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
427 8-2-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
428 6-7-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
429 Voided
430 Zoning Map amendment Not adopted
431 9-6-2000 Street acceptances NCM
432 8-2-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
433 9-6-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
434 Zoning Map amendment Not adopted
§ 195-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:727
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
435 10-4-2000 Merger of TRCOG program
into SHACOG
telecommunications
franchising program
NCM
436 Incurrence of indebtedness NCM
437 11-1-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
438 Zoning amendment Not adopted
439 11-1-2000 Streets and sidewalks:
parking during snowfall;
snow and ice removal
Ch. 166, Art. III
440 Bond NCM
441 12-28-2000 Appropriation (2001 budget) NCM
442 12-28-2000 2001 tax levy NCM
443 Zoning amendment Not adopted
444 4-4-2001 Zoning Map amendment NCM
445 4-4-2001 Zoning Map amendment NCM
446 4-4-2001 Street acceptances NCM
447 4-4-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
448 5-2-2001 Street vacation NCM
449 6-6-2001 Zoning Map amendment NCM
450 9-5-2001 Salaries and compensation:
elected officials amendment
Ch. 62, Art. I
451 9-5-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
452 9-5-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
453 11-7-2001 Police Pension Plan
amendment
NCM
454 11-7-2001 Street acceptance NCM
455 11-7-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
456 12-27-2001 Appropriation (2002 budget) NCM
457 12-27-2001 2002 tax levy NCM
458 12-5-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
459 4-3-2002 Recycling amendment Ch. 161, Art. II
460 5-1-2002 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 ROSTRAVER CODE § DL-1
1:728
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
461 7-3-2002 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
462 7-3-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
463 7-3-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
464 8-7-2002 Planning Commission
repealer
Ch. 50, reference
only
465 8-7-2002 Planning Agency Ch. 51
466 8-7-2002 Floodplain management
amendment
Ch. 97
467 8-7-2002 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
468 8-7-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
469 10-2-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
470 10-2-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
471 10-2-2002 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
472 Withdrawn
473 12-4-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
474 12-4-2002 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
475 12-4-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
476 12-4-2002 Sewers: grease remediation
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. III
477 12-30-2002 Appropriation (2003 budget) NCM
478 12-30-2002 2003 tax levy NCM
479 12-30-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
480 12-30-2002 Solid waste: collection and
disposal amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 608
481 1-6-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
482 2-5-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
483 4-2-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
484 5-7-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
485 5-7-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
486 5-7-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
487 5-7-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:729
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
488 5-7-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
489 5-7-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
490 11-5-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
491 7-2-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
492 7-2-2003 Stormwater management Ch. 164
493 7-2-2003 Floodplain management
amendment
Ch. 97
494 7-2-2003 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
495 7-2-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
496 8-6-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
497 Not adopted
498 10-1-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
499 12-3-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
500 11-5-2003 Exercise of eminent domain
powers
NCM
501 11-5-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
502 11-5-2003 Fire district tax amendment NCM
503 11-5-2003 Streetlighting tax NCM
504 12-3-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
505 12-29-2003 Appropriation (2004 budget) NCM
506 12-29-2003 2004 tax levy NCM
507 2-4-2004 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
508 4-7-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
509 4-7-2004 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
510 4-7-2004 Sewers: Sweeney- Fellsburg-
Pollock Run drainage area
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. II
511 5-5-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
512 6-2-2004 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
513 7-7-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
514 7-7-2004 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 164
§ DL-1 ROSTRAVER CODE § DL-1
1:730
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
515 7-7-2004 Floodplain management
amendment
Ch. 97
516 7-7-2004 Fire prevention: smoke
detectors amendment
Ch. 93, Art. II
517 7-7-2004 Solid waste: collection and
disposal amendment
Ch. 161, Art. I
518 7-7-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
519 9-1-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
520 10-6-2004 Street acceptance NCM
521 11-3-2004 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 53
522 Withdrawn
523 12-1-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
524 12-28-2004 Appropriation NCM
525 12-28-2004 Tax levy NCM
526 1-5-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
527 5-4-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
528 5-4-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
529 7-6-2005 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
530 7-6-2005 Streets and sidewalks:
openings, excavations and
occupancy amendment
Ch. 166, Art. I
531 9-7-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
532 7-25-2005 Bond refinancing NCM
533 11-2-2005 Street acceptance NCM
534 11-2-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
535 12-29-2005 Appropriation NCM
536 12-29-2005 2006 tax levy NCM
537 12-29-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
538 12-29-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
539 2-1-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
540 2-1-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
541 2-1-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:731
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
542 3-1-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
543 3-1-2006 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
544 2-20-2006 Water connections
amendment
NCM
545 4-5-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
546 5-3-2006 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175 (Editor's
note only)
547 5-3-2006 Increase term of existence of
Township Sewage Authority
NCM
548 8-2-2006 Incurrence of indebtedness NCM
549 7-5-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
550 7-5-2006 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
551 9-6-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
552 9-6-2006 Exercise of eminent domain
powers
NCM
553 11-1-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
554 11-1-2006 Sewers: Sweeney-Fellsburg-
Pollock Run drainage area
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. II
555 12-6-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
556 12-6-2006 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
557 12-6-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
558 12-28-2006 Appropriation NCM
559 12-28-2006 2007 Tax levy NCM
560 12-28-2006 Street vacation NCM
561 4-4-2007 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
562 4-4-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
563 4-4-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
564 Zoning Map amendment Not adopted
565 9-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
566 11-13-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 ROSTRAVER CODE § DL-1
1:732
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
567 10-3-2007 Emergency and rescue
services fees and charges
Ch. 90, Art. I
568 10-3-2007 Incurrence of indebtedness NCM
569 12-27-2007 Appropriation NCM
570 12-27-2007 2008 tax levy NCM
571 12-3-2007 Local services tax Ch. 182, Art. IV
572 2-6-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
573 7-2-2008 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
574 7-2-2008 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
575 8-6-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
576 10-1-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
577 10-1-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
578 11-5-2008 Sewers: Sweeney-Fellsburg-
Pollock Run drainage area
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. II
579 11-5-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
580 12-29-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
581 12-29-2008 Appropriation NCM
582 12-29-2008 2009 tax levy NCM
583 Not adopted
584 2-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
585 2-4-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
586 2-4-2009 Street acceptance NCM
587 2-4-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
588 3-4-2009 Sewers: Sweeney-Fellsburg-
Pollock Run Drainage Area
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. II
589 Not adopted
590 5-6-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
591 5-6-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
592 9-2-2009 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 141
593 Not adopted
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:733
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
594 12-29-2009 Appropriation NCM
595 12-29-2009 2010 tax levy NCM
596 3-17-2010 Street acceptance NCM
597 3-17-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
598 6-2-2010 Agreement with Comcast NCM
599 5-5-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
600 4-7-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
601 6-2-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
602 6-2-2010 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
603 7-21-2010 Street acceptance NCM
604 7-21-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
605 7-21-2010 Agreement with Atlantic
Broadband
NCM
606 9-1-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
607 Bond refinance NCM
608 10-6-2010 Solid waste: collection and
disposal amendment
Ch. 161, Art. I
609 Not adopted
610 12-29-2010 Appropriation NCM
611 12-29-2010 2011 tax levy NCM
612 1-19-2011 Floodplain management
amendment
Ch. 97
613 1-19-2011 Street acceptance NCM
614 1-19-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
615 5-4-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
616 5-4-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
617 6-1-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
618 10-5-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
619 10-5-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 ROSTRAVER CODE § DL-1
1:734
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
620 9-21-2011 Streets and sidewalks:
openings, excavations and
occupancy amendment;
occupancy of Township
highway right-of-way
amendment
Ch. 166, Arts. I and
II
621 9-21-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
622 11-2-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
623 12-29-2011 Appropriation NCM
624 12-29-2011 2012 tax levy NCM
625 4-4-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
626 4-4-2012 Street vacation NCM
627 5-2-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
628 7-5-2012 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 141
629 Zoning Map amendment Withdrawn
630 Zoning Map amendment Continued
indefinitely
631 11-7-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
632 12-27-2012 Appropriation NCM
633 12-27-2012 2013 tax levy NCM
634 Not adopted
635 2-5-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
636 1-16-2013 Salaries and compensation:
elected officials amendment
Ch. 62, Art. I
637 Withdrawn
638 3-6-2013 Sewers: Sweeney-Fellsburg-
Pollock Run drainage area
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. II
639 8-7-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
640 12-30-2013 Appropriation NCM
641 12-30-2013 2014 tax levy NCM
642 12-30-2013 Meetings amendment Ch. 39
643 2-5-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
644 4-2-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
645 6-4-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:735
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
646 9-3-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
647 5-7-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
648 7-16-2014 Police Pension Deferred
Retirement Option Program
See Ch. 45
649 8-6-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
650 9-17-2014 Water connections
amendment
NCM
651 12-29-2014 Appropriation NCM
652 12-29-2014 2015 tax levy NCM
653 2-4-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
654 4-1-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
655 4-1-2015 Street acceptance NCM
656 4-1-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
657 5-6-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
658 12-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
659 6-3-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
660 6-3-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
661 6-3-2015 Street acceptance NCM
662 6-3-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
663 11-4-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
664 11-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
665 12-29-2015 Appropriation NCM
666 12-29-2015 2016 tax levy NCM
667 1-20-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
668 12-29-2015 Street acceptance NCM
669 12-29-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
670 2-3-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
671 2-3-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
672 2-3-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
673 1-20-2016 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 164
§ DL-1 ROSTRAVER CODE § DL-1
1:736
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
674 4-6-2016 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 164
675 5-4-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
676 5-4-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
677 8-3-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
678 10-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
679 12-29-2016 Appropriation NCM
680 12-29-2016 2017 tax levy NCM
681 1-25-2017 Fees and charges: Tax
Collector
Ch. 90, Art. II
682 2-15-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
683 3-1-2017 Building regulations Ch. 79
684 3-15-2017 Street acceptances NCM
685 3-15-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
686 4-5-2017 Gas and oil exploration:
general provisions
Ch. 99, Art. I
687 Not adopted
688 7-12-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
689 9-6-2017 Fireworks: general
provisions
Ch. 95, Art. I
690 Not adopted
691 10-4-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
692 12-28-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
693 12-28-2017 Appropriation NCM
694 12-28-2017 2018 tax levy NCM
695 2-7-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
696 4-4-2018 Fire Departments and
Ambulance Associations
Amendment
Ch. 21
697 4-4-2018 Library Board Amendment Ch. 25
698 6-6-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
699 5-2-2018 Streetlighting Amendment Ch. 169
700 5-2-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 187
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:737
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
701 6-6-2018 Subdivision and Land
Development Amendment
Ch. 175
702 7-5-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
703 8-1-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
704 8-1-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 187
705 9-5-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
706 11-7-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
707 11-7-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
708 9-5-2018 Bond NCM
709 11-7-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
710 12-27-2018 Appropriation NCM
711 12-27-2018 2019 tax levy NCM
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
712 2-6-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 195 9
713 4-3-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 9
714 4-3-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 9
715 8-7-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 195 9
716 8-7-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 9
717 11-6-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 195 9
718 11-6-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 9
719 12-4-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 9
720 Not yet codified
721 12-30-2019 Appropriation NCM 9
722 12-30-2019 2020 Tax Levy NCM 9
§ DL-1 ROSTRAVER CODE § DL-1
1:738

BILL NO.: 720
ORDINANCE NO.:
INTRODUCED BY:
FIRST READING:
FINAL READING:
ADOPTED:
720
DEVIN M. DERIENZO
MARCH 4, 2020
WAIVED
MARCH 4, 2020
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
ROSTRAVER, WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE
TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE TO ADD DEFINITION FOR STORAGE SHEDS
AND ZONING PERMITS IN A- 1 AGRICULTURE, R-1 SINGLE FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL, R-2 SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL, R-3 MULTI -FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL, AND VR VILLAGE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT'S.
WHEREAS, the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P. S. § 10101 et seq. ( the " MPC"),
authorizes the Township of Rostraver ( the " Township") to regulate land uses in the Township;
and
WHEREAS, pursuant to its authority under the MPC, the Board of Commissioners of the
Township ( the " Board") enacted Ordinance No. 300 of 1995 on July 25, 1995, in order to
establish zoning regulations within the Township; and
WHEREAS, the Board from time to time adopted amendments to Ordinance No. 300 of
1995 ( said ordinance as so amended being referred to hereafter as the " Zoning Ordinance").
NOW THEREFORE, the Board hereby ordains and enacts as follows, incorporating the
above recitals by reference:
SECTION 1. Section 195- 6 of the Zoning Ordinance, Definitions is amended by inserting the
following underlined text:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE - Accessory buildings shall include, but not be
limited to, the following, which are subordinate to the principal buildings on the same lot:
A. In all residential zones, including Planned Residential Developments, unless
prohibited by declaration of covenants:
1) Children's playhouse, picnic shelter, greenhouse (noncommercial), garage,
carport, garden house or storage building for domestic storage.
2) Swimming pool, ornamental pool, tennis court, basketball court or similar
private recreational facility.
3) Storage of camping, sports and similar equipment, owned or leased for
noncommercial purposes, for the use of the residents ofthe premises.
4) Home gardening.
5) The following shall not be considered as an accessory building or use in
all residential zones, including Planned Residential Development: 
a) Railroad Car
b) Shipping containers or any type of container used as a trailer
previously attached to a tractor.
B. In commercial zones:
1) Storage of merchandise and goods normally carried in stock in conjunction
with the principal use on the same parcel or lot of ground.
2) Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities on the same
parcel or lot of ground.
C. In all zones:
1) Required off-street motor vehicle parking areas and loading and unloading
areas.
2) Fences and ornamental walls and landscape features.
PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT- Any container designed for the storage of personalproperty,
where said container is transportable by vehicle and is typically rented for temporary use.
Portable storage units shall not include shipping containers.
SHIPPING CONTAINER- Any heavy -gauge steel container designed for transporting cargo on a
marine freighter vessel, flatbed truck or flatbed railroad car, or a container manufactured to the
same strength and weight specifications that is similar in design or function to such a container,
but excluding a portable storage unit.
STORAGE SHED- An enclosed accessory structure for domestic storage which is not used for
the storage of a motor vehicle as defined by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code. A storage
shed shall not include a portable storage unit or a shipping container.
SECTION 2. Section 195- 12 of the Zoning Ordinance, A-1 Agricultural District, Statement of
purpose and use summary is amended by inserting the following underlined text:
B. Conditional Use
8) Shipping Container
SECTION 3. Section 195- 13 of the Zoning Ordinance, A-1 Agricultural District, Conditional
use provisions is amended by inserting the following underlined text:
H. Shipping Container shall be used for agricultural/domestic use only and are not to
be rented or leased
1. Minimum lot area shall be one and a half (1. 5) contiguous acres. 
2. Site buffering shall be provided as specified in Article XVIII, 4 195-75, of
this chapter.
3. Only permitted in the rear yard.
4. Must be located a minimum of 25 feet from any property line.
5. Cannot be located on a lot without a principle structure.
6. Exterior finishes of the shipping container shall be compatible with the
exterior of the principle structure and adjoining properties.
7. No business activity of any kind, other than the storage of privately -owned
goods, shall be conducted within a shipping container.
8. No activities or substances of a hazardous safety or environmental nature
shall be employed, carried or utilized as part of any operations conducted on
the site unless specifically provided for as part of the conditional use approval.
9. The Township reserves the right to add specific conditions as part of the
conditional use per the regulations of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (MPC).
SECTION 4. Section 195- 92 of the Zoning Ordinance, Zoning Permit, Administration and
Enforcement is amended by inserting the following underlined text:
C. No permit shall be required for the following:
1) An accessory structure having not more than 200 square feet of floor area.
However, all such structures shall comply with all yard, area and setback
requirements.
a.) Except storage sheds up to 199 square feet of floor area in the A- 1,
R- 1, R-2, R-3 and VR Districts shall be required to get a zoning permit
and only need to be a minimum of 5 feet from the side and rear property
lines.
SECTION 5. Section 195- 67 of the Zoning Ordinance, Supplementary Regulations, Agriculture
and husbandry is amended by removing the stricken language and inserting the following underlined text:
B. Agricultural uses shall comply with the following requirements:
3)
property line.
4) Storage of manure or odor- or dust -producing substances shall not be
permitted within 150 feet of a property line, including agricultural
accessory buildings that contain manure or odor- or dust -producing
substances. 
SECTION 6. Section 195- 95 of the Zoning Ordinance, Temporary Permit, Administration and
Enforcement is amended by inserting the following underlined text:
F. Portable storage unit shall be subject to the following:
1) Portable storage units shall not be permitted in the front yard.
2) Portable storage units and containers, including but not limited to
portable on demand" ( PODS®) units, may be kept upon a lot for up to
one year ifthere is an active building permit for construction or until the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy or completion, whichever occurs
first. Portable storage units not associated with an active permit for
construction on the same lot shall be limited to 30 days within anv sixmonth period.
3) An applicant with an active building permit for construction may request
an extension for up to one year for the portable storage unit until the
construction is complete or an occupancy permit is issued.
4) An applicant shall obtain a permit for said placement of a portable storage
unit.
5) Portable storage units shall not be used as living quarters.
SECTION 7. Repealer. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of any such inconsistency.
SECTION 8. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section or other part ofthis Ordinance is for
any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections
or parts of this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
SECTION 9. Effective Date. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED as an Ordinance of the Township of Rostraver this 4th
day of March, 2020.
ATTEST:
Pamela S. B RD, ownship Secretary
BOARD OF • MMISSIONERS
ROST
fi

BILL NO.: 723
ORDINANCE NO.:
INTRODUCED BY:
FIRST READING:
FINAL READING:
ADOPTED:
723
DEVIN M. DERIENZO
FEBRUARY 5, 2020
WAIVED
FEBRUARY 5, 2020
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
ROSTRAVER, WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE
TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE FOR LOW LEVEL FREQUENCY NOISE
WHEREAS, the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P. S. § 10101 et seq. ( the " MPC"),
authorizes the Township of Rostraver ( the " Township") to regulate land uses in the Township;
and
WHEREAS, pursuant to its authority under the MPC, the Board of Commissioners of the
Township ( the " Board") enacted Ordinance No. 300 of 1995 on July 25, 1995, in order to
establish zoning regulations within the Township; and
WHEREAS, the Board from time to time adopted amendments to Ordinance No. 300 of
1995 ( said ordinance as so amended being referred to hereafter as the " Zoning Ordinance").
NOW THEREFORE, the Board hereby ordains and enacts as follows, incorporating the
above recitals by reference:
SECTION 1. Section 195- 74 of the Zoning Ordinance, Performance standards provisions is
amended by removing the following stricken text as follows:
C. Steady- state noise emanated from stationary equipment. Steady- state noise emanating from
stationary equipment or sources, which will persist during indefinite or periodic intervals of time
over a period of more than three consecutive days onto adjacent real properties or to a receiving
property within any district within the Township, shall not exceed the maximum noise levels
prescribed in this section.
1) No person shall cause or permit any steady- state sound to emanate from a source
property which exceeds the levels set forth in Subsection C(2) of this section when
measured at the following locations:
a) Within 100 feet of any occupied building located in any district; or
b) At any point along the boundary line between the source property and the receiving
property in any district.
2) Maximum permissible noise levels are:
Daytime (7: 00 a.m. to 10: 00 p.m.): 70 dBA.
b) Nighttime ( 10: 00 p.m. to 7: 00 a.m.): 60 dBA.
c) Low Level Frequency Noise: 55dBC
SECTION 2. Repealer. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of any such inconsistency.
SECTION 3. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section or other part of this Ordinance is for
any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections
or parts of this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
SECTION 4. Effective Date. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption.
SECTION 5. Penalties. Any violation hereof, shall upon conviction, result in a fine of $500
per occurrence plus costs.
SECTION 6. Injunctive Relief. Any party aggrieved hereby may file for Injunctive Relief in
the Court of Common Pleas of Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania or any Court of competent
Jurisdiction to restrain, abate or prohibit violations of this Ordinance in the manner prescribed by
Law or Equity and a violator thereof shall, in addition to the provisions Ordered by the Court
shall be required to re -apply for any permits required by the Township of Rostraver. The
Township shall seek such reasonable costs and counsel fees for violations committed here under.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED as an Ordinance of the Township of Rostraver this 5th
day ofFebruary, 2020.
ATTEST:
Pamela SEARD, Township Secretary
BOARD OF COMMIS • HERS
ROSTRA SHIP

BILL NO.: 726
ORDINANCE NO.: 726
INTRODUCED BY: DEVIN M. DERIENZO
FIRST READING: MAY 6. 2020
FINAL READING: WAIVED
ADOPTED: MAY 6, 2020
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
ROSTRAVER, WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE
TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE FOR PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR
DAYTIME AND NIGHTIME HOURS
WHEREAS, the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P. S. § 10101 et seq. ( the " MPC")
authorizes the Township of Rostraver (the " Township") to regulate land uses in the Township
and
WHEREAS, pursuant to its authority under the MPC, the Board of Commissioners of th
Township ( the " Board") enacted Ordinance No. 300 of 1995 on July 25, 1995, in order t
establish zoning regulations within the Township; and
WHEREAS, the Board from time to time adopted amendments to Ordinance No. 300 0
1995 ( said ordinance as so amended being referred to hereafter as the " Zoning Ordinance"); and
WHEREAS, Rostraver Township seeks to promote the general health, safety and welfar
of the community by adopting and implementing an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance t
regulate the performance standards; and
NOW THEREFORE, the Board hereby ordains and enacts as follows, incorporating th
above recitals by reference:
SECTION 1. Section 195- 74 of the Zoning Ordinance, Performance standards provisions
amended by removing the following stricken text and inserting the underlined text as follows:
197- 74C( 2) Maximum permissible noise levels are:
a) Daytime ( 7: 00 a.m. to 10: 00 7: 00 p.m.): 70 dBA.
b) Nighttime ( 10: 00 7: 00 p.m. to 7: 00 a.m.): 60 dBA.
SECTION 2. Repealer. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsiste
herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of any such inconsistency.
SECTION 3. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section or other part of this Ordinance is fo
any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality o
invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining, provisions, sentences. clauses. section
or parts of this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invali
sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
H
SECTION 4. Effective Date. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
ORDAINED AND ENACTED as an Ordinance of the Township of Rostraver this 6th
day of May, 2020.
ATTEST:
BARD. fiownship Secretary
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS

BILL NO.: 728
ORDINANCE NO.: 728
INTRODUCED BY: JOHN LORENZO
FIRST READING: MAY 6, 2020
FINAL READING: WAIVED
ADOPTED: MAY 6, 2020
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
ROSTRAVER, WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE
TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE TO SET FORTH REQUIREMENTS FOR SOLAR
ENERGY SYSTEMS.
WHEREAS, the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq. ( the " MPC"),
authorizes the Township of Rostraver ( the " Township") to regulate land uses in the Township;
and
WHEREAS, pursuant to its authority under the MPC, the Board of Commissioners ofthe
Township ( the " Board") enacted Ordinance No. 300 of 1995 on July 25, 1995, in order to
establish zoning regulations within the Township to regulate the use of property and to promote
the conservation of energy through access to and use of renewable energy resources; and
WHEREAS, Rostraver Township seeks to promote the general health, safety and welfare
of the community by adopting and implementing an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance
providing for access to and use of solar energy systems; and
WHEREAS, the Board from time to time adopted amendments to Ordinance No. 300 of
1995 ( said ordinance as so amended being referred to hereafter as the " Zoning Ordinance").
NOW THEREFORE, the Board hereby ordains and enacts as follows, incorporating the
above recitals by reference:
SECTION 1. Section 195- 6 of the Zoning Ordinance, Definitions provisions is amended by
adding the following underlined text:
ACCESSORY SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: An area of land or other area used for a solar
collection system used to capture solar energy, convert it to electrical energy or thermal power
and supply electrical or thermal power primarily for on-site use. An accessory solar energy
system consists of one ( 1) or more free- standing ground, or roof mounted solar arrays or
modules, or solar related equipment and is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of
utility power or fuels.
GLARE: The effect produced by light with an intensity sufficient to cause annoyance,
discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
PRINCIPAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: An area of land or other area used for a solar
collection system principally used to capture solar energy, convert it to electrical energy or
thermal power and supply electrical or thermal power primarily for off-site use. Principal solar
energy systems consist of one ( 1) or more free-standing ground, or roof mounted solar collector
devices, solar related equipment and other accessory structures and buildings including light
reflectors, concentrators, and heat exchangers, substations, electrical infrastructure, transmission
lines and other appurtenant structures.
SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy (direct, diffuse and/or reflective) received from the sun.
SOLAR PANEL: That part or portion of a solar energy system containing one or more receptive
cells or modules, the purpose of which is to convert solar energy for use in space heating or
cooling, for water heating and/ or for electricity.
SOLAR RELATED EQUIPMENT: Items including a solar photovoltaic cell, module, panel, or
array, or solar hot air or water collector device panels, lines, pumps, batteries, mounting brackets,
framing and possibly foundations or other structures used for or intended to be used for
collection of solar energy.
1. SOLAR ARRAY: A grouping of multiple solar modules with purpose of harvesting
solar energy.
2. SOLAR CELL: The smallest basic solar electric device which generates electricity
when exposed to light.
3. SOLAR MODULE: A grouping of solar cells with the purpose of harvesting solar
energy.
SECTION 2. Section 195- 12 of the Zoning Ordinance, Statement of purpose and use summary
for the A- 1 District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 12B Conditional use.
8) Principal Solar Energy Systems.
195- 12D. Accessory use examples
9) Accessory Solar Energy Systems
SECTION 3. Section 195- 13 of the Zoning Ordinance, Conditional use provisions for the A- 1
District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 131-1. Principal Solar Energy Systems.
1) The Principal Solar Energy Systems ( PSES) layout, design and installation
shall conform to applicable industry standards, such as those of the American
National Standards Institute ( ANSI), Underwriters Laboratories ( UL), the
American Society for Testing and Materials ( ASTM), ), Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers ( IEEE), Solar Rating and Certification Corporation
SRCC), Electrical Testing Laboratory ( ETL), Florida Solar Energy Center
FSEC) or other similar certifying organizations, and shall comply with the PA
Uniform Construction Code as enforced by Rostraver Township and with all
other applicable fire and life safety requirements. The manufacturer
specifications for the key components of the system shall be submitted as part
of the application.
2) PSES installers must demonstrate they are listed as a certified installer on
the PA Department of Environmental Protection' s ( DEP) approved solar
installer list or that they meet the criteria to be a DEP approved installer by
meeting or exceeding one of the following requirements: 
a. Is certified by the North American Board of Certified Energy
Practitioners (NABCEP).
b. Has completed an Interstate Renewable Energy Council ( IREC)
Institute for Sustainable Power Quality (ISPQ) accredited PV training
program or a PV manufacturer' s training program and successfully
installed a minimum ofthree PV systems.
3) All on-site transmission and plumbing lines shall be placed underground
to the extent feasible.
4) The owner of a PSES shall provide the Township written confirmation
that the public utility company to which the PSES will be connected has been
informed of the customer' s intent to install a grid connected system and
approved of such connection.
5) No portion of the PSES shall contain or be used to display advertising.
The manufacturer' s name and equipment information or indication of
ownership shall be allowed on any equipment of the PSES provided they
comply with the prevailing sign regulations.
6) Glare
a. All PSES shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or
glare does not project onto nearby structures or roadways.
b. b. The applicant has the burden of proving that any glare produced
does not have significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent
uses either through siting or mitigation.
7) Noise. As part of the conditional use application, and prior to construction,
the operator shall establish the ambient or background noise level baseline. The
baseline shall be established hourly over a seventy -two-hour period with at
least one twenty -four-hour reading on a Saturday or Sunday. A noise
consultant/engineer mutually agreed upon by the Township and owner/operator
will be responsible for determining the residual background noise level
baseline. The operator and Township will mutually agree to the location of the
sampling equipment. The operator shall be responsible for all costs associated
with the noise consultant/engineer. The results shall be provided to the
Township. Noise from a PSES shall comply with section 195- 74 of this
ordinance.
8) No trees or other landscaping otherwise required by the municipal
ordinances or attached as a condition of approval of any plan, application, or
permit may be removed for the installation or operation of a PSES.
9) The PSES owner and/or operator shall maintain a phone number and
identify a person responsible for the public to contact with inquiries and
complaints throughout the life ofthe project and provide this number and name
to the Township. The PSES owner and/or operator shall make reasonable
efforts to respond to the public' s inquiries and complaints.
10) Decommissioning
a. The PSES owner is required to notify the Township immediately
upon cessation or abandonment of the operation. The PSES shall be
presumed to be discontinued or abandoned if no electricity is
generated by such system for a period of twelve ( 12) continuous
months.
b. The PSES owner shall then have twelve ( 12) months in which to
dismantle and remove the PSES including all solar related equipment
or appurtenances related thereto, including but not limited to buildings,
cabling, electrical components, roads, foundations and other associated
facilities from the property. If the owner fails to dismantle and/or
remove the PSES within the established timeframes, the municipality
may complete the decommissioning at the owner' s expense.
c. At the time of issuance of the permit for the construction of the
PSES, the owner shall provide financial security in the form and
amount acceptable to the Township to secure the expense of
dismantling and removing said PSES and restoration of the land to its
original condition, including forestry plantings of the same
type/variety and density as the original. Said financial security shall
be 10% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements. Please
provide the Township with a construction cost to install the PSES, in
order for the Township to verify the 10% required fmancial security
that will remain in place for the life of the PSES.
d. If a ground mounted PSES is removed, any earth disturbance
resulting from the removal must be graded and reseeded.
11) Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, PSES applicants must
acknowledge in writing that the issuing of said permit shall not and does not
create in the property owner, its, his, her or their successors and assigns in title
or, create in the property itself :
a) the right to remain free of shadows and/ or obstructions to solar
energy caused by development of adjoining or other property or the
growth of any trees or vegetation on such property; or
b) the right to prohibit the development on or growth of any trees or
vegetation on such property.
12) Permit Requirements:
a. PSES shall comply with the Township subdivision and land
development requirements. The installation of PSES shall follow all
applicable permit requirements, codes, and regulations. 
13
14
15
16
17
18
1
2
b. The PSES owner and/ or operator shall repair, maintain and replace
the PSES and related solar equipment during the term of the permit in
a manner consistent with industry standards as needed to keep the
PSES in good repair and operating condition.
Minimum lot size is 3 acres
1 Minimum setback from all property lines is 30 feet.
I Ground mounted PSES shall not exceed 20 feet in height
1 PSES mounted on the roof or wall of any building shall be subject to the
maximum height regulations of the principle structure.
I The following components of a PSES shall be considered impervious
coverage as follows and shall comply with the stormwater management
districts established in Chapter 164 of the Code of the Township of Rostraver,
including but not limited to any necessary agreements and/or bonding:
a. The area beneath the ground mounted PSES is considered
impervious cover.
b. Foundation systems, typically consisting_of driven piles or
monopoles or helical screws with or without small concrete collars.
c. All mechanical equipment of PSES including any structure for
batteries or storage cells.
d. Gravel or paved access roads servicing the PSES.
Ground mounted PSES shall be screened from adjoining residential uses
to the standards found in 195- 75G ofthis ordinance.
Ground -mounted PSES shall not be placed within any legal easement or
right-of-way location or be placed within any storm water conveyance system
or in any other manner that would alter or impede storm water runoff from
collecting in a constructed storm water conveyance system.
1) Security:
a. All ground mounted PSES shall be completely enclosed by a
minimum six (6) foot high fence with a self-locking gate following the
standards of 195- 72 of this ordinance.
b. A clearly visible warning sign shall be placed at the base of all
pad -mounted transformers and substations and on the fence on the
surrounding the PSES informing individuals of potential voltage
hazards. 
21) Access:
a. At a minimum, a 25' wide access road must be provided from a
state or township roadway into the site.
b. At a minimum, a 20' wide cartway shall be provided between the
solar arrays to allow access for maintenance vehicles and emergency
management vehicles including fire apparatus and emergency vehicles.
Cartway width is the distance between the bottom edge of a solar panel
to the top edge of the solar panel directly across from it.
22) The ground mounted PSES shall not be artificially lighted except to the
extent required for safety or applicable federal, state, or local authority. Site
lighting shall be directed downward and shielded so as to avoid glare on public
roads and adjacent properties. All lighting shall be designed and utilized in
compliance with § 195- 81. 2.
23) For roof and wall mounted systems, the applicant shall provide evidence
that the plans comply with the Uniform Construction Code and adopted
building code of the township/ borough that the roof or wall is capable of
holding the load imposed on the structure.
SECTION 4. Section 195- 15 of the Zoning Ordinance, Lot, area and dimensional requirements
for the A- 1 District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
Conditional use Min. Min. Min. Min. Min. Max. Max.
Lot Lot Front Side Rear Height Lot
Area Width Setback Yard Yard Coverage
Principal Solar 3 acres 150 30 30 30 40%
Energy Systems.
SECTION 5. Section 195- 16 of the Zoning Ordinance, Statement of purpose and use summary
for the VR District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 16D. ( 7) Accessory Solar Energy System.
SECTION 6. Section 195- 20 of the Zoning Ordinance, Statement of purpose and use summary
for the R- 1 District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 20D. (6) Accessory Solar Energy System.
SECTION 7. Section 195- 24 of the Zoning Ordinance, Statement of purpose and use summary
for the R-2 District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 24D. ( 6) Accessory Solar Energy System. 
SECTION 8. Section 195- 28 of the Zoning Ordinance, Statement of purpose and use surnmary
for the R-3 District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 28D. ( 6) Accessory Solar Energy System.
SECTION 9. Section 195- 32 of the Zoning Ordinance, Statement of purpose and use summary
for the B -I District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 32D. (2) Accessory Solar Energy System.
SECTION 10. Section 195- 36 of the Zoning Ordinance, Statement of purpose and use summary
for the 13- 2 District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 36D. (2) Accessory Solar Energy System.
SECTION 11. Section 195- 39. 1 of the Zoning Ordinance, Statement of purpose and use
summary for the MU District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 39. 1D. ( 4) Accessory Solar Energy System.
SECTION 12. Section 195- 40 of the Zoning Ordinance, Statement of purpose and use summary
for the I- 1 District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 40B Conditional use.
4) Principal Solar Energy Systems.
195- 40D. Accessory use examples
2) Accessory Solar Energy Systems
SECTION 13. Section 195- 41 of the Zoning Ordinance, Conditional use provisions for the I- 1
District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 41 D. Principal Solar Energy Systems
1) The Principal Solar Energy Systems (PSES) layout, design and installation
shall conform to applicable industry standards, such as those of the American
National Standards Institute ( ANSI), Underwriters Laboratories ( UL), the
American Society for Testing and Materials ( ASTM), ), Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers ( IEEE), Solar Rating and Certification Corporation
SRCC), Electrical Testing Laboratory ( ETL), Florida Solar Energy Center
FSEC) or other similar certifying organizations, and shall comply with the PA
Uniform Construction Code as enforced by Rostraver Township and with all
other applicable fire and life safety requirements. The manufacturer
specifications for the key components of the system shall be submitted as part
of the application.
2) PSES installers must demonstrate they are listed as a certified installer on
the PA Department of Environmental Protection' s ( DEP) approved solar
installer list or that they meet the criteria to be a DEP approved installer by
meeting or exceeding one of the following requirements: 
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
9)
a. Is certified by the North American Board of Certified Energy
Practitioners (NABCEP).
b. Has completed an Interstate Renewable Energy Council ( IREC)
Institute for Sustainable Power Quality ( ISPQ) accredited PV training
program or a PV manufacturer' s training program and successfully
installed a minimum of three PV systems.
All on-site transmission and plumbing lines shall be placed underground
to the extent feasible.
The owner of a PSES shall provide the Township written confirmation
that the public utility company to which the PSES will be connected has been
informed of the customer' s intent to install a grid connected system and
approved of such connection.
No portion of the PSES shall contain or be used to display advertising,
The manufacturer' s name and equipment information or indication of
ownership shall be allowed on any equipment of the PSES provided they
comply with the prevailing sign regulations.
Glare
a. All PSES shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or
glare does not project onto nearby structures or roadways.
b. b. The applicant has the burden of proving that any glare produced
does not have significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent
uses either through siting or mitigation.
Noise. As part ofthe conditional use application, and prior to construction,
the operator shall establish the ambient or background noise level baseline. The
baseline shall be established hourly over a seventy -two-hour period with at
least one twenty -four-hour reading on a Saturday or Sunday. A noise
consultant/engineer mutually agreed upon by the Township and owner/operator
will be responsible for determining the residual background noise level
baseline. The operator and Township will mutually agree to the location of the
sampling equipment. The operator shall be responsible for all costs associated
with the noise consultant/engineer. The results shall be provided to the
Township. Noise from a PSES shall comply with section 195- 74 of this
ordinance.
No trees or other landscaping otherwise required by the municipal
ordinances or attached as a condition of approval of any plan, application, or
permit may be removed for the installation or operation of a PSES.
The PSES owner and/ or operator shall maintain a phone number and
identify a person responsible for the public to contact with inquiries and
complaints throughout the life of the project and provide this number and name
10
11
1
to the Township. The PSES owner and/ or operator shall make reasonable
efforts to respond to the public' s inquiries and complaints.
Decommissioning
a. The PSES owner is required to notify the Township immediately
upon cessation or abandomnent of the operation. The PSES shall be
presumed to be discontinued or abandoned if no electricity is generated
by such system for a period of twelve ( 12) continuous months.
b. The PSES owner shall then have twelve ( 12) months in which to
dismantle and remove the PSES including all solar related equipment or
appurtenances related thereto, including but not limited to buildings,
cabling, electrical components, roads, foundations and other associated
facilities from the property. If the owner fails to dismantle and/or
remove the PSES within the established timeframes, the municipality
may complete the decommissioning at the owner' s expense.
c. At the time of issuance of the permit for the construction of the
PSES, the owner shall provide financial security in the form and
amount acceptable to the Township to secure the expense o
dismantling and removing said PSES and restoration of the land to its
original condition, including forestry plantings of the same type/variety
and density as the original. Said financial security shall be 10% of the
actual cost of installation of said improvements. Please provide the
Township with a construction cost to install the PSES, in order for the
Township to verify the 10% required financial security that will remain
in place for the life of the PSES.
d. If a ground mounted PSES is removed, any earth disturbance
resulting from the removal must be graded and reseeded.
Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, PSES applicants must
acknowledge in writing that the issuing of said permit shall not and does not
create in the property owner, its, his, her or their successors and assigns in title
or, create in the property itself :
b) the right to remain free of shadows and/or obstructions to solar
energy caused by development of adjoining or other property or the
growth of any trees or vegetation on such property., or
b) the right to prohibit the development on or growth of any trees or
vegetation on such property.
Permit Requirements:
a. PSES shall comply with the Township subdivision and land
development requirements. The installation of PSES shall follow all
applicable permit requirements, codes, and regulations. 
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
b. The PSES owner and/or operator shall repair, maintain and replace
the PSES and related solar equipment during the terns of the permit in a
manner consistent with industry standards as needed to keep the PSES
in good repair and operating condition.
1 Minimum lot size is 1 acre
Minirnurn setback from all property lines is 30 feet.
I Ground mounted PSES shall not exceed 20 feet in height
1 PSES mounted on the roof or wall of any building shall be subject to the
maximum height regulations ofthe principle structure.
The following components of a PSES shall be considered impervious
coverage as follows and shall comply with the stormwater management
districts established in Chapter 164 of the Code of the Township of Rostraver,
including but not limited to any necessary agreements and/or bonding.
a. The area beneath the ground mounted PSES is considered
impervious cover.
b. Foundation systems, typically consisting ofdriven piles or
monopoles or helical screws with or without small concrete collars.
c. All mechanical equipment of PSES including any structure for
batteries or storage cells.
d. Gravel or paved access roads servicing the PSES.
Ground mounted PSES shall be screened from adjoining residential uses
to the standards found in 195- 750 ofthis ordinance.
Ground -mounted PSES shall not be placed within any legal easement or
right-of-way location or be placed within any storm water conveyance system
or in any other manner that would alter or impede storm water runoff from
collecting in. a constructed storm water conveyance system.
Security:
a. All ground mounted PSES shall be completely enclosed by a
minimum eight ( 8) foot high fence with a self-locking gate following
the standards of 195- 72 ofthis ordinance.
b. A clearly visible warning sign shall be placed at the base of all
pad -mounted transformers and substations and on the fence on the
surrounding the PSES informing individuals of potential voltage
hazards. 
21) Access:
a. At a minimum, a 25' wide access road must be provided from a
state or township roadway into the site.
b. At a minimum, a 20' wide cartway shall be provided between the
solar arrays to allow access for maintenance vehicles and emergency
management vehicles including fire apparatus and emergency vehicles.
Cartway width is the distance between the bottom edge of a solar panel
to the top edge of the solar panel directly across from it.
22) The ground mounted PSES shall not be artificially lighted except to the
extent required for safety or applicable federal, state, or local authority. Site
lighting shall be directed downward and shielded so as to avoid glare on public
roads and adjacent properties. All lighting shall be designed and utilized in
compliance with § 195- 81. 2.
23) For roof and wall mounted systems, the applicant shall provide evidence
that the plans comply with the Uniform Construction Code and adopted
building code of the township/ borough that the roof or wall is capable o
holding the load imposed on the structure.
SECTION 14. Section 195- 43 of the Zoning Ordinance, Lot, area and dimensional requirements
for the I- 1 District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
Conditional use Min. Min. Min. Min. Min. Max. Max.
Lot Lot Front Side Rear Height Lot
Area Width Setback Yard Yard Coverage
Principal Solar 1 acre 75 30 30 30 30%
Energy Systems.
SECTION 15. Section 195- 44 of the Zoning Ordinance, Statement of purpose and use sunmiary
for the I-2 District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 44B Conditional use.
6) Principal Solar Energy Systems.
195-44D. Accessory use examples
2) Accessory Solar Energy Systems
SECTION 16. Section 195- 45 of the Zoning Ordinance, Conditional use provisions for the I-2
District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 45F. Principal Solar Energy Systems, subject to the standards and criteria of Article
XIV, section 195- 41D, of this chapter.
SECTION 17. Section 195- 47 of the Zoning Ordinance, Lot, area and dimensional requirements
for the I-2 District is amended by adding the following underlined text: 
Conditional use Min. Min. Min. Min. Min. Max. Max.
Lot Lot Front Side Rear Height Lot
Area Width Setback Yard Yard Coverage
Principal Solar
Energy Systems. Subject to the requirements of 195- 41D
SECTION 18. Section 195- 48 of the Zoning Ordinance, Statement of purpose and use summary
for the 1- 3 District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 48B Conditional use.
5) Principal Solar Energy Systems.
195- 48D. Accessory use examples
2) Accessory Solar Energy Systems
SECTION 19. Section 195- 49 of the Zoning Ordinance, Conditional use provisions for the 1- 3
District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
195- 49E. Princi• al Solar Ener S stems sub' ect to the standards and criteria of Articl
XIV, section 195-41D, of this chapter.
SECTION 20. Section 195- 51 of the Zoning Ordinance, Lot, area and dimensional requiremen
for the I-3 District is amended by adding the following underlined text:
Conditional use Min. Min. Min. Min. Min. Max. Max.
Lot Lot Front Side Rear Height Lot
Area Width Setback Yard Yard Coverage
Principal Solar
Energy Systems. Subject to the requirements of 195- 41D
SECTION 21. Repealer. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsisten
herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of any such inconsistency.
SECTION 22. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section or other part of this Ordinance i
for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegalit
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses
sections or parts of this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal o •
invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
SECTION 23. Effective Date. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
ORDAINED AND ENACTED as an Ordinance of the Township of Rostraver this 6th
day of May, 2020.
ATTEST:
Pamelaa SA Township Secretaiy
BOARD OF C• MISSIONERS
ROS . i TO SHIP

BILL NO.
ORDINANCE NO.
INTRODUCED BY:
FIRST READING:
FINAL READING:
ADOPTED:
731
731
DEVIN M. DERIENZO
AUGUST 5, 2020
WAIVED
AUGUST 5, 2020
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
ROSTRAVER, WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE
TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE TO REGULATE COMMERCIAL PARKING
LOT(S) IN THE I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT, I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICT, AND 1- 3 MIXED INDUSTRIAL SERVICES DISTRICT.
WHEREAS, the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P. S. § 10101 et seq. ( the " MPC"),
authorizes the Township of Rostraver (the " Township") to regulate land uses in the Township;
and
WHEREAS, pursuant to its authority under the MPC, the Board of Commissioners ofthe
Township ( the ' Board") enacted Ordinance No. 300 of 1995 on July 25, 1995, in order to
establish zoning regulations within the Township; and
WHEREAS, the Board from time to time adopted amendments to Ordinance No. 300 o
1995 ( said ordinance as so amended being referred to hereafter as the " Zoning Ordinance").
NOW THEREFORE, the Board hereby ordains and enacts as follows, incorporating the
above recitals by reference:
SECTION 1. Section 195- 6 of the Zoning Ordinance, Definitions is amended by inserting the
following underlined text:
COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT
A parking lot and/or garage used only for the parking of vehicles where a fee is charged
to park. or the property is leased for parking, but it shall not include the storage o
vehicles for repair, dismantling, display or sale and/or a junkyard.
SECTION 2. Section 195- 40 of the Zoning Ordinance, I- 1 Light Industrial District, Statement
of purpose and use summary, is amended by inserting the following underlined text and
removing the following stricken text:
A. Use permitted by right.
26) Commercial Parking Lot
C. Special Exception
10) Commercial Parking Lot
SECTION 3. Section 195- 42 of the Zoning Ordinance, I- 1 Light Industrial District, Special
exception provisions, is amended by removing the following stricken text: 
of this chapter.
SECTION 4. Section 195- 43 of the Zoning Ordinance, I- 1 Light Industrial District, Lot. area
and dimensional requirements, is amended by inserting the following underlined text removing
the following stricken text:
Use Category Min. Lot Min. Lot Min. Front Min. Side Min. Rear Max. Bldg. Max. Lot
Area Width Setback (ft. Yard (ft.) Yard (ft.) Height (ft.) Coverage
ft.) from
ROW)
Permitted Use:
Commercial
Parking Lot 32, 000 100 50
Special Exception:
Commercial
25 25 40 50%
38K
SECTION 5. Section 195- 44 of the Zoning Ordinance, I-2 Heavy Industrial District, Statement
of purpose and use summary, is amended by inserting the following underlined text and
removing the following stricken text:
A. Use permitted by right.
27) Commercial Parking Lot
C. Special Exception
11) Commercial Parking Lot
SECTION 6. Section 195- 46 of the Zoning Ordinance, I-2 Heavy Industrial District, Special
exception provisions, is amended by removing the following stricken text:
this chapter.
SECTION 7. Section 195- 47 of the Zoning Ordinance, 1- 2 Heavy Industrial District, Lot. area
and dimensional requirements, is amended by inserting the following underlined text:
Use Category Min. Lot Min. Lot Min. Front Min. Side Min. Rear Max. Bldg. Max. Lot
Area Width Setback (ft. Yard (ft.) Yard (ft.) Height (ft.) Coverage
ft.) from
ROW)
Permitted Use:
Commercial
Parking Lot 32, 000 100
Special Exception:
Ge.,,, rrrrm•, ier- isi
50 25 25 40 50%
SECTION 8. Repealer. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of any such inconsistency. 
SECTION 9. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section or other part of this Ordinance is fo
any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality o
invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections
or parts of this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invali.
sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
SECTION 10. Effective Date. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED as an Ordinance of the Township of Rostraver this 5th
day of August, 2020.
ATTEST:
Pamela S. $ EARD, Township Secretary
TOWNSHIP OF ROSTRAVER
BO OF CO 4, 11 SSIONERS
President