Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1502, Clause I, II (53 P.S. § 56502) of the First Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Ridley, County of Delaware, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections
by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through
325, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained
and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Ridley, which shall be
known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Ridley,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of
this ordinance, including the 1975 Code, are intended as a continuation
of such ordinances and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of
such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance.
All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are
hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Ridley, and it is the intention of said Board of Commissioners
that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reenacted
and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former
ordinances or the 1975 Code as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed
repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only new or
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Ridley and in force on the date of the adoption
of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the
effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 3-26-2000.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 RIDLEY CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees; and in particular Ord. Nos. 1717 and 1744,
and any amendments thereto, are saved from repeal.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances of the Township for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board
of Commissioners that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended
to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances included in the Code.
These changes are enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the
desired policies of the Board of Commissioners, and it is the intent of
the Board of Commissioners that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the legislation so changed have been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, wherever the following terms
were used, they have been updated as follows:
(1) The terms "Justice of the Peace," "Alderman" and "Magistrate" are
revised to read "District Justice."
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Defintions; word usage.
§ 1-8. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
(2) The term "Department of Community Affairs" is revised to read
"Department of Community Affairs and Economic Development."
(3) The term "Department of Environmental Resources" is revised to
read "Department of Environmental Protection" or "Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources," whichever is appropriate.
(4) The term "Fire Bureau" is revised to read "Fire Department."
(5) The terms "Chief of Police," "Police Chief" and "Superintendent of
Police" are revised to read "Captain of Police."
(6) The term "Dogcatcher" is revised to read "Animal Control Officer."
A. As used in this ordinance and the Code adopted hereby, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated below, unless the context
clearly indicates another meaning:
SOLICITOR — The Township Solicitor of the Township of Ridley.
TOWNSHIP or MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Ridley in the County
of Delaware, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. In this ordinance and the Code adopted hereby, the usage of various
words and phrases shall be interpreted as follows, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
(1) A word importing the masculine gender only shall also include and
mean the feminine and neuter.
(2) A word importing the singular number only shall also include and
mean the plural.
(3) The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.
C. For the purposes of codification, the word "ordinance" has been
changed, as applicable, to the word "chapter," "article" or "section." The
usage of the words "chapter," "article" or "section" in such instances
shall not be construed as affecting in any way the original adoption of
provisions of this Code as ordinances or parts thereof.
§ 1-6 RIDLEY CODE § 1-9
1:6
§ 1-9. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-10. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-11. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Commissioners to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-12. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Commissioners subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Commissioners shall
adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are
printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements
shall be inserted therein.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
§ 1-13. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-15. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Commissioners that
this ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-16. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after October 25, 2000.
§ 1-13 RIDLEY CODE § 1-16
1:8
Chapter 5
AUTHORITIES
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9

ARTICLE I
Central Delaware County Authority
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 3, Art. I, of the 1975 Code1]
§ 5-1. Intent.
The Township of Ridley does hereby signify intention to organize an
Authority, together with the Townships of Springfield and Nether
Providence and the Boroughs of Swarthmore, Rutledge, Morton, Prospect
Park and Ridley Park, under the provisions of the Acts of Assembly and the
amendments and supplements thereto.2
§ 5-2. Authorization to organize.
The proper officers are hereby authorized and directed to organize the said
Authority in conjunction with the proper officers of the aforesaid townships
and boroughs, and, together with the aforesaid officers, to execute the
Articles of Incorporation and to file the same with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as provided by law.
§ 5-3. Articles of Incorporation.
The said Articles of Incorporation shall be as follows:
A. The name of the Authority shall be the "Central Delaware County
Authority."
B. The Authority is formed under the provisions of 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.3
[Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
C. No other Authority organized under the Municipal Authorities Act of
1937 (Act No. 200) nor under the Act approved December 27, 1933
(Special Session, 1933, P.L. 114) is in existence in or for the
incorporating municipalities.
D. The names of the incorporating municipalities, together with the names
and addresses of their municipal officers, are as follows.
E. The names and addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of the said Authority are as follows.4
1. Editor's Note: Originally adopted 11-13-1937 by Ord. No. 256.
2. Editor's Note: The joinder of the Township of Marple as a member of the Central Delaware
County Authority was approved 9-21-1960 by Ord. No. 1110. That ordinance also approved
and set forth the form of application of said Township to become a member, revised the
terms of office of the members of the Board of the Authority and authorized the execution
of said application.
3. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. §§ 301 through 322 were repealed by 2001, June 19, P.L. 287, No. 22,
§ 3, effective immediately.
4. Editor's Note: The original listing which followed was deleted at time of publication of the
1975 Code as being obsolete.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:11
§ 5-4. Adoption of similar ordinances by other municipalities.
It is provided, however, that unless the Townships of Springfield and Nether
Providence and the Boroughs of Swarthmore, Rutledge, Morton, Prospect
Park and Ridley Park, each and all of them, pass similar ordinances, then
the Township of Ridley shall not be bound by any provisions of this article,
which shall be, in that event, without force and effect.7
F. Commissioners or Councils, as the case may be, of each municipality
creating the said Joint Authority, shall appoint one member of the
Board. The Townships of Ridley and Nether Providence shall appoint
one member each for a period of four years; the Borough of
Swarthmore and the Township of Springfield, for a period of three
years; the Boroughs of Ridley Park and Prospect Park, for a period of
two years; and the Boroughs of Rutledge and Morton, for a period of
one year. Thereafter the said Commissioners or Councils, as the case
may be, shall, at a meeting held not later than one month prior to
January 1 in each year in which a vacancy occurs in the office filled by
that municipality, appoint as a member of the Board a citizen of that
municipality for a term of four years to succeed the member whose
term expires on January 1 next succeeding.5 All vacancies shall be filled
by the governing body of the municipality whose appointee has vacated
his office.
The term of existence of the Central Delaware County Authority shall
be for a period ending June 1, 2055.6
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the municipalities appointed herein have
hereunto caused to be written their respective names, signed by their
presiding officer and attested by their Secretary or Clerk, this 13th day
of November A.D. 1937.
5. Editor's Note: The preceding provisions were revised by the application of the Township of
Marple to become a member of the Authority (approved 9-21-1960 by Ord. No. 1110). The
last paragraph of Subsection G of said application provided as follows: "Whenever a
vacancy in the Board has occurred by reason of death, resignation or otherwise, or is
about to occur by reason of the expiration of the term of a member, the municipal
authorities of the municipality which appointed the member whose term has expired or is
about to expire shall appoint a member for a term of five years to flu the vacancy
occurring by reason of the expiration of a term and for the unexpired term when the
vacancy has otherwise occurred. Members whose terms have expired shall hold office until
their successors have been appointed and may be appointed to succeed themselves."
6. Editor's Note: This provision was amended 5-25-2005 by Ord. No. 1883.
7. Editor's Note: A supplemental agreement, dated August 17, 1960, between the Central
Delaware County Authority and the incorporating municipalities, was approved by the
Township of Ridley 9-21-1960 by Ord. No. 1111. It provided for: "(1) The construction by
said Authority of an extension to Its trunk line sewers; "(2) The operation and
maintenance by the Authority of said extension; "(3) Certain payments by the Township of
Marple to the other municipalities and to Baldwin-Lima-Hamilton Corporation for the use
of the Authority's sewer system; "(4) Payments by the Township of Nether Providence and
the Township of Springfield of a portion of the total cost of constructing and equipping
said Improvements; and "(5) Payment by the Township of Marple of certain charges for
the use of said Improvements;" and authorized the execution and delivery of said
supplemental agreement on behalf of the Township of Ridley.
§ 5-3 RIDLEY CODE § 5-4
1:12
ARTICLE II
Muckinipates Authority
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 3, Art. II, of the 1975 Code8]
§ 5-5. Intent.
The Township of Ridley does hereby signify intention to organize an
Authority, together with the Townships of Springfield and Upper Darby
and the Boroughs of Clifton Heights, Folcroft, Glenolden and Norwood,
under the provisions of the Acts of Assembly and the amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 5-6. Authorization to organize.
The proper officers are hereby authorized and directed to organize the said
Authority in conjunction with the proper officers of the aforesaid Townships
and boroughs, and, together with the aforesaid officers, to execute the
Articles of Incorporation and to file the same with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as provided by, law.
§ 5-7. Articles of Incorporation.
The said Articles of Incorporation shall be as follows:
A. The name of the Authority shall be the "Muckinipates Authority."
B. The Authority is formed under the provisions 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.9
[Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
C. No other Authority organized under 53 P.S. § 301 et seq. is in existence
in or for the incorporating municipalities. [Amended 10-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 1808]
D. The names of the incorporating municipalities, together with the names
and addresses of their municipal officers, are as follows.10
E. The municipality, names and addresses and terms of office of the first
members of the Board of the said Authority are as follows.11
F. Commissioners or Councils, as the case may be, of each municipality
creating the said Joint Authority, shall appoint one member of the
Board. The Borough of Glenolden and the Township of Ridley shall
appoint one member each for a period of four years from the first of
January 1939; the Township of Springfield and the Borough of
Norwood, for a period of three years from the first of January 1939; the
8. Editor's Note: Originally adopted 10-19-1938 by Ord. No. 273.
9. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. §§ 301 through 322 were repealed by 2001, June 19, P.L. 287, No. 22,
§ 3, effective immediately.
10.Editor's Note: The original listing which followed was deleted at time of publication of the
1975 Code as being obsolete.
11.Editor's Note: The original listing which followed was deleted at time of publication of the
1975 Code as being obsolete.
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:13
§ 5-8. Adoption of similar ordinances by other municipalities.
It is provided, however, that unless the Townships of Springfield and Upper
Darby and the Boroughs of Norwood, Folcroft, Glenolden and Clifton
Heights, each and all of them, pass similar ordinances, then the Township
of Ridley shall not be bound by any provision of this article, which shall be,
in that event, without force and effect.13
Township of Upper Darby and the Borough of Folcroft, for a period of
two years from the first of January 1939; and the Borough of Clifton
Heights, for a period of one year from the first of January 1939, all
the said terms to start immediately upon the granting of certificate of
incorporation by the Secretary of the commonwealth. Thereafter the
said Commissioners or Councils, as the case may be, shall, at a meeting
held not later than one month prior to January 1 in each year in which
a vacancy occurs in the office filled by that municipality, appoint as a
member of the Board a citizen of that municipality for a term of four
years to succeed the member whose term expires on January 1 next
succeeding. All vacancies shall be filled by the governing body of the
municipality whose appointee has vacated his office.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the municipalities appointed herein have
hereunto caused to be written their respective names, signed by their
presiding officer and attested by their Secretary or Clerk, this 16th day
of November A.D. 1938.12
12.Editor's Note: This provision was amended 11-16-1938 by Ord. No. 275.
13.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1984, adopted 2-22-2012, terminated the Marina Authority,
which was originally created 1-22-2003 by Ord. No. 1835, and formerly included as Article
III of this chapter, pursuant to the requirements of the Municipal Authorities Act, 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 5619.
§ 5-7 RIDLEY CODE § 5-8
1:14
Chapter 9
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Authorities — See Ch. 5.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 18.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 37.
Police Civil Service Commission — See Ch. 45.
§ 5-8 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 5-8
9:15

ARTICLE I
Annual Organization Meetings
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 6, Art. I, of the 1975 Code]
§ 9-1. Board of Commissioners to organize first.
No board, commission or committee appointed by the Board of Township
Commissioners shall hereafter hold its reorganization meeting for the
election of its officers at any time prior to the reorganization of the Board
of Township Commissioners. Any reorganization hereafter held by any such
board, commission or committee prior to the reorganization of the Board of
Township Commissioners shall be deemed to be void.
§ 9-2. Time limits on reorganization meetings.
§ 9-3. Continuation of office holder until qualification of successor.
All persons holding any office of honor or profit under any board,
commission or committee shall continue to hold such office until their
successors are duly elected and qualified, except where restricted by an Act
of Assembly.
A. In the event that a reorganization of any board, commission or
committee is held, by virtue of the provisions of any Act of Assembly or
by ordinance, in any year in which the Board of Township
Commissioners does not reorganize, then in such event such
reorganization meeting of such board, commission or committee shall
be held within 30 days of the first Monday of January of such year.
B. In the event that a reorganization of any board, commission or
committee is held, by virtue of the provisions of any Act of Assembly or
by ordinance, in any year in which the Board of Township
Commissioners shall reorganize, such reorganization of such board,
commission or committee shall be held within 30 days after the
reorganization of the Board of Township Commissioners.
§ 9-1 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 9-3
9:17

ARTICLE II
Official Meeting Place
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 6, Art. III, of the 1975 Code]
§ 9-4. Designation of place for conduct of official business.
Beginning the 30th day of April A.D. 1962, the Municipal Building situate on
the southeast comer of MacDade Boulevard and Morton Avenue in the said
Township of Ridley is hereby determined to be the place where all meetings
of the Board of Township Commissioners and all official business pertaining
to the said Township of Ridley shall be held.
§ 9-4 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 9-4
9:19

ARTICLE III
Board of Commissioners: Duties of President and Vice President
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 6, Art. IV, of the 1975 Code]
§ 9-5. Appointments to committees; approval required.
§ 9-6. Refusal to appoint.
If the President of the Board of Township Commissioners or, in his absence,
the Vice President of such Board, refuses to make an appointment to any
such committee or refuses to appoint a chairman of any such committee
which is approved by the majority of the Board as provided in § 9-5A of this
article, then in such event nominations and elections to such committees
and the chairmanship thereof shall be in order, and the person receiving
the majority of the votes at any such election shall be deemed duly elected.
For the purpose of such election, a person nominated to the membership of
any such committee or to the chairmanship of any such committee shall be
eligible to vote thereon.
§ 9-7. Appointments not approved deemed void.
All appointments heretofore made by the President or Vice President of the
Board of Township Commissioners to any committee or to the chairmanship
of any committee that do not receive the approval of the majority of the
members of the Board of Township Commissioners as provided in § 9-5A of
this article shall be deemed to be null and void.
§ 9-8. Questions on rulings.
Any ruling of the President or, in his absence, the Vice President of the
Board of Township Commissioners, if questioned or challenged by a
member of the Board of Township Commissioners shall immediately be
put to a vote to determine whether the ruling of the President shall be
sustained. In the event that a majority of the members of the Board of
Township Commissioners, as provided in § 9-5A of this article, do not concur
A. The President of the Board of Township Commissioners or, in his
absence, the Vice President of the Board of Township Commissioners,
shall appoint the members of all committees and their respective
chairmen; provided, however, that all of such appointments shall be
subject to the approval of the majority of the members of the Board of
Township Commissioners who are present at the time such
appointments are made. No such appointments shall be made except at
a meeting of the Board of Township Commissioners at which a quorum
shall be present.
B. Any such appointment made by the President or Vice President of the
Board of Township Commissioners which does not have the approval of
any majority, as provided in Subsection A of this section, shall be
deemed to be null and void.
§ 9-5 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 9-8
9:21
in the ruling of the presiding officer, then in such event his decision on such
point shall be deemed to be overruled and of no effect and the decision of
the majority of the members of the Board shall be deemed to be the ruling
of the Board.
§ 9-8 RIDLEY CODE § 9-8
9:22
ARTICLE IV
Planning Commission
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 6, Art. V, of the 1975 Code]
§ 9-9. Creation; membership.
A Planning Commission of the Township of Ridley is hereby created,
consisting of nine members.
§ 9-10. Appointment; terms; vacancies; removal.
§ 9-11. Qualifications.
All members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of the Township
of Ridley. At least six members of the Commission shall be citizen members
who shall not be officers or employees of the Township.
§ 9-12. Compensation. [Amended 9-26-1990 by Ord. No. 1660]
All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation but may
be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable expenses. However, elected
or appointed officers or employees of the Township of Ridley shall not, by
reason of membership thereon, forfeit the right to exercise the powers,
perform the duties or receive the compensations of the municipal offices
held by them during such membership.
A. All members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Board of
Township Commissioners, and the term of each of the members of the
Commission shall be for four years or until his successor is appointed
and qualified, except that the terms of the members so appointed shall
be so fixed that no more than three members shall be reappointed or
replaced during any future calendar year. The first appointments shall
be as follows:
(1) Three members for a two-year term.
(2) Three members for a three-year term.
(3) Three members for a four-year term.
B. The Chairman of the Planning Commission shall promptly notify the
Township Commissioners concerning vacancies in the Commission, and
such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
C. Any member of the Planning Commission once qualified and appointed
may be removed from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the
Board of Township Commissioners taken after the member has received
15 days advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall
be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in
writing. Any appointment to fill a vacancy created by removal shall be
only for the unexpired term. [Added 9-26-1990 by Ord. No. 1660]
§ 9-9 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 9-13
9:23
§ 9-13. Officers; reports.
The Commission shall select its own Chairman and Vice Chairman, and may
succeed themselves. It shall keep a full record of its business and annually
make a written report by March 1 of each year of its activities to the Board
of Township Commissioners. Interim reports may be made as often as may
be necessary or as requested by the Board of Township Commissioners.
§ 9-14. Engineering and legal advisors. [Amended 9-26-1990 by
Ord. No. 1660]
The Township Engineer or an engineer appointed by the Board of Township
Commissioners shall serve as engineering advisor. The Township Solicitor
or an attorney appointed by the Board of Township Commissioners shall
serve as legal advisor.
§ 9-15. Powers and duties.
§ 9-16. Funds or assistance.
The Planning Commission may, with the consent of the Board of Township
Commissioners, accept and utilize an funds, personnel or other assistance
made available by the county, the commonwealth or the federal government
or any of their agencies, or from private sources. The Board of Township
Commissioners may enter into agreements or contracts regarding the
acceptance or utilization of the funds or assistance in accordance with the
governmental procedures of the municipality.
A. The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties set forth
in 53 P.S. § 10209.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code and any other
powers and duties assigned to it by the Board of Commissioners that
are not expressly prohibited by law. [Amended 9-26-1990 by Ord.
No. 1660; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
B. In the performances of its powers and duties, any act or
recommendation of the Planning Commission which involves
engineering consideration shall be subject to review and comments of
the Engineer, which shall be incorporated and separately set forth in
any report, written act or recommendation of the Planning Commission.
§ 9-13 RIDLEY CODE § 9-16
9:24
ARTICLE V
Shade Tree Commission
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 6, Art. VI, of the 1975 Code]
§ 9-17. Creation.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Act of Assembly in such case made and
provided, a Shade Tree Commission is hereby created in the Township of
Ridley.
§ 9-18. Membership; appointment; terms; vacancies. [Amended
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
The said Commission shall consist of three owners or occupants of the
said Township of Ridley, who shall be appointed by the Board of Township
Commissioners and shall serve without compensation: one member of said
Commission for a term of three years, one member of said Commission for
a term of four years and one member of said Commission for a term of
five years. On the expiration of the term of any Shade Tree Commissioner,
a successor shall be appointed by the Board of Township Commissioners,
to serve for a term of five years. Vacancies in the office of Shade Tree
Commissioner shall be filled by the Board of Township Commissioners for
the unexpired term.
§ 9-19. Authority.
The Shade Tree Commission shall have exclusive custody and control of the
shade trees in the Township of Ridley and is authorized to plant, remove,
maintain and protect shade trees on the public highways in the Township.
§ 9-20. Employees; promulgation of regulations.
The Shade Tree Commission may, with the approval of the Board of
Township Commissioners, employ and pay such superintendents, engineers,
foresters, tree wardens or other assistants as the proper performance of the
duties devolving upon it shall require, and may make, publish and enforce
regulations for the care and protection of the shade trees of the Township.
No such regulation shall be in force until it has been approved by the Board
of Township Commissioners and until it has been published at least twice in
at least one newspaper of general circulation in the said Township of Ridley.
§ 9-21. Annual report.
The Shade Tree Commission shall annually report in full to the Board of
Township Commissioners its transactions and expenses for the last fiscal
year of the Township.
§ 9-22. Notice of work to be done.
Whenever the Shade Tree Commission proposes to plant, transplant or
remove shade trees on any highway, notice of the time and place of the
§ 9-17 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 9-22
9:25
meeting at which such work is to be considered shall be given in at least
one newspaper of general circulation in the Township of Ridley, once a week
for two weeks immediately preceding the time of the meeting. The notice
shall specify in detail the highways or portions thereof upon which trees are
proposed to be so planted, replanted or removed.
§ 9-23. Payment of costs. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
The cost of planting, transplanting or removing any shade trees in the
highways of the Township of Ridley, of the necessary and suitable guards,
curbing or grading for the protection thereof and of the replacing of any
pavement or sidewalk necessarily disturbed in the execution of such work
shall be paid by the owner of the real estate in front of whose property
the work is done. The amount each owner or occupant is to pay shall be
ascertained and certified by the Shade Tree Commission to the Board of
Township Commissioners and to the Township Treasurer.
§ 9-24. Notice of assessment.
Upon the filing of the certificate with the Board of Township Commissioners,
the Township Secretary shall cause 30 days' written notice to be given to
the persons against whose property an assessment has been made. The
notice shall state the amount of the assessment and the time and place of
payment and shall be accompanied by a copy of the certificate. The amount
assessed against the real estate shall be a lien from the time of the filing of
the certificate with the Board of Township Commissioners, and if not paid
within the time designated in the notice, a claim may be filed and collected
by the Township of Ridley in the same manner as municipal claims are filed
and collected.
§ 9-25. Maintenance costs.
§ 9-26. Assessment of penalties.
The Shade Tree Commission may assess penalties for the violation of its
regulations and of this article so far as it relates to shade trees. Any penalty
A. The cost and expenses of caring for such trees after having been
planted and the expense of publishing the notice provided in the
preceding section shall be paid by the Township of Ridley. The needed
amount shall each year be certified by the Shade Tree Commissioners
to the Board of Township Commissioners and shall be drawn against as
required by the Shade Tree Commission, in the same manner as money
appropriated for Township purposes.
B. The Township Commissioners, instead of levying the tax authorized
under the general tax levying powers of the Act of Assembly in such
case made and provided, may provide for the expense of caring for
trees already planted and of publishing the notice required by the
preceding section by appropriations equal to the amount certified to be
required by the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 9-22 RIDLEY CODE § 9-26
9:26
so assessed shall be a lien upon the real estate of the offender and may be
collected as municipal claims are collected.
§ 9-27. Disposition of moneys.
All penalties or assessments imposed under this article shall be paid to
the Township Treasurer, to be placed to the credit of the Shade Tree
Commission, subject to being drawn upon by the Commission for the
purposes of the preceding sections.
§ 9-28. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Shade Tree Commission shall adopt rules and regulations not in conflict
with any law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or ordinance or
resolution of the Township of Ridley.14
§ 9-29. Removal of diseased trees.
Pursuant to Section 3027.1 of the First Class Township Code,15 the Shade
Tree Commission may, with the approval of the Board of Township
Commissioners, upon 30 days' written notice, require the owner of property
to cut and remove trees afflicted with disease which threaten to injure or
destroy shade trees in the Township. Upon failure of any such owner to
comply with such notice, the Township may cause the work to be done by
the Township and levy and collect the costs thereof from the owner of the
property in accordance with the Acts of Assembly in such cases made and
provided.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 290, Trees, for provisions relating to trees, as adopted by the Board
of Commissioners.
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 58027.1.
§ 9-26 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 9-29
9:27

ARTICLE VI
Recreation Board
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 6, Art. VII, of the 1975 Code]
§ 9-30. Board established; membership.
A Recreation Board is hereby established, which Board shall consist of
seven persons, two of the members of which shall be members or
appointees of the Ridley School Board and five members of such Board to
be appointed by the Board of Township Commissioners.
§ 9-31. Terms; vacancies.
The members of the Board shall serve for terms of five years or until their
successors are appointed, except that the members of such Board first
appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the terms of not more than
two members shall expire annually thereafter. All persons so appointed shall
serve their full terms unless they shall voluntarily resign or be removed
by the Board of Township Commissioners for malfeasance or nonfeasance
of duty. Vacancies in such Board occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original
appointments.
§ 9-32. Compensation.
Members of such Board shall serve without pay.
§ 9-33. Powers and duties.
The Recreation Board shall exercise its powers and duties in establishing
standards, qualifications and salary schedules, which shall not become
effective unless first approved by the Board of Township Commissioners.
§ 9-34. Officers and employees.
The Recreation Board shall elect its own Chairman and Secretary and select
all other necessary officers, to serve for a period of one year, and may
employ such persons as may be needed, subject to the approval of the Board
of Township Commissioners.
§ 9-35. Annual report.
It shall be the duty of the Recreation Board to submit an annual report
to the Board of Township Commissioners, including an analysis of the
community recreation areas, facilities and leadership, with particular
reference to the extent and adequacy of the program and its effectiveness
in view of the public expenditure involved and the public needs to be met.
§ 9-30 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 9-35
9:29

ARTICLE VII
Advisory Committee on Cable Television
[Adopted 10-2-1978 by Ord. No. 1465; amended in its entirety
6-18-1986 by Ord. No. 1596]
§ 9-36. Establishment and composition. [Amended 1-27-1993 by
Ord. No. 1699]
It is hereby established an Advisory Committee on Cable Television. The
President of the Board of the Township Commissioners, or in his absence,
the Vice President of the Board, shall appoint five members of the Board to
this Committee pursuant to the procedures established in Chapter 9, Article
III, of the Code of the Township of Ridley and he shall also appoint one
additional member who is recommended by the Ridley School District.
§ 9-37. Functions.
The Committee shall have the following functions:
A. Advise the Township on applications for franchises and on franchise
renewal.
B. Advise the Township on matters which might be grounds for revocation
of the franchise or imposition of a penalty on the company in
accordance with Chapter 99, Cable Television.
C. Resolve disagreements among franchises or between the company and
subscribers or public or private users of the system. Decisions of the
Committee in such cases are appealable to the Township.
D. Advise the Township in respect to rates, to policy relating to the
services provided to subscribers and to the operation and use of public
channels and to the availability of channel time for lease for pay-cable
programs, business users or informational programming.
E. Cooperate with other systems and supervise interconnection of
systems.
F. Audit all company records as required by Chapter 99, Cable Television,
and, at the Committee's discretion, require preparation and filing of
information additional to that required herein.
G. Make an annual report to the Township, including an account of
franchise fees received and distributed, the total number of hours of
utilization of public channels and hourly subtotals for various
programming categories, and a review of any plans submitted during
the year by the company for development of new services.
H. Conduct an evaluation of the system at least every three years, in
consultation with the company and utilizing technical consultants if
necessary, which shall be paid for from fees received by the Township
§ 9-36 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 9-37
9:31
from the company, and pursuant thereto make recommendation to the
Township for amendments to Chapter 99, Cable Television.
I. Set up a procedure to handle major and minor disputes that may arise.
§ 9-37 RIDLEY CODE § 9-37
9:32
ARTICLE VIII
Telecommunications Committee
[Adopted 2-26-1997 by Ord. No. 1761]
§ 9-38. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
COMMITTEE — The Telecommunications Committee of the Township of
Ridley.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT — Any and all towers, antennas,
receivers, transmitters and appurtenant hardware used by the telephone,
cable or other communications industries in carrying or transmitting their
signal, whether wireless or wired.
§ 9-39. Establishment and composition.
In light of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and the rapidly
evolving industry of wireless communications, a committee is hereby
created in the Township of Ridley. The President of the Township Board of
Commissioners, or in his absence, the Vice President of the Board, shall
appoint four members of the Board to the Committee. In addition, one
resident of the Township of Ridley shall be appointed to the Committee. All
appointments to the Committee shall be made pursuant to the procedures
established in Chapter 9, Article III, of the Code of the Township of Ridley.
§ 9-40. Legal advisor.
The Township Solicitor or an attorney appointed by the Board of Township
Commissioners shall serve as legal advisor.
§ 9-41. Functions.
The Committee shall have the following functions:
A. Review the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
B. Review the Township ordinances related to telecommunications
equipment and report any areas of noncompliance with any federal or
state law to the Board of Commissioners.
C. Establish procedures and regulations for applications to locate, erect,
alter or use telecommunications equipment within the Township of
Ridley, to be submitted to the Board for adoption.
D. Accept, review and make recommendations on applications to locate,
erect, alter or use telecommunications equipment within the Township
of Ridley.
E. Advise the Board of Commissioners regarding changes in state, federal
or agency laws and regulations related to telecommunications.
§ 9-38 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 9-41
9:33
F. Advise the Township on matters which might be grounds for revocation
of a permit, license or other permission to locate, erect, alter or use
telecommunications equipment.
G. Review and make recommendations on all other matters related to
telecommunications referred to the Committee by the Board.
§ 9-41 RIDLEY CODE § 9-41
9:34
ARTICLE IX
Board of Appeals
[Adopted 7-28-2004 by Ord. No. 1868]
§ 9-42. Board established; membership.
A Board of Appeals is hereby established pursuant to Section 501(c) of the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code Act [35 P. S. § 7210.501(c)], The
Board of Appeals shall consist of five persons appointed by resolution of
the Board of Township Commissioners. A member of the Board of Appeals
shall be qualified by training and experience to pass on matters pertaining
to building construction. Training and experience may consist of licensure
as an architect or engineer, experience in the construction industry, and
training or experience as an inspector or plan reviewer. Members of the
Board of Appeals shall hold no other office in the Township, including
its Code administrators and members of the Board of Township
Commissioners. The Board of Township Commissioners may fill a position
on the Board of Appeals with a qualified person who resides outside of the
Township of Ridley when it cannot find a person within the Township of
Ridley who satisfies the requirements of this section.
§ 9-43. Terms; vacancies.
The terms of office of the members of the Board of Appeals shall be
five years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member
of the Board of Appeals shall expire each year. The Board of Appeals
shall promptly notify the governing body of any vacancies that occur.
Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the
term. A member of the Board of Appeals holds office at the pleasure of the
Board of Township Commissioners.
§ 9-44. Alternate members; terms.
The Board of Township Commissioners may appoint by resolution at least
one but no more than three persons to serve as alternate members of the
Board of Appeals. The term of office of an alternate member shall be three
years. When seated pursuant to the provisions of § 9-46, an alternate shall
be entitled to participate in all proceedings and discussions of the Board of
Appeals to the same and full extent as provided by law for Board of Appeals
members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member
during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties set forth in
this article and as otherwise provided by law. Any alternate may participate
in any proceeding or discussion of the Board of Appeals but shall not be
entitled to vote as a member of the Board of Appeals nor be compensated
pursuant to § 9-47 unless designated as a voting alternate member pursuant
to § 9-46.
§ 9-42 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 9-45
9:35
§ 9-45. Removal of members.
Any Board of Appeals member may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority
vote of the Board of Township Commissioners, taken after the member has
received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing
shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in
writing.
§ 9-46. Organization of Board.
§ 9-47. Expenditures for services.
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Township
Commissioners, the Board of Appeals may employ or contract for
secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and
clerical services. Members of the Board of Appeals may receive
compensation for the performance of their duties as may be fixed by the
Board of Township Commissioners, but in no case shall it exceed the rate
of compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the Board of
Township Commissioners. Alternate members of the Board of Appeals may
receive compensation as may be fixed by the Board of Township
Commissioners for the performance of their duties when designated as
alternate members pursuant to § 9-46, but in no case shall such
A. The Board of Appeals shall elect from its own membership its officers,
who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For
the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall
be not less than a majority of all the members of the Board of Appeals,
but the Board of Appeals may appoint a hearing officer from its own
membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the parties may
waive further action by the Board of Appeals as provided in § 9-48.
B. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not
reached, the Chairman of the Board of Appeals shall designate as many
alternate members of the Board of Appeals to sit on the Board of
Appeals as may be needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate member
of the Board of Appeals shall continue to serve on the Board of Appeals
in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate
was initially appointed until the Board of Appeals has made a final
determination of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate
pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in
rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
C. The Board of Appeals may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for
its procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws of
the commonwealth. The Board of Appeals shall keep full public records
of its business, which records shall be the property of the Township of
Ridley, and shall submit a report of its activities to the Board of
Township Commissioners as requested by it.
§ 9-45 RIDLEY CODE § 9-47
9:36
compensation exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the
members of the Board of Township Commissioners.
§ 9-48. Meetings; hearings.
A. The Board of Appeals shall schedule meetings and provide public notice
of meetings in accordance with 65 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 701—716 (relating to
Sunshine Act).
B. The Board of Appeals shall conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Building Official, such other persons as the Board of
Township Commissioners shall designate by ordinance and to any
person who has made timely request for the same. Written notices
shall be given at such time and in such manner as shall be
prescribed by ordinance or, in the absence of ordinance provision,
by rules of the Board of Appeals. In addition to the written notice
provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be
conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at a least one
week prior to the hearing.
(2) The Board of Township Commissioners shall, by resolution,
prescribe reasonable fees with respect to hearings before the
Board of Appeals. Fees for said hearings may include compensation
for the Secretary and members of the Board of Appeals, notice and
advertising costs, and necessary administrative overhead
connected with the hearing. The costs, however, shall not include
legal expenses of the Board of Appeals, expenses for engineering,
architectural or other technical consultants or expert witness costs.
(3) The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the
applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time. The postmark date or the date of personal
service will establish the filing date of the appeal and request for
variance or extension of time.
(4) The Board of Appeals shall conduct the hearings or the Board of
Appeals may appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision
or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the
Board of Appeals; however, the appellant or the applicant, as the
case may be, in addition to the Township of Ridley, may, prior to the
decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the Board of
Appeals and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as
final.
(5) The parties to the hearing shall be the Township of Ridley, any
person affected by the application who has made timely
appearance of record before the Board of Appeals, and any other
person permitted to appear by the Board of Appeals. The Board of
§ 9-47 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 9-48
9:37
Appeals shall have the power to require that all persons who wish
to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms
provided by the Board of Appeals for that purpose.
(6) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(7) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial,
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(8) The Board of Appeals or the hearing officer, as the case may be,
shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. The applicant
and the Board of Appeals shall share the appearance fee for a
stenographer equally. The cost of the original transcript shall be
paid by the Board of Appeals if the transcript is ordered by the
Board of Appeals or the hearing officer or shall be paid by the
person appealing from the decision of the Board of Appeals if such
appeal is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies
shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other
cases the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the
cost thereof.
(9) The Board of Appeals shall not communicate, directly or indirectly,
with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue
involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports,
staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from its
solicitor, unless the parties are offered an opportunity to contest
the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party
or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to
be present.
(10) The Board of Appeals or the hearing officer, as the case may be,
shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for,
make written findings on the application within 45 days after the
last hearing before the Board of Appeals or hearing officer. Where
the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon
together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any
provisions of this article or of any ordinance, rule or regulation
shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons
why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts
found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and there
has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the
Board of Appeals shall make his report and recommendations
available to the parties within 45 days and the parties shall be
entitled to make written representations thereon to the Board of
Appeals prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the Board of
§ 9-48 RIDLEY CODE § 9-48
9:38
§ 9-49. Jurisdiction.
§ 9-50. Appeals, variances and extensions of time; Board of Appeals
functions.
Appeals' decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the
report of the hearing officer. Where the Board of Appeals fails to
render the decision within the period required by this subsection,
or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days from the
date of the applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the
applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of
time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant
because of the failure of the Board of Appeals to meet or render
a decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to
render a decision in the same manner as provided in Subsection
B of this section. If the Board of Appeals shall fail to provide such
notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall
prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal
the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(11) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him not later than the day following its date. To all other persons
who have filed their name and address with the Board of Appeals,
not later than the last day of the hearing the Board of Appeals shall
provide by mail or otherwise brief notice of the decision or findings
and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings
may be examined.
A. The Board of Appeals shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) Appeals from the decision of a building code official.
(2) Applications for a variance from the Uniform Construction Code.
(3) Applications for extension of time to comply with the decision of a
building code official.
B. The Board of Appeals does not have jurisdiction and shall not act upon
appeals, requests for variance or requests for extension of time relating
to accessibility.
(1) An owner or owner's agent may file an appeal concerning technical
infeasibility under Chapter 11 (Accessibility) of the Uniform
Construction Code and other accessibility requirements contained
in or referenced by the Uniform Construction Code with the
Accessibility Advisory Board of the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry.
§ 9-48 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 9-50
9:39
A. An appeal or request for variance or extension of time to the Board of
Appeals will automatically suspend an action to enforce an order to
correct until the matter is resolved. An action under the Uniform
Construction Code § 403.84 (relating to unsafe building, structure or
equipment) may not be stayed.
B. The Board of Appeals shall decide an appeal, variance request or
request for extension of time by reviewing documents and written brief
or argument unless the owner or owner's agent requests a hearing.
C. The Board of Appeals shall only consider the following factors when
deciding an appeal of the Building Code Official:
(1) The true intent of the Act or Uniform Construction Code was
incorrectly interpreted.
(2) The provisions of the Act do not apply.
(3) An equivalent form of construction is to be used.
D. The Board of Appeals may consider the following factors when ruling
upon a request for extension of time or the request for variance:
(1) The reasonableness of the Uniform Construction Code's application
in a particular case.
(2) The extent to which the granting of a variance or an extension of
time will pose a violation of the Uniform Construction Code or an
unsafe condition.
(3) The availability of professional or technical personnel needed to
come into compliance.
(4) The availability of materials and equipment needed to come into
compliance.
(5) The efforts being made to come into compliance as quickly as
possible.
(6) Compensatory features that will provide an equivalent degree of
protection to the Uniform Construction Code.
E. The Board of Appeals may:
(1) Deny the request in whole or in part.
(2) Grant the request in whole or in part.
(3) Grant the request upon certain conditions being satisfied.
F. The Board of Appeals shall provide a written notice of its decision to the
owner and to the Building Code Official.
§ 9-50 RIDLEY CODE § 9-50
9:40
Chapter 14
EDUCATIONAL SERVICE AGENCY
§ 14-1. Establishment.
By authority vested in Townships by Act No. 108 of 1979,16 the Township of
Ridley establishes an Educational Service Agency.
§ 14-2. Composition; terms.
The Educational Service Agency shall be composed of three individuals,
each of whom shall be a resident of the Township, at least 18 years of
age, who shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners for three-year,
overlapping terms, coinciding with the calendar year, provided that, in the
case of the three individuals appointed at the time of establishment of the
Educational Service Agency, the term of one shall expire on the first day of
January of the first year after the establishment, the term of one shall expire
on the first day of January of the second year after the establishment and
the term of the third shall expire on the first day of January of the third year
following the establishment.
§ 14-3. Eligibility for membership.
No elected Township or school district official shall be eligible to
appointment to or membership on the Educational Service Agency. A
vacancy shall occur in the Educational Service Agency in the case of any
member who ceases to be a resident of the Township or who otherwise
becomes disqualified for appointment or membership.
§ 14-4. Vacancies.
Vacancies in the Educational Service Agency occurring for any reason shall
be filled by appointment by the Board of Commissioners of a successor to
serve for the remainder of the term of the individual being replaced.
§ 14-5. Compensation.
Members of the Educational Service Agency shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 14-6. Bond may be required.
Each member of the Educational Service Agency may, at the discretion of
the Board of Commissioners, be required to furnish a bond in the amount
and with the surety specified by the Township for the faithful performance
of his duties as a member of the Educational Service Agency.
16.Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 802.1.
§ 9-50 EDUCATIONAL SERVICE AGENCY § 14-7
14:41
§ 14-7. Function.
The function of the Educational Service Agency shall be to employ and
supervise school crossing guards, also referred to as special school police,
to direct traffic at or near schools. In order to enable the Educational
Service Agency to perform that function, the Township delegates to the
Educational Service Agency the authority to appoint and supervise crossing
guards or special school police as set out in the First Class Township Code.
§ 14-8. Duties.
The Educational Service Agency shall have the following authority, and it
shall be its duty to:
A. Prepare annually and, on or before the first day of November of each
year, submit to the Board of Commissioners for approval a budget
showing its contemplated income and its proposed expenditures for the
succeeding year.
B. Annually adopt the budget, as submitted under Subsection A of this
section, as modified by the Township.
C. From time to time employ and/or discharge and fix the compensation of
crossing guards or special school police to serve in the Township.
D. Exercise supervision and control over the crossing guards or special
school police by:
(1) Establishing, administering and enforcing rules and regulations for
the work and conduct of the crossing guards or special school
police.
(2) Establishing work schedules and designating the locations where
and the time when the various individuals are to be on duty.
(3) Establishing position classifications if deemed necessary and
designating the individuals to serve in each classification.
(4) Exercising any and all other perogatives normally associated with
personnel management.
E. From moneys budgeted and available, make all payments. for the
services of crossing guards or special school police and make all other
expenditures as prescribed by law or a superior body or agency or as
otherwise deemed necessary or appropriate.
F. Receive, in addition to payments by the Township, any payments by the
school district or any other gift, grant, devise or bequest.
G. Establish a system of accounts for all moneys under its control and
establish one or more separate bank accounts into which all income
shall be deposited and from which all expenditures shall be made.
§ 14-7 RIDLEY CODE § 14-9
14:42
§ 14-9. Transfer of funds.17
The Township shall transfer and pay over to the Educational, Service
Agency the moneys that the Township is required to pay as compensation
to special school police under the First Class Township Code or other
agreement executed with the school district, as provided in 43 P.S. § 802.1,
as well as other moneys as necessary to cover expenditures budgeted for
the Educational Service Agency as provided in § 14-8 of this chapter.
§ 14-10. Continuation of Agency.
The Educational Service Agency hereby recognized and formally
established shall continue until changed or abolished by action of the
Township or until the suspension of Act No. 108 of 1979 as adopted by the
Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in accord with the terms
thereof.
Chapter 18
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 9.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 37.
§ 18-1. Standards of conduct.
No Township official or employee of the Township of Ridley whose office is
accompanied by a salary or fees shall perform any act that is contrary to the
utmost good faith in all matters pertaining to his duty toward the Township
of Ridley and its property, nor shall any such person do any act or deed
that is in conflict between the best interest of the Township and any other
person.
§ 18-2. Remuneration or gifts.
No Township official or employee shall accept any remuneration or other
valuable thing which could influence the decision or action of the Board of
Commissioners or any of its boards, commissions or committees.
§ 18-3. Plans prepared by the Engineer.
Any plan prepared by the Township Engineer affecting the Township or
property in the Township and paid for by other Township funds shall be
subject to the strictest scrutiny by the Board of Township Commissioners or
by the board, committee or commission to which it is presented, and, where
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 14-9 ETHICS, CODE OF § 18-3
18:43
there is a serious question arising from the appropriateness or efficiency of
the plan, the body to which it is presented is invested with the power, at the
expense of the applicant, to engage a disinterested engineer to review the
same for approval or disapproval of said plan.
§ 18-4. Township Solicitor.
The Township Solicitor shall not represent any person other than the
Township in any matter before the Board of Township Commissioners or
before any of its boards, committees or commissions, but such restriction
shall not be deemed to include the preparation, on behalf of the Township,
of any contract, the cost of which shall be paid by the other party. Where
there is a serious question arising from the appropriateness or legality
of the agreement prepared by the Township Solicitor, the Township
Commissioners, at the expense of the other party, shall have the right to
engage other counsel to pass upon the appropriateness or legality of the
agreement.
§ 18-5. Inspections.
No inspector in the employ of the Township shall inspect his own work, and
any work done by the inspector in the Township shall be inspected by an
independent inspector who shall receive the usual fee for such inspection.
Chapter 22
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
§ 18-3 RIDLEY CODE § 18-5
22:44
ARTICLE I
Fire Police
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 10 of the 1975 Code]
§ 22-1. Appointment.
The Board of Township Commissioners may appoint officers, known as "fire
police," from each fire company within the Township of Ridley, who shall
be residents of the said Township, in the number specified by the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 22-2. Holding of other offices restricted.
No such policeman shall at the same time hold any public office other than
Constable or Health Officer.
§ 22-3. Compensation.
Said policemen shall not be entitled to any compensation whatsoever for
their services performed except as provided under the provisions of the
Act of the General Assembly of June 28, 1935, P.L. 477, Section 1, as
amended by the Act of May 14, 1937, P.L. 632, Section 1,18 which provides
for compensation for any fireman injured in the performance of his duties
and who by reason thereof is temporarily incapacitated from performing his
duties.
§ 22-4. Recommendations for appointment; term.
The President, with the approval of the Fire Chief of each fire company,
shall recommend to the Board of Township Commissioners the names of the
persons to be appointed as fire police, which appointments shall be for a
period of one year beginning from the first Monday of each year and until
their successors are duly appointed and qualified.
§ 22-5. Limitation on actions.
Such policemen shall only act during the progress of a fire in the Township
of Ridley and, in relation to such fire, shall only act while they are upon the
scene or adjacent to and in actual participation in extinguishing, regulating
and controlling any such conflagration.
§ 22-6. Right to arrest violators.
Such policemen may, while on such duty as aforesaid, without warrant and
on view, arrest and commit for hearing any and all persons guilty of a breach
of the peace, riotous or disorderly conduct or who may be engaged in the
commission of any unlawful act tending to imperil the personal security or
endanger the property of the citizens, or violating any of the ordinances
18.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 637.
§ 22-1 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 22-6
22:45
of the Township of Ridley in relation to fires and fire protection, for the
violation of which a fine or penalty is imposed.
§ 22-7. Obeying orders.
Such fire police shall obey the orders of the Captain of Police and such
special orders given by the Fire Chief in charge of such fire.
§ 22-8. Badge.
Said fire police, when on duty, shall wear a badge or shield with the words
"Township of Ridley Fire Police."
§ 22-9. Restrictions.
§ 22-10. Enactment of rules and regulations.
The Board of Commissioners may make such regulations as may be deemed
proper, from time to time, relative to the supervision and control of such
Township fire police, by enacting rules and regulations in relation thereto,
which rules and regulations may be submitted by the Fire Department,
approved by the Police Committee of the Township of Ridley and finally
enacted by resolution of the said Township Commissioners.
A. The fire police may not charge or accept any fee or other compensation
for any services rendered or performed by them of any kind or nature
whatsoever pertaining to their office or duties as fire police, except
public rewards.
B. Such fire police may not participate in any Police Pension Fund of the
Township police of the Township of Ridley,19 nor are they subject to and
under the control of, nor shall the Township of Ridley be bound by, in
relation to said fire police, any civil service act or ordinance in relation
to the Township police.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 41, Pensions and Retirement, for provisions relating to the Police
Pension Fund.
§ 22-6 RIDLEY CODE § 22-10
22:46
ARTICLE II
Fire Marshal
[Adopted 3-7-1979 by Ord. No. 1473]
§ 22-11. Position created; appointment.
Pursuant to the authorization provided in Section 1502, Subsection XVI,
of the First Class Township Code,20 the position of Fire Marshal is hereby
created. The Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the Board of
Commissioners for a term of one year. A nominating committee consisting
of the Public Safety Committee, the Police Captain and the Fire Department
shall submit three names and resumes to the Board of Commissioners.
The Board of Commissioners shall make a selection from among the three
candidates.
§ 22-12. Powers and duties.
The Fire Marshal shall have the following duties, powers and
responsibilities:
A. To act as the administrative head of the Fire Department, although he
shall not have fire-fighting responsibility.
B. To designate, with the approval of the Fire Department, one or more
persons as his authorized assistants to assist in the performance of his
duties. These assistants shall be residents of the Township of Ridley.
C. To prepare, submit and manage the budget for the Fire Department,
which shall be submitted annually to the Board of Commissioners for
review.
D. To coordinate the activities of the fire companies within the Township
and to act as a liaison with other fire companies outside of the
Township.
E. To act together with the coordinator as a liaison with the Board of
Commissioners and to cooperate with the Township Manager in
resolving differences between the Fire Department and other Township
departments.
F. To submit an annual report to the Board of Commissioners and the
Township Manager regarding the Fire Department's activities,
including the making of recommendations for improvements in fire
protection for the Township.
G. To investigate fires which occur within the Township in order to
determine the causation thereof. In the absence of the Fire Marshal, the
responsibility to inspect fires shall be delegated to his assistants or
deputies. The Fire Marshal shall keep records of all inspections and
fires and shall inform the Fire Chiefs of inspections in their areas.
20.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 56516.
§ 22-11 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 22-12
22:47
§ 22-13. Right of entry for inspections.
The Fire Marshal or his assistants may, at all reasonable hours and at
least once yearly, enter any public building or any private building used
for any business, commercial or industrial purpose, or any apartment or
converted home with two or more apartments, for the purpose of making
any inspection or investigation.
§ 22-14. Compensation.
The yearly compensation for the office of Fire Marshal shall be set by the
Board of Commissioners.
§ 22-15. Coordination with fire companies.
H. To inspect buildings, to enforce the Fire Code21 and to conduct
programs in order to educate the public in fire safety.
I. To assist fire-fighting units by surveying buildings and recording their
construction, occupancy, hazards and fire protection systems. He shall
advise the area fire company of this information and shall arrange for
familiarization tours.
J. To consult with the insurance services offices and to convey to the Fire
Department and to the Board of Commissioners the requirements for
fire protection which are acceptable to the insurance rating authorities.
K. To enforce all laws and ordinances relating to the prevention of fires,
the storage and use of explosives and flammables, the installation and
maintenance of private fire alarm systems, the adequacy of exits in case
of fire from all buildings and other places in which people reside, work
or congregate for any purpose.
L. To keep all records of all inspections and fires on file in the Township
Manager's office.
M. To order immediate evacuation of any building if, in his opinion, an
immediate fire hazard exists. Such a building shall be kept closed until
all violations and/or hazardous conditions have been corrected.
A. Each volunteer fire company shall operate under its own bylaws, which
shall be in accordance with generally accepted standards for similar
organizations. This chapter shall not be deemed to restrict the internal
organization of the volunteer fire companies.
B. The Fire Chief and his subordinate officers of each volunteer fire
company shall be in command of their companies at fires. They shall
also, under the direction of the training officer, train, the members of
their companies.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Fire Prevention.
§ 22-12 RIDLEY CODE § 22-15
22:48
§ 22-16. Violations and penalties.
C. The Fire Chiefs and their subordinate officers shall continue to be
responsible for the maintenance, efficiency and conduct of their
respective companies.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate this chapter by failing
to cooperate with the Fire Marshal in the reasonable exercise of his
duties shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment thereof shall be liable to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days. [Amended
11-16-1988 by Ord. No. 163922 ]
B. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
C. The application of the above penalties shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions. The cost for the removal of
such conditions shall be the responsibility attain restitution in the
manner provided by law.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 22-15 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 22-16
22:49
Chapter 37
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 9.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 18.
Pensions and retirement — See Ch. 41.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 50.
§ 22-16 RIDLEY CODE § 22-16
37:50
ARTICLE I
Controller
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 15, Art. I, of the 1975 Code; amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)
§ 37-1. Office created.
There is hereby created in the Township of Ridley the office of Controller,
who shall have all the powers and duties provided by the First Class
Township Code. By adoption of this article, the Board of Commissioners
hereby accepts the provisions of 53 P.S. § 55526 of the First Class Township
Code.
§ 37-2. Salary.
The salary of the Controller shall be as fixed by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 37-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 37-2
37:51

ARTICLE II
Township Manager
[Adopted 4-5-1978 by Ord. No. 1460]
§ 37-3. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to enable the Township to function under
generally accepted principles of the council-manager form of government.
The Board of Commissioners shall he responsible for legislative
policymaking and appointing a professional Township Manager, who shall
be responsible for supervising and conducting the administrative affairs of
the Township in a nonpartisan manner. It is the intent of this article to
delegate to the Township Manager all of the nonlegislative and nonjudicial
powers and duties of the Board of Commissioners as authorized by Section
1502, IV (53 P.S. § 56504), of the First Class Township Code.
§ 37-4. Position created; term.
The position of Township Manager is hereby created. The Manager shall be
appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of all members of the Board
of Commissioners, who fix his compensation.
§ 37-5. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative qualifications, with special reference to his training and/or
experience in municipal management. He need not be a resident of the
Township or the state at the time of his appointment.
§ 37-6. Bond required.
Before entering his duties, the Township Manager shall give a bond to the
Township, with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the Board
of Commissioners, in such sum as it shall from time to time determine, and
conditioned for the faithful performance of the Manager's duties, with the
premium for said bond to be paid by the Township.
§ 37-7. Duties and responsibilities.
The Township Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Township. He shall:
A. Be responsible to the Board of Commissioners for carrying out all
policies and programs established by the Board.
B. Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and
agencies of the Township, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or
by law.
C. Appoint and, when he deems it necessary for the good of the service,
suspend or remove all Township employees and appointed
§ 37-3 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 37-7
37:53
§ 37-8. Compensation.
The Township Manager shall receive such compensation as the Board of
Commissioners decides.
§ 37-9. Removal.
administrative officers on the basis of merit and civil service system
principles, except as otherwise provided by law. This subsection shall
not apply to the Township Solicitor, Township Engineer and Township
Secretary. All appointments and removals shall be subject to the
approval of the Board of Commissioners.
D. Make such recommendations to the Board of Commissioners
concerning policy formulation as he deems desirable.
E. Prepare and submit the annual budget to the Board of Commissioners,
together with such explanatory comment as he may deem desirable,
and administer the approved budget.
F. Keep the Board of Commissioners and the public informed as to the
conduct of Township affairs.
G. See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced.
H. Prepare the agenda and attend all meetings of the Board of
Commissioners, with the right to take part in discussion but not to vote.
I. Negotiate and sign contracts for the municipality, subject to the
approval of the Board of Commissioners.
J. Perform such other duties as are designated by the Board of
Commissioners.
A. Whenever the Manager declines to submit his resignation at the
request of the Board of Commissioners, he may be removed from office
in accordance with the following procedure:
(1) The Board shall adopt a preliminary resolution of removal by a
majority vote of all members. The resolution shall state the specific
reasons for removal and may suspend the Manager from duty. A
copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the Manager.
In any event, the Manager shall be paid forthwith any unpaid
balance of his salary and his salary for the next three calendar
months following adoption of the resolution.
(2) Within 15 days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the
Manager, he may file with the Board a written request for a public
hearing. This hearing shall be held at a meeting of the Board not
earlier than 20 days nor later than 30 days after the request is filed.
(3) The Board may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be
made effective immediately, by a majority vote of all members at
§ 37-7 RIDLEY CODE § 37-9
37:54
§ 37-10. Acting Manager.
The Manager may designate a qualified Township employee to act as
Manager and to exercise the duties of Manager during his temporary
absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the Board of
Commissioners may remove such designation at any time and appoint
another person as Acting Manager to serve until the Manager shall return
or his disability shall cease.
any time after 15 days from the time when the preliminary
resolution was delivered to the Manager if he has not requested a
public hearing or at any time after the public hearing.
B. Whenever the Manager declines to submit his resignation following his
conviction of any felony or misdemeanor the Board of Commissioners
may remove the Manager from office by a simple motion adopted at any
public meeting.
§ 37-9 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 37-10
37:55
Chapter 41
PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 50.
§ 37-10 RIDLEY CODE § 37-10
37:56
ARTICLE I
Firemen's Relief Association
[Adopted 3-19-1995 as Ch. 17, Art. II, of the 1975 Code23]
§ 41-1. Recognition of organization.
The Ridley Township Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association of the Township
of Ridley, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, is hereby officially recognized by
the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Ridley, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, as an organization formed for the purpose of maintaining an
association for the beneficial and protective purposes to its members and
their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or permanent disability
or accident.
§ 41-2. Designation of Association as receiver of funds.
The aforesaid Ridley Township Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association of the
Township of Ridley is hereby designated by the Board of Commissioners
of the Township of Ridley as the proper association to receive such funds
as are due and payable to the Township treasury by the Treasurer of the
State of Pennsylvania from the two-percent tax on premiums from foreign
fire insurance companies.
§ 41-3. Appropriation of funds.
There is hereby annually appropriated from the Township treasury all such
sums of money that may hereafter be paid into the aforesaid Township
treasury by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes
paid on premiums by foreign fire insurance companies pursuant to an Act of
Assembly in such case made and provided.
23.Editor's Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 1717, adopted 12-29-1993, provided for the
renumbering of this article but made no changes to the text.
§ 41-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 41-3
37:57

ARTICLE II
Police Pension Fund
[Adopted 12-29-1993 by Ord. No. 1715; amended in its entirety
2-23-2005 by Ord. No. 187524]
§ 41-4. through § 41-24. (Reserved)
24.Editor's Note: The revised Police Pension Plan, adopted 2-23-2005 by Ord. No. 1875, as
amended, is on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Township
Manager.
§ 41-4 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 41-4
37:59

ARTICLE III
Municipal Retirement System
[Adopted 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 1999]
§ 41-25. Change of plan.
Ridley Township (the "Township"), being a member municipality of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (the "System"), hereby elects
to amend its Municipal Pension Plan administered by the System in
accordance with Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law,
53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq. ("Retirement Law"), and does hereby agree to be
bound by all the requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and
the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S.
§ 895.101 et seq., and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise,
placed upon member municipalities.
§ 41-26. Administration of benefits.
As part of this article, the Township agrees that the System shall administer
and provide the benefits set forth in the amended Municipal Pension Plan
Contract entered into between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Board and the Township effective February 1, 2013 (the "contract").
§ 41-27. Acceptance of contract and financial obligations.
The passage and adoption of this article by the Township is an official
acceptance of the contract and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of the contract.
§ 41-28. Payments.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the contract shall be made by the Township in accordance with the
Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act. The Township hereby assumes all liability for any
unfundedness created due to the benefit structure set forth in the contract.
§ 41-29. Complete authorization; repealer.
The Township intends this article to be the complete authorization of the
contract, and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance
Number 1921 either immediately or on February 1, 2013, which is the
effective date of the contract, whichever is later.
§ 41-30. Filing of copy.
A duly certified copy of this article and an executed contract shall be filed
with the System.
§ 41-31. (Reserved)
§ 41-25 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 41-31
37:61

ARTICLE IV
Township Manager Supplemental Retirement Plan
[Current provisions regarding the Township Manager Supplemental
Retirement Plan are on file in the Township offices.]
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 41-31
37:63

ARTICLE V
Employees Supplemental Plan
[Current provisions regarding the Employees Supplemental Plan
are on file in the Township offices.]
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 41-31
37:65

ARTICLE VI
Voluntary Deferred Compensation Plan
[Current provisions regarding the Voluntary Deferred
Compensation Plan are on file in the Township offices.]
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 41-31
37:67
Chapter 45
POLICE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
Chapter 46
PROCUREMENT
§ 41-31 RIDLEY CODE § 41-31
45:68
ARTICLE I
Contract Eligibility Standards
[Adopted 9-24-2008 by Ord. No. 194325]
§ 46-1. Purpose.
§ 46-2. Responsible contractor requirements.
A. The Township of Ridley recognizes that there is a need to ensure that all
work on public construction and maintenance contracts is performed by
responsible, qualified firms that maintain the capacity, expertise,
personnel and other qualifications and resources necessary to
successfully perform such contracts in a timely, reliable and costeffective
manner.
B. To effectuate the purpose of selecting responsible contractors for public
contracts and to protect the Township of Ridley's investments in such
contracts, prospective contractors and subcontractors should be
required to meet preestablished, clearly defined, minimum standards
relating to contractor responsibility. Such standards include
requirements and criteria concerning technical qualifications,
competency, experience, adequacy of resources, including equipment,
financial and personnel, and satisfactory records regarding past project
performance, safety, law compliance and business integrity.
C. Further, due to the critical impact that skilled construction craft labor
has on public works projects, and due to the limited availability of
skilled construction craft labor and imminent craft labor skill shortages,
it is necessary to require contractors and subcontractors to participate
in established, bona fide apprenticeship training programs for the
purpose of both promoting successful project delivery and ensuring
future workforce development. The Township of Ridley also recognizes
that it is beneficial to the local community to ensure that firms receiving
public contracts provide adequate wages and benefits to their
employees and utilize fair business, employment and training practices
that have a positive impact on local communities affected by such
contracts.
D. Therefore, the Township of Ridley shall require compliance with the
provisions of this article by business entities seeking to provide services
to the Township of Ridley as specified herein. The requirements of this
article are intended to supplement, not replace, existing contractor
qualification and performance standards or criteria currently required
by law, public policy or contracting documents. However, in the event
that any of the provisions of this article conflict with any law, public
policy or contracting documents of the Township of Ridley, this act shall
prevail.
25.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that its requirements would not apply to contracts
executed prior to its effective date, except that the exercise of an option on a contract
covered by this ordinance shall be deemed to create a new contract.
§ 46-1 POLICE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 46-2
45:69
§ 46-3. Contractor responsiblity certifications.
A. All contractors and subcontractors of any tier that perform work valued
at over $50,000 on any public facility or public works project, including
construction, alteration, renovation, repair, and maintenance work,
shall meet the requirements of this article.
B. All firms engaged in contracts covered by this article shall be qualified,
responsible contractors or subcontractors that have sufficient
capabilities in all respects to successfully perform contracts on which
they are engaged, including the necessary experience, equipment,
technical skills and qualifications and organizational, financial and
personnel resources. Qualified, responsible firms shall also have a
satisfactory past performance record of law compliance, integrity and
business ethics.
A. As a condition of performing work on a public works contract subject to
this article, a general contractor, construction manager or other lead or
prime contractor seeking award of a contract shall submit a contractor
responsibility certification at the time it submits its bid for a contract.
B. The contractor responsibility certification shall be completed on a form
provided by the Township Administration office and shall reference the
project for which a bid is being submitted by name and contract or
project number.
C. In the contractor responsibility certification the construction manager,
general contractor or other lead or prime contractor shall confirm the
following facts regarding its past performance and work history and its
current qualifications and performance capabilities:
(1) The firm has or will obtain all valid, effective licenses, registrations,
or certificates required by federal, state, county, or local law,
including, but not limited to, licenses, registrations or certificates
required to:
(a) Do business in the designated locale; and
(b) Perform the contract work it seeks to perform, including but
not limited to, licenses, registrations or certificates for any
type of trade work which the firm proposes to self-perform.
(2) The firm meets the bonding requirements for the contract, required
by applicable law or contract specifications, and any insurance
requirements, as required by applicable law or contract
specifications, including general liability insurance, workers'
compensation insurance and unemployment insurance
requirements.
(3) The firm has not been debarred on any project by a federal, state or
local government agency or authority in the past three years.
§ 46-2 RIDLEY CODE § 46-3
45:70
(4) The firm has not defaulted on any project in the past three years.
(5) The firm has not had any type of business, contracting or trade
license, registration or other certification suspended or revoked in
the past three years.
(6) The firm has not committed a willful violation of federal or state
safety laws as determined by a final decision of a court or
government agency in the past three years.
(7) The firm and its owners have not been convicted of any crime
relating to the contracting business by a final decision of a court or
government agency for the past 10 years.
(8) The firm has not within the past three years been found by a final
decision of a court or government agency in violation of any law
applicable to its contracting business, including, but not limited to,
licensing laws, tax laws, prompt payment laws, wage and hour
laws, prevailing wage laws, environmental laws or others, where
the result of such violation was the imposition of a fine, back pay
damages or any other type of penalty in the amount of $10,000 or
more.
(9) The firm will pay all craft employees that it employs on the project
the current wage rates and benefits as required under applicable
state or federal law for the duration of the referenced project.
(10) The firm participates in a Class A Apprenticeship Program directly
related to each and every separate trade or classification in which
it employs craft employees and shall continue to participate in such
program or programs for the duration of the project. [Amended
2-24-2010 by Ord. No. 1968]
(a) For the purposes of this section, a "Class A Apprenticeship
Program" is an apprenticeship program that is currently
registered with and approved by the U.S. Department of Labor
or a state apprenticeship agency and has graduated
apprentices to journeyperson status for three of the past five
years.
(b) If a firm is identified as the lowest responsible bidder or
otherwise selected as the prospective awardee, it shall provide
appropriate documentation as determined by the Township
Administration office, to verify it meets the requirements of
this section for each and every trade or classification of craft
workers it will employ on the project. ("Craft" shall mean
special skills and trades which are recognized as such by
custom and usage in the building and construction industry).
This verification shall be provided prior to performance of
work by the firm. [Amended 2-24-2010 by Ord. No. 1968]
§ 46-3 POLICE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 46-3
45:71
§ 46-4. Subcontractor lists; subcontractor responsibility
certifications.
(11) The firm has all other technical qualifications, and resources,
including equipment, personnel and financial resources, to perform
the referenced contract, or will obtain same through the use of
qualified, responsible contractors.
D. Execution of the contractor responsibility certification required by this
article shall not establish a presumption of contractor responsibility,
and the Township Administration office may require any other
additional information it deems necessary to evaluate a prospective
contractor's technical qualifications, financial capacity or other
resources and performance capabilities. The Township Administration
office may require that such information be included in a separate
statement of qualifications and experience or as an attachment to the
contractor responsibility certification.
E. If the submitting firm has ever operated under another name or
controls or is controlled by another company or business entity or in the
past five years controlled or was controlled by another company or
business entity, whether as a parent company, subsidiary or in any other
business relation, it shall attach a separate statement to its contractor
responsibility certification that explains in detail the nature of any such
relationship. Additional information may be required from such an
entity if the relationship in question could potentially impact contract
performance.
F. A contractor responsibility certification shall be executed by a person
who has sufficient knowledge to address all matters in the certification
and shall include an attestation stating, under the penalty of perjury,
that all information submitted is true, complete and accurate.
G. If a firm fails to provide a contractor responsibility certification
required by this section, it may be disqualified from bidding. No action
of any nature shall lie against the Township of Ridley because of its
refusal to accept a bid for failing to provide information required by this
section.
A. At the same time that the bid is submitted, a contractor shall submit to
the Township a subcontractor list containing the names of
subcontractors that will be used for the referenced project, their
addresses and a description of the work each listed subcontractor will
perform on the project.
B. At the time a contractor submits the subcontractor list it shall also
submit subcontractor responsibility certifications for all listed
subcontractors to the Township. Subcontractor responsibility
certifications shall be executed by the respective subcontractors and
contain the same information and representations required in
contractor responsibility certifications.
§ 46-3 RIDLEY CODE § 46-4
45:72
§ 46-5. Subcontractor responsibility review requirements.
§ 46-6. Public review process.
C. Subcontractor responsibility certifications shall be executed by persons
having sufficient knowledge to address all matters in the certification
and shall include an attestation stating, under the penalty of perjury,
that all information submitted is true, complete and accurate.
A. A construction manager, general contractor or other lead or prime
contractor shall not be permitted to use a subcontractor on any work
performed for the Township of Ridley unless it has identified the
subcontractor on its subcontractor list and provided a subcontractor
responsibility certification in accordance with the requirements of
§ 46-4 of this article.
B. A subcontractor listed on a firm's subcontractor list shall not be
substituted unless written authorization is obtained from the Township
and a subcontractor responsibility certification is provided for the
substitute subcontractor.
C. In the event that the Township determines that a prospective
subcontractor listed by the apparent low bidder does not meet the
responsibility standards of this section, it may, after informing the
prospective awardee, exercise one of the following options:
(1) Permit the awardee to substitute a qualified, responsible
subcontractor in accordance with the requirements of this section;
(2) Require the awardee to self-perform the work in question if the firm
has the required experience, licenses and other qualifications to
perform the work in question; or
(3) Disqualify the prospective awardee.
D. In the event that a subcontractor is disqualified under this article, the
general contractor, construction manager or other lead or prime
contractor shall not be permitted to make any type of contractual claim
against the Township and the Township of Ridley on the basis of a
subcontractor disqualification.
A. The contractor responsibility certification for a firm identified as the
apparent low bidder, subcontractor lists and subcontractor
responsibility certifications shall be made available to the public
through the current public information procedure, which period shall
begin the day after the bids are opened.
B. During the Public Review Period, any person or organization may
protest a contractor or subcontractor for failing to meet applicable
requirements of this article or on any other relevant grounds by
submitting a written objection with supporting evidence to the
Township.
§ 46-4 POLICE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 46-6
45:73
C. If the Township determines that the contractor or subcontractor
responsibility certification contains false or misleading material
information that was provided knowingly or with reckless disregard for
the truth or omits material information that was omitted knowingly or
with reckless disregard of the truth, the firm for which the certification
was submitted may be prohibited from performing work for the
Township of Ridley for a period of up to three years. Such firms may
also be subject to any other penalties or sanctions, including contract
termination, available to the Township of Ridley under law. A contract
terminated under these circumstances shall further entitle the
Township of Ridley to withhold payment of any monies due to the firm
as damages.
D. A procurement contract subject to this article shall not be executed
until all requirements of this article have been fulfilled and until
contractor and subcontractor responsibility certifications and
subcontractor lists have been made available for public inspection for
at least five calendar days.
E. The applicability of this article to any contract shall be determined by
the Township and such applicability may be waived in the event of
emergency or in such other event when, in the opinion of the Township
with the approval of the Board of Commissioners, it is determined that
such action would be in the best interest of the Township of Ridley.
§ 46-6 RIDLEY CODE § 46-6
45:74
Chapter 50
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 37. Pensions and retirement — See Ch. 41.
§ 46-6 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 46-6
50:75

ARTICLE I
Commissioners
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 21, Art. II, of the 1975 Code]
§ 50-1. Future compensation.26
Beginning on the first day of January 1976, the compensation of all
Township Commissioners of the Township of Ridley elected or appointed
after the adoption of this section shall be the maximum amount permitted
as the General Assembly may from time to time determine, except as
restricted by the provisions of Section 603 of the First Class Township
Code,27 which provides that no Township shall increase or diminish the
salary, compensation or emoluments of any elected official after he is
elected.
26.Editor's Note: Former § 21-3, Compensation of Township Commissioners, which
immediately preceded this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
27.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55603.
§ 50-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 50-1
50:77

ARTICLE II
Treasurer
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 21, Art. III, of the 1975 Code]
§ 50-2. Compensation of Treasurer. [Amended 2-9-1993 by Ord. No.
1700; 2-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1882]
The Treasurer of the Township of Ridley shall receive for his duties as
Treasurer and Tax Collector for the Township of Ridley the sum of $10,000
per annum for all moneys received by him or collected by him for the
Township of Ridley.
§ 50-3. Extra expenses.
The Treasurer of the Township of Ridley, as Collector of Township Taxes,
shall be further allowed such actual printing and postage expenses as shall
be incurred in the performance of the duties prescribed, as provided by the
Act of Assembly in such case made and provided.
§ 50-2 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 50-3
50:79

ARTICLE III
Officers and Employees
[Current provisions regarding the salaries and compensation of
other Township officers, officials and employees are on file in the
Township Offices.]
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 50-3
50:81
Chapter 53
SMOKING
§ 53-1. Restrictions in Municipal Building.
§ 53-2. Employee smoking policies.
§ 53-3. Posting of policy.
A copy of this chapter shall be posted in the Ridley Township Municipal
Building.
§ 53-4. Enforcement agent.
The Code Enforcement Office of the Township of Ridley will enforce this
chapter and assist in the implementation of this nonsmoking policy.
§ 53-5. Violation and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to a fine or penalty not exceeding $300 for each
offense. Such fines or penalties shall be collected as like fines or penalties
are now by law collected.
A. Smoking is prohibited in the Ridley Township Municipal Building at all
times by any building occupants, including employees, lessees and/or
visitors.
B. No persons shall carry a lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe or other
smoking material while inside the Ridley Township Municipal Building.
A. Employees who work at the Ridley Township Municipal Building are
allowed to smoke on Township business while outside of said building.
B. Employees will be allowed a cigarette break outside of the building as
conditions permit. Department heads will reasonably accommodate the
needs of smoking employees in this regard.
C. Township employees are allowed to smoke in Township vehicles as long
as no nonsmoking passengers are present.
D. The Township will not discriminate in favor of either smokers or
nonsmokers in any personnel action. Hiring practices will not be
affected except that applicants will be advised of this chapter.
§ 50-3 RIDLEY CODE § 53-5
53:82
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 62
ADULT USES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning regulation of adult
entertainment — See Ch. 325, Art. XVIII.
§ 62-1. Legislative finding; purpose. [Amended 3-20-1985 by Ord.
No. 1584]
The Board of Commissioners find that the commercial exploitation of
explicit sexual conduct through the sale, rental and showing of obscene
films, videotapes, videodiscs, records, magazines, books, pamphlets,
photographs, drawings and devices and the use of massage parlors and
model studios for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution
constitutes a debasement and distortion of a sensitive and key relationship
of human existence, central to family life, community welfare and the
development of human personality, is indecent and offensive to the senses
and to public morals and interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life
and property, in that such interferes with the interest of the public in the
quality of life and community environment, the tone of commerce in the
Township, property values and public safety, and the continued operation
of such facilities in a commercial manner is detrimental to the health,
safety, convenience, good morals and general welfare of the Township of
Ridley and of the residents, citizens, inhabitants and businesses thereof.
Accordingly, the Board of Commissioners hereby declares such activities
to be illegal as hereinafter set forth and, further, that such activities are
hereby declared to be and constitute a public nuisance.
§ 62-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
COMMUNITY STANDARDS — The standards of the community from which
the jury is drawn or would be drawn if it were the trier of the fact.
KNOWINGLY — Having knowledge of the character and content of the
material involved or failure on notice to exercise reasonable inspection
which would disclose the content and character of the same.
OBSCENE — That which is determined as obscene, applying the following
guidelines:
Whether the average person applying contemporary community
standards would find that the subject matter taken as a whole appeals
to the prurient interest.
A.
§ 53-5 ADULT USES § 62-2
62:83
PATENTLY OFFENSIVE — So offensive on its face as to affront current
standards of decency, and shall be deemed to include any of the following
described forms of sexual conduct, if they are depicted so as to affront
current standards of decency:
PERSON — A natural person, partnership or corporation. Whenever used
in a clause describing or imposing a fine or term of imprisonment, or both,
the term "person" as applied to partnership shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporation shall mean the officers
thereof.
§ 62-3. Prohibited conduct.
Whether the subject matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive
way sexual conduct of a type hereinafter described.
B.
Whether the subject matter taken as a whole lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
C.
An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
real or animated, including genital-genital, anal-genital or oral-genital
intercourse, whether between human beings or between a human being
and an animal.
A.
Sadomasochistic abuse meaning flagellation or torture or sexual
gratification by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments
or in a revealing costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or
otherwise physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed.
B.
Masturbation, excretory functions and lewd exhibition of the genitals,
including any explicit close-up representation of a human genital organ
or spread-eagle exposure of female genital organs.
C.
Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or
naked pubic area or buttocks of a human male or female, or the breasts
of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or
opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent
sexual stimulation or gratification.
D.
A device designed and marketed as useful primarily for stimulation of
the human genital organs.
E.
F. Male or female genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
Fellatio, cunnilingus, anal sodomy, seminal ejaculation or any excretory
function.
G.
A. In general. [Amended 3-20-1985 by Ord. No. 1584]
(1) No person shall knowingly sell, rent, distribute, exhibit, transmit,
show or offer to sell, rent, distribute, exhibit, show or transmit or
have in his possession or under his control with the intent to sell,
rent, distribute, exhibit, transmit or show to another person in a
§ 62-2 RIDLEY CODE § 62-3
62:84
commercial setting any obscene film, videotape, videodisc,
phonograph record, magazine, book or pamphlet, photograph,
drawing or device.
(2) No person shall knowingly participate in, support or in any way aid
or assist in the selling, renting, distributing or showing of any
obscene motion-picture film, videotape, videodisc, phonograph
record, magazine, book, pamphlet, photograph, drawing or device.
(3) No person shall knowingly design, copy, draw, photograph, print,
utter, publish, manufacture or prepare any obscene motion-picture
film, videotape, videodisc, phonograph record, magazine, book,
pamphlet, photograph, drawing or device.
(4) No person shall knowingly produce, present or direct any obscene
performance or participate in the portion thereof which is obscene.
(5) No person, being the owner of any premises or having control
thereof, shall knowingly permit within or upon said premises the
exhibition or showing of any motion-picture film, videotape,
videodisc, show, presentation or performance of an obscene nature
or permit anyone to sell, rent, distribute, exhibit or show any
obscene motion-picture film, videotape, videodisc, phonograph
record, magazine, book, pamphlet, photograph, drawing or device.
(6) No person shall knowingly write, print, publish or utter or cause to
be uttered, printed or published any advertisement or notice of any
kind giving information, directly or indirectly, stating or purporting
to state where, how or whom or by what means any obscene
motion-picture film, videotape, videodisc, phonograph record,
magazine, book, pamphlet, photograph, drawing or device or thing
of an obscene nature can be seen, purchased, rented, obtained or
had.
B. Minors. [Amended 3-20-1985 by Ord. No. 1584]
(1) No person within the Township of Ridley shall display at newstands
or any other business establishment frequented by minors under
the age of 18 years or where said minors are or may be invited as
part of the general public or where they may view same any
material depicting the acts specified in § 62-2, definition of
"patently offensive," Subsections A through G, inclusive, of male or
female buttocks or genitals or the female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola.
(2) In addition to any other violations or penalties prescribed herein,
any person in the Township of Ridley who has in his possession or
under his control with intent to sell, rent distribute, exhibit, show
or transmit to another any obscene motion-picture film, videotape,
videodisc, phonograph record, magazine, book, pamphlet,
photograph, drawing or device depicting children under the age of
17 years participating, performing or observing any of the acts
§ 62-3 ADULT USES § 62-3
62:85
§ 62-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord. No.
1639; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
In addition to any other penalties specifically provided, any person violating
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction before a District Justice,
be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a
period not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 66
ALARMS AND ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defective fire alarms — See Ch. 135, Art. III.
Noise — See Ch. 190.
Police services — See Ch. 220.
§ 66-1. Permit required.
No private burglar alarm system shall be attached or maintained in the
Township of Ridley Municipal Building, Department of Police, without a
permit therefor issued by the Township Secretary.
§ 66-2. Issuance of permit.
Said permit shall be issued by the Township Secretary upon written
application.
defined in § 62-2, definition of "patently offensive," shall, upon
conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not
to exceed 30 days, in addition to any other penalties that may be
imposed. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1639; 10-25-2000
by Ord. No. 1808]
(3) Any obscene literature, films, tapes, discs, photographs,
magazines, books, pamphlets or drawings depicting prepubescent
children showing underdeveloped genitalia or breasts shall be a
per se violation of the provisions of Subsection B(2) without proof
of age being necessary.28
28.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Massage parlors and model studios, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-28-2002 by Ord. No. 1830. See now
Chapter 180, Massage and Massage Establishments.
§ 62-3 RIDLEY CODE § 66-3
66:86
§ 66-3. Fee. [Amended 6-18-1984 by Ord. No. 1570]
The fee for the permit to connect an approved burglar alarm system to the
Ridley Township Emergency Communication Center shall be the prevailing
fee set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Each
application for a permit shall be accompanied by a certified check payable
to the Township of Ridley in a sum equal to the prevailing fee.
§ 66-4. Expiration and renewal. [Amended 6-18-1984 by Ord. No.
1570]
Said permit shall be valid for a period of one year and may be renewed for
a like period upon payment of the prevailing annual fee.
§ 66-5. Disconnection for nonpayment.
Any such burglar alarm system for which a permit fee has not been paid for
a period of 30 days after the fee is due and payable will be disconnected
without any further notice to the installer.
§ 66-6. Definitions. [Added 5-18-1983 by Ord. No. 1551]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any horn or device that emits a warning signal audible
outside of the building to which it is attached and in which it is designed to
attract attention to a burglary or similar emergency.
DIGITAL DIALER CONNECTIONS — Monitoring systems which respond
to normal telephone line communications generated by digital telephone
dialers. The digital telephone dialer is a device which automatically dials a
predetermined telephone number upon activation of an alarm system. This
telephone number accesses, via the telephone company system, a receiving
device located in the Ridley Township Police Department Emergency
Communication Center, which receiving device communicates a two-way
electronically coded tone transmission to acknowledge receipt of the ring
signal, receives a tone-coded alarm number and finally emits a tone-coded
signal (sometimes referred to as a "handshake signal") to acknowledge
successful reception of the alarm code number.[Added 6-18-1984 by Ord.
No. 1570]
DIRECT ALARM CONNECTIONS — Monitoring systems which respond to
a change in current flow over supervised leased lines. "Supervision" is
defined as, at a minimum, a four-milli-amp direct current signal transmitted
from the alarm-generating device to the appropriate equipment in the
Ridley Township Police Department Emergency Communications Center.
"Leased line" is defined as a pair of conductors provided by the telephone
company. The response to a direct alarm connection is an audible and
visual indication of either an alarm transmission indicated by a polarity
reversal of the supervisory signal or a trouble signal indicated by loss of the
supervisory signal.[Added 6-18-1984 by Ord. No. 1570]
§ 66-3 ALARMS AND ALARM SYSTEMS § 66-6
66:87
FALSE ALARM — A spurious signal; one which is not the result of a fire,
burglary or similar emergency.
INTRUSION ALARM — A direct connection to the Police Department or fire
company which automatically activates a visual or audible signal intended
to indicate an intrusion, fire or other emergency.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
TELEPHONE ALARM — An automatically activated alarm transmitted by
telephone, directly or indirectly, to the Police Department or fire company,
which is intended to indicate an intrusion, fire or other emergency.
VOICE DIALER CONNECTIONS — Monitoring systems which, upon
activation of an alarm system, automatically dial a predetermined telephone
number and communicate a tape-recorded voice message to the recipients
of the telephone call.[Added 6-18-1984 by Ord. No. 1570]
§ 66-7. Disengaging of audible alarms. [Added 5-18-1983 by Ord.
No. 1551]
Audible alarms must be equipped with a timing mechanism which
disengages the audible alarm after 15 minutes.
§ 66-8. Malfunctions and repairs. [Added 5-18-1983 by Ord. No.
1551]
If an alarm system or installation malfunctions or is determined to be faulty,
the person whose premises are protected thereby shall be responsible for
making necessary repairs within 48 hours.
§ 66-9. False alarms. [Added 5-18-1983 by Ord. No. 1551]
It shall be a violation of this chapter to cause a false alarm. The police
officer or officers who respond to an alarm which is determined to be a false
alarm shall promptly issue a false alarm violation citation to the person in
whose name the alarm is registered.
§ 66-10. Voice dialer connections prohibited. [Added 6-18-1984 by
Ord. No. 1570]
On or after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person to communicate with the Ridley Township Emergency
Communication System by means of a voice dialer connection. Such
communication with the Ridley Township Emergency Communication
System shall only be by means of a direct alarm connection or a digital
dialer connection. Furthermore, no permit for the connection of a private
burglar alarm system will be issued or reissued unless the system used is a
direct alarm connection type system.
§ 66-6 RIDLEY CODE § 66-11
66:88
§ 66-11. Required technology. [Added 6-18-1984 by Ord. No. 1570]
All burglar alarm systems connected to the Ridley Township Police
Department Emergency Communication Center shall use such
communications technology as in the judgment of the Captain of Police
or his designee is necessary to ensure sufficient and adequate alarm
monitoring by the Police Emergency Communication Center.
§ 66-12. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-18-1983 by Ord. No.
1551; amended 11-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1639]
Chapter 69
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 113.
Drugs and drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 117.
Loitering and curfew — See Ch. 176.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 205.
A. Other than the first false alarm in any calendar year, whoever violates
or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not more than $100 for the second offense, $300 for the third
offense, $600 for the fourth offense and $1,000 for the fifth or
subsequent offense and cost of prosecution. In default of payment of the
fine and cost, the violator shall be imprisoned for not more than 30
days. Each and every day in which a violator or noncompliance occurs
or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Any person violating any other provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof by a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each offense.
§ 66-11 ALARMS AND ALARM SYSTEMS § 66-12
66:89

ARTICLE I
Consumption in Public
[Adopted 1-28-1981 by Ord. No. 1505]
§ 69-1. Intent; determination.
It is the intent of the Board of Commissioners to promote the general health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Township, and it is determined
that the uncontrolled consumption of alcoholic beverages in public is
detrimental to health and safety.
§ 69-2. Consumption in public prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume, whether inside or outside
of a motor vehicle, in or upon public ways, parks, places or property within
the Township any alcoholic beverage or to possess an open container of an
alcoholic beverage.
§ 69-3. Possession of open container evidence of consumption.
The possession of an open container containing alcoholic beverages in and
upon the public ways, parks, places or property of the Township shall be
prima facie evidence of consumption of such beverages in violation of this
article.
§ 69-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes all property owned by the Township.
PUBLIC WAY OR PLACE — Every way or place open to the use of the
public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian travel,
including sidewalks, streets, highways, buildings other than those public
buildings with a liquor license, parking lots, parks or recreation areas.
§ 69-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord. No.
163929]
Any person found guilty, after hearing before a District Justice, of violating
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment of said fine and costs, shall be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 69-1 ALARMS AND ALARM SYSTEMS § 69-5
66:91
Chapter 73
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement tax — See Ch. 275, Art. II.
§ 73-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CEO — Code Enforcement Officer.
JUKEBOXES — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which,
upon insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice
or other opening or by the payment of any price, operates or may be
operated for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine,
contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate,
disc or key into any slot, crevice or other opening or by the payment of any
price, may be operated or used as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score and whether or not a prize is offered. It
shall include but shall not be limited to such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, mechanical bowling
machines, photoelectric shooting or target machines, electronic video
games, air-hockey tables, football games and all games, operations or
transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be designated
or described. It shall not include devices or machines which dispense
merchandise such as candy, cigarettes, etc.
OPERATOR — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association
displaying or maintaining for use and operation, any jukebox, mechanical
amusement device or pool table or otherwise permitting the use or
operation of such devices for a fee or charge.
PERSON — Every natural person, copartnership, association or
corporation, and whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a
penalty, the term, as applied to copartnership or associations, shall mean
the partners or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation, the
officers thereof.
POOL TABLE — Any table with cushions and/or pockets upon which games
of pool and/or billiards in any form are played upon payment of a price,
whether or not operated by the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc
or key into any slot, crevice or other opening.
§ 69-5 RIDLEY CODE § 73-2
73:92
§ 73-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any operator to display or keep or maintain for use
and operation or otherwise permit the use and operation of any jukebox,
mechanical amusement device, pool table or other similar machine without
first having registered with and obtained a license from the CEO as
prescribed herein.
§ 73-3. Application requirements; issuance of license. [Amended
2-20-1985 by Ord. No. 1579]
§ 73-4. Fees. [Amended 2-20-1985 by Ord. No. 1579]
A. Every operator desiring to register with and obtain a license or licenses
as required herein shall apply to the CEO. Application forms may be
secured from the Code Enforcement Department and shall set forth the
following information:
(1) The name and business address of the operator.
(2) The business name and premises address to be licensed.
(3) The amount of jukeboxes, amusement devices and pool tables for
which the application is being made.
(4) A plan of the premises showing the location or locations where the
jukebox, amusement device or pool table is to be displayed or
maintained, as well as the location or locations of the supervision of
the establishment. No device may be located within 10 feet of any
doorway.
(5) Such other information as the CEO may deem necessary for the
proper administration and enforcement of this chapter.
B. Upon approval of the application, the CEO shall issue a license for the
premises where a jukebox, amusement device or pool table is to be
displayed or maintained.
A. Registration and license fees shall be paid by the operator to the CEO at
the time the application is filed. Such fees shall be as as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for each jukebox; for
each mechanical or electronic amusement device; and for each pool
table.30
B. No deductions or refunds of any fee shall be granted in case of a fee
payable for less than a full calendar year or in the case of any device
destroyed, stolen, sold or otherwise disposed of or transferred after
payment of the fee.
C. In the case of the loss, defacement or destruction of any original
license, the operator to whom such license was issued shall apply to the
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 73-2 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 73-4
73:93
§ 73-5. General regulations; suspension of license.
§ 73-6. Expiration and renewal of licenses.
Licenses issued under this chapter expire on December 31 of each year.
Applications for renewal, accompanied by the required annual fee, shall
be submitted in the month of December and may consist of a signed
verification of the original application contents so long as there have been
no changes.
CEO, who will then issue a new license upon payment of a fee as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.31
A. A copy of the license must be visibly posted upon the premises where
any jukebox, amusement device or pool table is displayed or maintained
for use and operation. [Amended 2-20-1985 by Ord. No. 1579]
B. Any premises upon which any jukebox, mechanical or electronic
amusement device or pool table is displayed or maintained shall be
open to examination and inspection by duly authorized agents of the
CEO during all hours that such premises are open to use by the public.
C. No mechanical or electronic amusement device or pool table shall be
used for gambling or other illegal purposes.
D. Any premises or places of business primarily or substantially devoted to
the display or maintenance of mechanical or electronic amusement
devices or pool tables shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 325,
Zoning, relating to amusement centers. For the purposes of this
subsection, any premises upon which are displayed or maintained more
than three mechanical or electronic amusement devices and/or pool
tables shall be considered as being substantially devoted to the display
or maintenance of mechanical or electronic amusement devices or pool
tables.
E. Any operator granted a license shall not permit operation of any device
by a person under the age of 18 years of age during the regular class
hours of any day in which public school is in session. [Amended
2-20-1985 by Ord. No. 1579]
F. Upon written recommendation of the Ridley Township Police
Department, the Board of Commissioners may suspend or revoke any
license issued pursuant to this chapter following a hearing in
accordance with the Local Agency Law of Pennsylvania.32 [Amended
2-20-1985 by Ord. No. 1579]
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
32.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 105, 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
§ 73-4 RIDLEY CODE § 73-7
73:94
§ 73-7. Transfers of licenses. [Amended 2-20-1985 by Ord. No.
157933]
Licenses shall apply only to the operator and premises to which issued,
and any transfer of operator shall require amendment of the original
application, approval by the CEO and payment of a fee as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Licenses shall not be
transferred from the premises for which the license was issued.
§ 73-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord. No.
1639]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions in this chapter
shall, upon summary conviction before any District Justice, be subject to a
fine not exceeding $600, and costs of prosecution, and in default of payment
of fine and costs, such person may be imprisoned in the county jail for
not more than 30 days. Each and every day which any person shall be in
violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 77
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health Code — See Ch. 155.
Noise and odors — See Ch. 190.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 224.
Zoning — See Ch. 325.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 73-7 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 73-8
73:95

ARTICLE I
Control of Animals
[Adopted 7-21-1982 by Ord. No. 1536]
§ 77-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Ridley Township Animal
Control Ordinance."
§ 77-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Any animal kept by a person or persons for pleasure or utility.
OWNER — Includes any person having the right of proprietorship or
ownership or any person keeping or harboring one or more animals. An
animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed, sheltered or permitted to
remain on or about any premises occupied by the "owner."34
VICIOUS CANINE — A dog or canine that constitutes a physical threat to
persons or other animals as more specifically defined in the Pennsylvania
State Dog Law.35
§ 77-3. Enforcement officer.
The Ridley Township Animal Control Officer shall be the person dedicated
as the law enforcement officer of this article. The Animal Control Officer
shall be under the supervision of the Ridley Township Health Department
and the Ridley Township Police Department. It shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to interfere with the Animal Control Officer in the lawful
performance of his duties.
§ 77-4. Canines to be properly controlled.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owners of canines to permit their canines to
run at large, to molest persons or vehicles or to attack other animals.
B. A canine which is neither tied nor secured within an enclosure will be
deemed to be running at large despite its uninterrupted presence on
the owner's premises. A lead or leash used to secure a canine on its
owner's premises is inadequate and unlawful if the leashed canine can
reach the public street or sidewalk or neighboring property.
C. Any canine off the owner's premises shall be secured on a leash not
exceeding six feet in length which shall be of sufficient strength to
restrain the canine. Furthermore, said leash shall be controlled by a
34.Editor's Note: The former definition of PIT BULLS, added 7-15-1987 by Ord. No. 1615,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 5-27-1998 by Ord. No. 1784.
35.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 77-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 77-4
73:97
§ 77-5. Injury of persons prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any canine to permit said canine
to injure any person by biting, jumping on, knocking down or otherwise
attacking a person.
§ 77-6. Barking prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any canine to permit said canine to
cause a nuisance to the citizens or residents of the Township of Ridley by
barking, yelping, howling or causing any other unseemly or loud noise for
an extended period of time, whether confined inside or to an outside area.
§ 77-7. Confinement of females in heat.
Every female animal in heat shall be confined in a building or secured area
so the animal cannot escape and cause a nuisance.
§ 77-8. Detention and confinement of animals running at large.
person of sufficient strength and maturity to be capable of controlling
the canine under the foreseeable circumstances.
D. In general the owner of a canine shall exercise proper and necessary
care and control over said canine at all times to prevent it from
becoming a public nuisance.
A. Canines or other animals running at large without identification shall
be taken by police, Animal Control Officer or other designated officials
to the Delaware County Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
for confinement until disposition, for a period of not less than three
days. [Amended 3-20-1985 by Ord. No. 1583]
B. Animals or canines running at large with proper identification shall be
taken by police, Animal Control Officer or other designated officials and
returned to the owner. If the owner cannot be located or contacted, the
canine or other animal shall be transported to the Delaware County
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals for confinement until
the owner can be notified, or for a period not to be less than three days.
[Amended 3-20-1985 by Ord. No. 1583]
C. No animal or canine shall be returned to the owner once confined until
the owner pays to the Township of Ridley a recovery fee in the sum as
set by statute and an amount equal to the cost of the maintenance, care
and medical services supplied to the animal while in the custody of the
Township, including the charges imposed by the Delaware County
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. [Amended
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
§ 77-4 RIDLEY CODE § 77-9
73:98
§ 77-9. Notice of violation.
Notice of any violation of this article in the form of a citation shall be issued
by the Animal Control Officer, Health Officer, police officer or any other
person authorized to enforce ordinances.
§ 77-10. Damage of property by animals prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit such animal
to damage or cause injury to the personal property, real estate, shrubs,
hedges, flowers or other growing things of another, to run across or on the
property of another, to urinate or defecate on the property of another or to
otherwise defile the property of another.
§ 77-11. Owner not to permit animal to defecate on public property.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal to permit said animal to
defecate upon any sidewalk or upon the floors or stairways of any building
used or frequented by the public or used in common with other tenants.
§ 77-12. Removal of animal excrement.
It shall be the duty of the owner of an animal to pick up and remove all
excrement from said animal from the public property and private property
of another. Excrement must not be deposited in the street or curbside but
must be removed from the area completely. Furthermore, the owner of
every animal will be responsible for the cleanup of all animal excrement
from his own property on a daily basis.
§ 77-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord. No.
1639]
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating § 77-3 of this article by
interfering with the Animal Control Officer in the lawful performance of
his duties shall, upon summary conviction before any District Justice,
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, and the cost of prosecution, and in
default of payment of the fine and cost, the violator may be sentenced to
the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any other provision of this
article shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 and the
cost of prosecution, and in default of payment of the fine and cost, the
violator may be sentenced to the county jail for a term of not more than
30 days.36
36.Editor's Note: Former §§ 33-7.7 through 33-7.11, regarding pit bulls, as added 7-15-1987
by Ord. No. 1615, which followed this section, were repealed 5-27-1998 by Ord. No. 1784.
§ 77-9 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 77-13
73:99

ARTICLE II
Dog Kennels
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 33, Art. II, of the 1975 Code]
§ 77-14. License required.
No person shall maintain any dog kennel in the Township of Ridley unless
he has obtained a license therefor from the Township Secretary.
§ 77-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG KENNEL — Includes any establishment in which dogs are kept for the
purpose of boarding, breeding, sale or show purposes.
§ 77-16. Board of Health approval.
The Township Secretary shall refer every application for a dog kennel
license to the Board of Health, and approval of the application therefor must
be obtained from the Board of Health before any such license shall be issued
by the Township Secretary.
§ 77-17. Location, sanitation and maintenance requirements.
The Board of Health, before granting its approval to any such application,
shall certify, in writing, that:
A. Proper sanitary conditions are present for the maintenance of the
kennel so that no odor shall emanate therefrom for a distance greater
than 10 feet.37
B. Appropriate closed receptacles are installed to store waste material
emanating from the dogs, and facilities are available so that such waste
material will be disposed of within 24 hours.
C. An appropriate and adequate supply of deodorizer and germicide are on
hand at all times, and the kennel will be thoroughly sprayed at least
once every 24 hours with such chemicals.
D. Every dog kept in such kennel is immunized against rabies.
E. Proper precautions are taken to prevent the dogs in the kennel from
howling.38
F. Such kennel is not built, kept or maintained within 100 feet of any
dwelling house.
G. Such kennel is not located in any district zoned as residential.39
37.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 190, Noise and Odors, and in particular § 190-13.
38.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 190, Noise and Odors, and in particular § 190-7.
§ 77-14 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 77-17
73:101
§ 77-18. License fee.
§ 77-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any owner or operator who shall maintain any dog kennel without a license
therefor, or who shall, after obtaining a license therefor, fail, refuse or
neglect to continue to comply with the conditions set forth in § 77-17 of
this article, or who shall furnish false information as to the number of dogs
having used the kennel in order to determine the license fee, or who shall
fail to avail himself of all the requirements set forth in § 77-17 of this article,
shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance and shall, upon conviction before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine and costs shall be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 77-20. Additional remedies.
Any penalty imposed under § 77-19 of this article shall not be deemed to
prevent the Township of Ridley from abating such nuisance by bill in equity,
as authorized under the First Class Township Code.
H. Such kennel is not located within 100 feet of any spring, well or open
water supply.
I. The applicant has available a building, which is approved by the
Building Committee of the Township, where all dogs must be kept
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
A. The annual license fee for any such dog kennel shall be as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for each male and
each spayed female dog, and for each unspayed female dog. [Amended
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
B. The number of dogs shall be determined from the total number of
individual dogs using the kennel in the previous twelve-month period.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 325, Zoning, for designation of districts.
§ 77-17 RIDLEY CODE § 77-20
73:102
ARTICLE III
Farm Animals
[Adopted 5-25-2011 by Ord. No. 197440]
§ 77-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FARM ANIMAL — Horse, cattle, donkeys, pigs, sheep, goats, chickens,
ducks, llamas, geese, guinea fowl, pea fowl, domestic fowl, roosters, swans,
turkeys and nonpoisonous snakes, native to Ridley Township. These shall
include hybrids, micro or miniature variations of any of the above animals.
§ 77-22. Keeping of farm animals prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any farm animals
within the limits of the Township or any structures, buildings, shelters or
pens for any farm animals on any lot less than one acre in area.
§ 77-23. Sanitation.
§ 77-24. Noise nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit said animal to
create a nuisance to any citizen in the Township by causing any unseemly
noise for extended periods of time, whether confined inside a structure,
building, shelter, corral, pen or coop or any other outside area.
§ 77-25. Disposition of animals.
Any person who keeps a prohibited farm animal in contravention of this
article shall dispose of the animal by removal of the animal from the
Township. Any person who holds a permit for any of these animals at the
time of the passage of this article has until the end of the calendar year to
remove the animal from the Township.
§ 77-26. Enforcing agent; violations and penalties; seizure and
injunctive relief.
A. Every structure, building, shelter or pen any animal is kept in shall be
constructed of such material and in such manner that it can be kept
clean and sanitary.
B. The Health Officer shall require such measures necessary in order to
avoid a nuisance and that such other measures be taken that may be
necessary to ensure proper protection of the public health and safety
and compliance with this article.
40.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Poultry, adopted 3-19-1975 as
Ch. 33, Art. III, of the 1975 Code, as amended.
§ 77-21 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 77-26
73:103
A. The Board of Health of the Township of Ridley and its duly appointed
agents, including the Health Officer of the Township of Ridley, are
hereby directed to enforce the provisions of this article.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a Magisterial District Court, be
sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 plus costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of such fine and cost shall be imprisoned for a
period not to exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.
C. In addition to the foregoing, the Township may, at its sole discretion,
cause to be seized any animal which is located in the Township of Ridley
in violation of this article. Furthermore, the Township may seek
injunctive relief in the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County
requiring any animal located in the Township of Ridley in violation of
this article to be removed. These remedies available to the Township
are not mutually exclusive, and the Township may, at its sole discretion,
fine any person, cause to be seized any animal and/or request injunctive
relief regarding the same for violations of this article.
§ 77-26 RIDLEY CODE § 77-26
73:104
ARTICLE IV
Trapping
[Adopted 4-18-1984 by Ord. No. 1569]
§ 77-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROPERTY — All public and private real property in the Township of Ridley.
SET — The setting up, placing, depositing or leaving of any trap on any
property.
TRAP — Any device which is commonly used to snare or kill beaver, otter,
fisher, mink, muskrat, skunk or raccoon, including but not limited to
conibear and leghold traps.
§ 77-28. Prohibited acts.
No person shall set a trap in any property within the Township of Ridley.
§ 77-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord. No.
1639; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction in a summary case
before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $1,000, together with the cost of prosecution, and in default
of of payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Furthermore, said persons shall forfeit any traps used in
violations of this article.
§ 77-30. Confiscation of traps.
The Police Department of the Township of Ridley is hereby authorized and
directed to seize and confiscate any traps being used in violation of this
article.
§ 77-27 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 77-30
73:105

ARTICLE V
Beekeeping
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as § 84-13 of the 1975 Code]
§ 77-31. Modern hives required.
No person shall keep or maintain honeybees in any hive other than a
modern movable frame hive which permits thorough examination to
determine the presence of bee disease.
§ 77-32. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
§ 77-31 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 77-32
73:107

ARTICLE VI
Exotic Animals
[Adopted 5-25-2011 by Ord. No. 1974]
§ 77-33. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any animal that is not normally domesticated in the
United States or is wild by nature. Exotic animals include, but are not
limited to, any or all of the following orders and families, whether bred in
the wild or in captivity, and also any or all of the hybrids with domestic
species. The animals listed in parentheses are intended to act as examples
and are not to be construed as an exhaustive list or to limit the generality of
each group of animals, unless otherwise specified.
A. Nonhuman primates and posiminans (monkeys, chimpanzees,
baboons);
B. Felidae (lions, tigers, bobcats, cougars, leopards, jaguars, mountain
lions and nondomesticated cats);
C. Canidae (wolves, coyotes, foxes, jackals, nondomesticated dogs);
D. Ursidae (all bears);
E. All venomous and constricting snakes, including, but not limited to, all
members of the families Vilperiidae (vipers and pit vipers), Elapidae
(cobras), Hydrophidae (sea snakes), venomous Columbridae
(boomslang, twig snake and keel back snake genus); all members of the
order Crocodilia, including alligators, crocodiles, caimans and gharials,
venomous fish other than those commonly kept in small aquariums and
posing no significant hazard to humans or domestic animals;
F. Crocodilia (alligators, crocodiles);
G. Proboscidas (elephants);
H. Hyaenidae (hyenas);
I. Artiodactyla (hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, but not cattle, swine,
sheep or goats);
J. Marsupialia (kangaroos, opossums);
K. Perissodactyla (rhinoceroses, tapirs, but not horses, donkeys or mules);
L. Edentata (anteaters, sloths, armadillos);
M. Viverridae (mongooses, civets and genets);
N. Wild birds, such as raptors and other avian creatures (this category
excludes cage birds such as parakeets, parrots, canaries, finches,
§ 77-33 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 77-33
73:109
§ 77-34. Keeping, transporting and handling of reptilian species.
All reptilian species not prohibited as pets or specimens not prohibited as
pets or specimens must be contained within habitats designed to prevent
escape; shall be transported in escapeproof containers; shall not be handled
openly in public places unless the handler is conducting an educational
meeting or is demonstrating a reptile for sale within a commercial animal
establishment; and shall not be released or abandoned except for native
reptiles which have wandered near human habitation and may be relocated
to nearby natural habitat. Any captive reptile secured by or forfeited to
the Township shall be released to a zoo, humane society or reptile rescue
organization, or euthanized at the discretion of the Township Police or Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 77-35. Keeping of exotic animals prohibited.
§ 77-36. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
lovebirds, myna birds and other birds ordinarily kept in cages in
households).
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep, harbor, bring,
or have in one's possession an exotic animal(s) within the Township
limits.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, or any other person in
control of a lot, tract, or parcel of land within the Township limits or any
residence or business premises situated thereon to knowingly permit
any other person to be in possession of an exotic animal upon the
property, residence or premises.
A. A bona fide publicly or privately owned zoological park or educational
institution incorporated or authorized to do business in Pennsylvania,
such as:
(1) A humane society or animal park;
(2) A veterinary hospital, clinic or office;
(3) A bona fide research institution using animals for scientific
research;
(4) Institutions accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium
Association; or
(5) Animals sold at pet stores recognized as domestic pets as defined
herein.
§ 77-33 RIDLEY CODE § 77-37
73:110
§ 77-37. Disposition of animals.
Any person who keeps a wild or exotic animal in contravention of this article
shall dispose of the animal by removal of the animal from the Township.
§ 77-38. Violations and penalties; seizure and injunctive relief.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District
Justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs, and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 30 days. Each separate day that a violation of this article
continues or each section of this article which shall be found to have
been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the Township may, at its sole discretion,
cause to be seized any animal which is located in the Township of Ridley
in violation of this article. Furthermore, the Township may seek
injunctive relief in the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County
requiring any animal located in the Township of Ridley in violation of
this article to be removed. These remedies available to the Township
are not mutually exclusive, and the Township may, at its sole discretion,
fine any person, cause to be seized any animal and/or request injunctive
relief regarding the same for violations of this article.
§ 77-37 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 77-38
73:111
Chapter 81
AUCTIONS
§ 81-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUCTION or SALE AT AUCTION — The verbal exchanges between an
auctioneer and members of his audience, conducting an invitation or series
of invitations for offers for the sale of goods or real estate made by the
auctioneer, offers by members of the audience and the acceptance of bids
by the auctioneer.
GOODS — Any goods, wares, works of art, commodity, compound or thing,
chattels, merchandise, vehicles or personal property, which may be lawfully
kept or offered for sale, including domestic animals and farm products,
but shall not include nor apply to sales at auction conducted pursuant to
any judicial order or decree, or in the settlement of a decedent's estate,
or to any sale conducted by or on behalf of any charitable corporation
or association if the person conducting the sale receives no compensation
therefor.
§ 81-2. Conduct of auctions; license required.
No auction shall be conducted within the Township of Ridley except by
an auctioneer or apprentice auctioneer duly licensed by the Board of
Auctioneer Examiners of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Said
auctioneer or apprentice auctioneer is hereby required to show such license
or facsimile thereof on demand by any person at all auction sales.
§ 81-3. Place of conduct.
§ 81-4. Regulations for sales.
A. No auction shall be conducted in the Township of Ridley in any area
except such area zoned industrial under Chapter 325, Zoning, of the
Code of the Township of Ridley.
B. It shall be unlawful to conduct any auction on any street, sidewalk or
public property in the Township of Ridley.
A. No sale shall be permitted prior to 10:00 a.m. nor later than 10:00 p.m.,
prevailing time.
B. No sale shall be permitted on Sundays nor on legal holidays.
C. No flood, beacon nor beamed search lights shall be erected or used to
illuminate the premises.
§ 77-38 RIDLEY CODE § 81-4
81:112
§ 81-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord. No.
163941]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions in this chapter
shall, upon conviction before any District Justice, be subject to a fine
not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment
thereof, shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 30 days.
Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and shall
be punishable as such.
Chapter 88
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landscaping — See Ch. 168.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 224.
Trees — See Ch. 290.
D. No bullhorns, loudspeakers, nor any instrument or device that
transmits sound shall be used on the premises.
E. Off-street parking shall be provided by the auctioneer and the owner of
the premises on which such auction is conducted for the vehicles of all
who attend such auctions.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 81-4 AUCTIONS § 81-5
81:113

ARTICLE I
Removal of Brush, Grass and Weeds
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 37, Art. I, of the 1975 Code]
§ 88-1. Statutory authority; removal required.
Pursuant to the authorization granted by Section 1502, Subsection XXVI, of
the First Class Township Code,42 the owner, tenant or occupier of any lands
in the Township of Ridley are jointly and severally required to remove all
grass in excess of six inches, together with all weeds and brush growing on
any lands owned or occupied by them.
§ 88-2. Service of notice. [Amended 1-20-1982 by Ord. No. 1531]
The Health Officer or other designated official is hereby authorized and
directed to serve a notice on any such owner, tenant or occupier of lands,
notifying such persons that such grass, weeds or brush shall be removed
within a period of 10 days from the receipt of such notice, and that such
notice is a constructive notice as to all future violations for the period of
one year from the date of issue. Said notice shall also state that if at any
time within one year after notice is issued the occupier fails to comply with
§ 88-1 of this chapter, the Township will cause removal pursuant to § 88-3 of
this chapter. Service of such notice may be effected by personal service, by
certified mail or, in any case that such notice cannot be served in either of
said manners, by posting the same at a conspicuous place on the premises.
§ 88-3. Removal by Township; collection of costs; administrative/
inspection fee.
§ 88-4. Records and reports.
The Superintendent of Highways is hereby directed to keep accurate
records of all removals of such grass, weeds and brush, and to certify the
cost of such removals to the Township Secretary and report the same to the
Board of Township Commissioners for appropriate action.
A. In default of the removal of such grass, weeds and brush within the time
set forth in said notice, the Township may cause the same to be done
and collect the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of such cost,
in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims, or
by action of assumpsit without the filing of a municipal claim.
B. In addition to the above, whenever a code officer makes any inspections
of the property after the initial site visit, the Township shall charge such
person an administrative/inspection fee of $50 per inspection. [Added
2-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2016]
42.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 56526.
§ 88-1 AUCTIONS § 88-5
81:115
§ 88-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
The maintenance of any such grass, weeds or brush after the period of
time set forth in said notice is hereby declared to be a nuisance, prejudicial
to the public health or safety, and any owner, tenant or occupier of lands
having received such notice as provided in § 88-2 hereof, who fails, refuses
or neglects to comply with such notice shall, upon conviction before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine and costs shall be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 88-5 RIDLEY CODE § 88-5
81:116
ARTICLE II
Hedges, Shrubbery and Vines
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 37, Art. II, of the 1975 Code]
§ 88-6. Growths at intersections restricted.43
In order to more properly secure the safety of persons within the Township
of Ridley, no hedges, shrubbery or vines shall be planted, grown or
maintained by any owner or occupant of any real property within the
Township of Ridley, which is along or adjacent to any street, road or highway
intersection, which have a maximum height of three feet or which extend
into the pavement area along any such intersecting street, road or highway.
§ 88-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
43.Editor's Note: See also § 325-79, Visibility at corner lots, of Ch. 325, Zoning.
§ 88-6 AUCTIONS § 88-7
81:117

ARTICLE III
Bamboo
[Adopted 7-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2007]
§ 88-8. Purpose.
The provisions of this article are enacted to control the planting, growing
or cultivating of bamboo in the Township of Ridley so as to control the
introduction of bamboo in Ridley Township as well as prevent the trespass
of existing bamboo onto neighboring properties by requiring effective
barriers.
§ 88-9. Regulations governing the planting, growing or cultivation
of bamboo.
Subject to the exemptions set forth in this article, no person, property
owner, or tenant shall plant, cause to grow or cultivate bamboo on any lot
or parcel of ground located in Ridley Township, subject to the following
exceptions:
§ 88-10. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to any landowner or possessor who, prior to the
effective date of this article, had planted or caused to grow any bamboo on
A. The root system of the bamboo plants is entirely contained within an
aboveground planter, barrel or other container of such design, material
and location as to prevent the spread of the bamboo's root system
beyond the confines of the container in which it is contained; or
B. The root system is planted in the ground but is entirely contained within
a barrier constructed in accordance with the following specifications.
Compliance with these specifications is subject to inspection by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
(1) The barrier itself shall be composed of high-density polypropylene
or polyethylene, with a thickness of at least 40 mils;
(2) The barrier shall be secured and joined together by stainless steel
clamps or stainless steel closure strips designed to be used with
such barriers;
(3) The barrier shall be installed at least 30 inches deep;
(4) At least three inches of the barrier must protrude above ground
level around the entire perimeter of the bamboo; and
(5) The barrier shall slant outward from bottom to top.
C. Whether planted or growing in a container, as described herein, all
bamboo plants shall be located, trimmed and maintained so that no part
of the plant is closer than 10 feet from any property line.
§ 88-8 AUCTIONS § 88-10
81:119
any property within the Township boundaries unless, upon determination of
the Code Enforcement Officer, any portion of such bamboo has been allowed
to grow upon or its roots, branches and/or stalks have extended onto or over
any public way or another's private property.
§ 88-11. Complaint; notice; order for removal and compliance.
Whenever a complaint is received by the Township regarding the
encroachment of any bamboo plan or root, or whenever the Township on its
own observations and inspections determines that there is an encroachment
of bamboo plants or roots onto the property of another, or a public street
or sidewalk, the Township shall give notice to the landowner or tenant in
possession of the property to remove the offending bamboo plant or root
system.
§ 88-12. Violations and penalties.
Any property owner or possessor of a property determined by any court
of competent jurisdiction to have violated this article shall be subject to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 per day for each day that the violation
persists, as well as court costs, legal fees and any other fees incurred by the
Township to enforce this article against the responsible party. Each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense, for which a separate
fine shall be levied.
A. The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested,
properly addressed and with sufficient postage. Notice by certified mail
shall be deemed complete on the date of personal delivery. If the
certified mail is marked "refused," "unclaimed" or otherwise
undeliverable by the United States Postal Service, notice will be sent by
regular mail and by posting the notice on the property.
B. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation.
C. The notice shall state that the violation must be corrected within 30
days from the date of mailing or posting the property, whichever is later.
(1) The notice shall state specifically what must be done by the
responsible party to correct the violation and come into compliance
with this article.
(2) The notice shall state that failure to comply within 30 days will
result in the removal of the offending bamboo or root system by the
Township and that the responsible party will be billed for all costs
incurred by the Township. The Township may, in its discretion, elect
to issue a citation daily until such time as the offending bamboo or
root system is removed, and the notice should so advise the
responsible party.
§ 88-10 RIDLEY CODE § 88-12
81:120
Chapter 92
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of appeals — See Ch. 9, Art. IX.
Numbering of building — See Ch. 95.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 120.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 122.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 124.
Excavations — See Ch. 129.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 138.
Fuel gas code — See Ch. 140, Art. IV.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 181.
Plumbing — See Ch. 216.
Sewers — See Ch. 237.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 260.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 264.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
268.
Walls and fences — See Ch. 310.
Zoning — See Ch. 325.
§ 88-12 AUCTIONS § 88-12
81:121

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 4-22-1992 by Ord. No. 1683]
§ 92-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the Township
Secretary, being marked and known as the "BOCA National Building Code,
Eleventh Edition, 1990," as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., hereinafter designated as the Building
Code of the Township of Ridley, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, with
changes noted herein for regulating the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion,
occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures in the Township
of Ridley, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, providing for the issuance of
permits therefor, providing penalties for violations of the codes, declaring
and establishing fire zones and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National Building Code, are
hereby referred to and proposed to be adopted and made part thereof as
if fully set out in the proposed chapter, with the additions, insertions and
deletions noted in § 92-2 of this chapter.
§ 92-2. Modifications and amendments to standards.
A. The BOCA National Building Code adopted herein is amended and
changed in the following respects:
(1) Section 100.1, Title, is completed by inserting the words "Township
of Ridley" in the space entitled "name of jurisdiction."
(2) Section 101.4, Continuation of unlawful use, is deleted in its
entirety and the following substituted therefor:
101.4 Continuation of unlawful use: The continuation of
occupancy or use of a building or structure, or part thereof,
contrary to the provisions of this code, shall be deemed a violation
and subject to the penalties prescribed in this chapter.
(3) Section 105.1.1, Determination by Building Official, is added to
read:
105.1.1 Determination by Building Official: In the event that
the owner or agent is unable to obtain the releases required in
Section 105.1, the Building Official shall inspect the premises for
which application has been made to determine that utility service
connections and appurtenant equipment have been removed or
sealed and plugged in a safe manner.
(4) Section 105.4, Technical Specifications, is added to read:
105.4 Technical specifications: All demolition shall conform to
the following requirements. Where, under these requirements,
§ 92-1 AUCTIONS § 92-2
81:123
responsibilities are imposed upon a "contractor," that term shall
also mean any person performing the demolition work, including
contractors and the owner or agents of the owner. Final
responsibility for compliance with all requirements shall be that of
the owner of the structure being demolished.
105.4.1 Demolition and clean-up: The work to be performed
shall include the demolition of all structures, vaults, steps, walls
and the disposal of all excess material, junk and rubbish.
105.4.2 Building permit required: The contractor shall not
commence work, nor shall he remove from the site of demolition
anything or any materials, until the contractor has received a
building permit from the Township of Ridley.
105.4.3 Sidewalk sheds: If the structure to be demolished is more
than two stories or 25 feet high, measured from sidewalk or street
level, and the horizontal distance from the inside of the sidewalk
to the structure is 15 feet or less, a substantial sidewalk shed shall
be constructed over the entire length of the sidewalk, adjacent to
the structure, of sufficient width to accommodate pedestrian traffic
without causing congestion. The sidewalk shed shall be lighted,
either by natural or artificial means sufficient to ensure safety at all
times.
105.4.4 Fences and demolition using machinery methods:
When the horizontal distance from the inside of the sidewalk to a
structure is more than 15 feet and less than 25 feet, a sidewalk
shed may be constructed over the sidewalk as described above, or
in place of such a shed, a substantial fence shall be constructed
along the inside edge of the sidewalk, or if permission has been
granted to close the sidewalk, a substantial fence eight feet high
may be constructed at the curbline and a safe place to walk in
the cartway of the street shall be provided. When demolition work
using machinery methods are employed, the buildings may be
demolished in a step-like fashion as long as adequate lateral
support of the structure exists. No wall, chimney or other
construction shall be allowed to fall in mass on an upper floor.
Bulky material, such as beams and columns, shall be lowered and
not allowed to fall.
105.4.5 Barriers around openings: Suitable barriers, subject
to the approval of the Building Official, shall be erected and
maintained by the contractor around all openings in the ground as
long as such openings shall, in the opinion of the Building Official,
constitute a hazard or a dangerous condition.
105.4.6 Signs: The contractor shall furnish, erect and maintain
approved danger, warning, and keep-out signs at places and
locations where the placing of such signs are warranted, especially
in working area, or as directed by the Building Official.
§ 92-2 RIDLEY CODE § 92-2
81:124
105.4.7 Work to be kept wet: During the demolition of buildings
and structures, the work shall be kept thoroughly wetted down to
prevent the spread of dust. The contractor shall provide necessary
water and connections therefor.
105.4.8 Capping of sewers: All sewer laterals must be capped at
the curb by the contractor before any demolition starts. A permit
must be obtained from the Plumbing Inspector of the Township of
Ridley.
105.4.9 Combustible materials: All combustible materials from
the demolition activity shall be removed from the site and any
basements or pits exposed by such demolition activity shall be
backfilled to at least the adjacent grade levels.
105.4.10 Removal of window and door frames: Window and
door frames shall not be removed until the demolition work shall
have progressed to their elevations in the walls.
105.4.11 Removal of walls above first floor: No portions of
walls above the elevations of the first floor and located immediately
adjacent and parallel to any street shall be thrown but shall be
barred loose and demolished piecemeal.
105.4.12 Contiguous buildings: The contractor shall leave
contiguous buildings in a safe condition and shall not deface, mar,
hurt or jeopardize any adjacent buildings, and any damage done to
such adjacent or nearby building shall be repaired or restored by
the contractor to the satisfaction of the Building Official. Extreme
care must be exercised in the demolition of buildings adjacent
to other structures which are to remain. The contractor shall be
responsible for damages to adjacent buildings, and all repairs shall
be made by the contractor at no expense to the adjacent building
owner. Any walls of contiguous buildings left exposed by this
demolition shall be preserved and treated in the manner specified
in BOCA Section 3005.3.1 so as to seal the surface of such walls
and provide adequate weather protection. All work required by this
subsection shall be completed within 30 days from the date any
demolition work results in exposure to the elements of contiguous
building walls or parapets, which time may be extended by the
Building Official for good cause.
105.4.14 Filling subsurface areas: The contractor shall furnish,
at his expense, all additional materials required for filling
subsurface areas to the grade of the surface of the adjoining
ground. Said material required shall be of quality acceptable to
the Building Official and a sufficient quantity shall be on hand to
ensure uninterrupted progress in completing the backfilling. On
completion of the demolition, the cellars shall be filled to a level not
higher than the existing sidewalk and yard. All backfilling shall be
done in twelve-inch layers and each layer compacted by a ten-ton
§ 92-2 AUCTIONS § 92-2
81:125
roller or its equivalent. Compacting the backfill with any loader is
not acceptable. Eighteen inches of soil free from stones, clods and
debris shall be evenly spread over all demolished structures. The
entire area shall be cleaned and graded so a rotary mower can be
used in cutting the grass or weeds.
105.4.15 Burning prohibited: No burning shall be permitted
on the site. Combustible material shall be disposed of by the
contractor.
105.4.16 Removal of debris: The contractor shall remove all
debris and equipment and dispose of all material from the site of
the work and leave the ground clear of all materials, rubbish and
debris and in a clean and neat condition as demolition of each
structure is completed.
(5) Section 109.5, Restriction of employees, is deleted in its entirety
and the following substituted therefor:
109.5 Restrictions of employees: The Building Officials shall
serve at the will and desire of the elected officials.
(6) Section 109.7, Official records, is deleted in its entirety and the
following substituted therefor:
109.7 Official records: An official record shall be kept of all
business and activities of the office of Building Official, and all such
records shall be open to the public for inspection at all appropriate
times, except that no individual, owner, operator, occupant or other
person shall be subject to unwarranted invasion of privacy and
except that all evidence or information obtained in the course
of any inspection shall be considered privileged information and
shall be kept confidential. Such evidence or information shall not
be disclosed except as may be necessary in the judgment of the
Building Official for the proper and effective administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and shall not
otherwise be made public without the consent of the owner,
occupant, operator or other person in charge of the unit, structure
or premises inspected.
(7) Section 109.8, Building Committee, is added to read:
109.8 Building Committee: The appointing body of the
municipality shall appoint a committee consisting of three
members, hereinafter referred to as the "Building Committee."
109.8.1 Qualifications of the Building Committee members:
To be eligible for appointment, the persons selected as Building
Committee members shall meet the requirements as established
by the Ridley Township Board of Commissioners. The Building
Committee members shall serve at the will and desire of the Board
of Commissioners.
§ 92-2 RIDLEY CODE § 92-2
81:126
109.8.2 Meetings: The Building Committee shall meet no less
than once a week to act upon all applications pending before it for
action.
109.8.3 Building Committee approval: Two signatures of
approval by the Building Committee shall be sufficient warrant for
the Township Secretary to issue the permit applied for. Where a
member of the Building Committee disapproves of any application,
he must set forth in writing the reasons for such action and attach
the same to the application.
109.8.4 Powers and duties:
1. To examine all applications, plans and specifications of any
proposed building or alterations, and to approve them within
15 days after the same have been filed, provided that said
application does not conflict with this chapter, or other
applicable ordinances of the Township, the Acts of Assembly
or restrictions in the deed of the premises involved, provided
that said restrictions are recorded with the Township, and
thereupon to notify the Township Secretary to issue a permit for
such building or alterations.
2. To visit, for purpose of inspection, any premises referred to
in the application for a permit, to determine whether the
provisions of this chapter are being complied with.
3. To enforce all the provisions of this chapter.
4. To recommend to the Ridley Township Board of Commissioners
any special regulations or rulings that shall be necessary to
enforce the purposes of any portion of this chapter.
(8) Section 110.2, Applications and permits, is deleted in its entirety.
(9) Section 111.1, When permit is required, is deleted in its entirety
and the following substituted therefor:
111.1 When permit is required: It shall be unlawful to construct,
enlarge, alter, repair or demolish a structure; or change the
occupancy of a building or structure requiring greater strength,
exitway or sanitary provision; or to change to another use; or to
install or alter any equipment for which provision is made or the
installation of which is regulated by this code without first filing an
application with the Building Committee in writing and obtaining
the required permit therefor; except that repairs, as defined in
Section 104.0 and which do not involve any violation of this code,
shall be exempted from this provision. It shall be unlawful for any
contractor or subcontractor (to include the officers thereof if a
corporation or the members thereof if a partnership) to perform
any work for which a permit is required unless said permit is first
obtained and is posted as required by Section 112.8.
§ 92-2 AUCTIONS § 92-2
81:127
(10) Section 111.2, Form of application, is deleted in its entirety and the
following substituted therefor:
111.2 Form of application: The application for a permit shall be
submitted in such form as the Building Committee may prescribe
and shall be accompanied by the required fee as prescribed in this
chapter.
(11) Section 111.3, By whom application is made, is amended by adding
the following sentence to the existing section: "It shall be the
responsibility of the contractor to determine that a permit has been
obtained before performing any work."
(12) Section 111.5, Plans and specifications, is amended by changing
the word "two" appearing in the second line to read "three"; and
changing the word "Official" appearing in the eighth line to read
"Committee."
(13) Section 111.6, Site plan, is amended by changing the word "a"
appearing in the first line to read "not less than three copies of
the."
(14) Section 111.7, Engineering details, is amended by changing the
word "Official" appearing in the first line to read "Committee."
(15) Section 111.10, Other permits required, is added to read:
111.10 Other permits required: At the time of filing an
application for a permit, the applicant shall present to the Building
Committee evidence that he has obtained all necessary permits,
licenses, approvals and/or variances as may be required by the
laws of the municipality and the Commonwealth. Individuals,
agencies, boards and commissions issuing aforesaid permits,
licenses, approvals and/or variances shall include, but not be
limited to, the Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board, Board of
Appeals, the Sewage Enforcement Officer, the Fire Marshal, the
State Police Fire Marshal, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the Pennsylvania Department of
Community Affairs and Economic Development, the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry and applicable federal agencies.
(16) Section 112.1, Action on application, is amended by changing the
word "Official" appearing in the first line to read "Committee."
(17) Section 112.3, Previous approvals, is deleted in its entirety and the
following substituted therefor:
112.3 Previous approvals: This code shall not require changes in
the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which
a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully
authorized and the construction of which shall have been actively
prosecuted within the 90 days after the effective date of this
§ 92-2 RIDLEY CODE § 92-2
81:128
chapter, and the entire building shall be completed, as authorized,
within two years after the date of approval of the application,
except as herein provided: In the case of a building which, because
of its size or complexity of construction, requires a longer period
for completion, no changes in the plans, construction or designated
use of the building, shall be required for the construction period
designated in fully executed construction contract documents if
prepared by a registered architect and/or engineer.
(18) Section 112.4, Signature to permit, is deleted in its entirety and the
following substituted therefor:
112.4 Signature to permit: The Township Manager/Secretary's
signature shall be attached to every permit.
(19) Section 112.5, Approved plans, is deleted in its entirety and the
following substituted therefor:
112.5 Approved plans: The Building Committee shall stamp or
endorse in writing all sets of corrected plans "Approved," and
two sets of such approved plans shall be retained by the Building
Official and the other set shall be kept at the building site, open to
inspection of the Building Official or an authorized representative
at all reasonable times.
(20) Section 112.6, Revocation of permits, is amended by changing the
words "Building Official" appearing in the first line to read
"Township Manager/Secretary."
(21) Section 112.7, Approval of part, is amended by changing the words
"Building Official" appearing in the first line to read "Township
Manager/Secretary."
(22) Section 114.3, New construction and alterations, is deleted in its
entirety and the following substituted therefor:
§ 92-2 AUCTIONS § 92-2
81:129
114.3 Fee schedule: The following building permit fees shall
be paid to the Township of Ridley upon filing of an application
and shall apply to construction, renovation, demolition, moving
of buildings, roofing, sandblasting, waterblasting with sand and/
or chemicals, air conditioning and swimming pools. The fee shall
be based on the actual contract price of any such work or, if
no contract price has been agreed upon, then the applicant's
estimated cost; provided, however, that upon review by the
Building Committee, with the assistance of the Township Engineer,
if required, such contract price or estimated cost shall be subject
to revision. If it is determined that the contract price or estimated
cost is unrealistic, then the Building Committee shall make the
estimate of the cost which shall be final. [Amended 10-25-2000
by Ord. No. 1808]
114.3.1 Residential: New construction, alterations, additions
and repairs: as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
114.3.2 All new construction, other than residential: As set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
114.3.3 All alterations, additions and repairs, other than
residential: As set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
114.3.4 Demolition and moving of any building: As set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
114.3.5 Work started prior to obtaining permit: Where work
for which a permit is required by this chapter is started prior to
obtaining the required permit, the fees set forth herein for such
permit shall be doubled; the payment of such double fee shall not
relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements
of this chapter in the execution of the work or from any other
penalties prescribed herein.
(23) Section 114.3.1, Fee schedule, is deleted in its entirety.
(24) Section 114.4, Accounting, is amended by changing the words
"Building Official" appearing in the first line to read "Township
Manager/Secretary."
(25) Section 114.5, Refunds, is deleted in its entirety.
(26) Section 115.4, Right of entry, is deleted in its entirety and the
following substituted therefor:
115.4 Right of entry: Except in the case of an emergency or
a mutually convenient time agreed to by the owner, operator, or
occupant or other person in charge of any structure or premises,
the Building Official or his authorized representative in discharging
of his duties, upon showing proper identification where requested,
is hereby authorized to enter and inspect, between the hours of
§ 92-2 RIDLEY CODE § 92-2
81:130
9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., any structure or premises in the
municipality to enforce the provisions of this chapter and of those
other applicable codes and ordinances; the assistance and
cooperation of all other municipality officials, including Police and
Fire Departments, shall be available to the Building Official to
assist in the performance of his duties and in securing right-ofentry.
However, the Building Official may accept reports of
inspection by approved agencies or individuals; and all reports of
such inspections shall be in writing and certified by a responsible
officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual.
The Building Official may engage such expert opinion as may be
deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that may
arise subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
(27) Section 117.4, Violation penalties, is deleted in its entirety.
(28) Section 118.2, Unlawful continuance, is deleted in its entirety and
the following substituted therefor:
118.2 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a
stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall constitute
a violation and shall be liable to a fine as prescribed in this chapter.
(29) Section 119.1, New buildings, is amended by changing the words
"Code Official" appearing at the end of the third line to read
"Zoning Officer."
(30) Section 119.2, Buildings hereafter altered, is amended by changing
the words "Code Official" appearing in the sixth and 10th lines to
read "Zoning Officer."
(31) Section 119.3, Existing buildings, is deleted in its entirety and the
following substituted therefor:
119.3 Existing buildings and use certificates: Any person, firm
or corporation who owns real property within Ridley Township
and desires to sell said property shall first obtain a use certificate
from the Ridley Township Zoning Officer and provide that use
certificate to the buyer of the property.
1. The Zoning Officer shall, upon application, issue a use
certificate which shall contain the following certifications:
A. A description of the zoning district classification of the
real property intended to be sold.
B. A statement that the existing use of the real property
intended to be sold, as described by the applicant, fully
complies with the provisions of the Ridley Township
Zoning Ordinance.44
§ 92-2 AUCTIONS § 92-2
81:131
C. A statement that there exists on the premises of the
property intended to be sold no uncorrected violations of
Ridley Township building, fire or housing ordinances of
which the Township has notice, and which are officially
recorded in the records of the appropriate Township
departments.
2. A fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners shall, to be consistent with current
certificates of occupancy, be charged to the seller by the
Zoning Officer for the issuance of the use certificate.
[Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
3. Should any federal law require a physical inspection of the
premises of the property intended to be sold, in order to verify
that the property conforms to current zoning and building
codes, that inspection must be completed and all appropriate
federal standards or requirements complied with prior to the
issuance of the use certificate by the Zoning Officer. The
use certificate shall note thereon that the required inspection
has been performed. The Zoning Officer shall charge a fee
for the performance of such inspections. That fee shall be
a charge computed at an hourly rate as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners per hour or
fraction thereof for the time actually expended to conduct the
inspection. Said fee shall be separate and in addition to any
fee charged for the issuance of a use certificate. [Amended
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
4. An application for a use certificate shall be submitted by the
seller to the Zoning Officer at least 45 days prior to the date of
settlement of the real property. Said application shall include
the name of the owner and address of the property intended
to be sold. The use certificate shall be issued to the seller and
provided by the seller to the buyer on or before the date of
settlement.45
(32) Section 119.5, Temporary occupancy, is amended by changing the
words "Code official" appearing in the second line to read "Zoning
Officer."
(33) Section 119.6, Contents of certificate, is deleted in its entirety.
(34) Section 120.1, Right to deem unsafe, is deleted in its entirety and
the following substituted therefor:
120.1 Right to deem unsafe: All buildings or structures that
are or hereafter shall become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient in
adequate means of egress facilities or which constitute a fire
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 325, Zoning.
45.Editor's Note: Former Section 119.3.1, Apartment use certificates, was repealed
11-16-2005 by Ord. No. 1890. See now Chapter 225, Rental Dwelling Units.
§ 92-2 RIDLEY CODE § 92-2
81:132
hazard or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public
welfare or which involve illegal or improper use, occupancy or
maintenance shall be deemed unsafe buildings or structures.
Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary and other
appendages or structural members which are supported by,
attached to or a part or a building and which are in deteriorated
condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads which
are specified in the Building Code are hereby designated as unsafe
building appendages. A vacant building, unguarded or open at
door or window, shall be deemed a fire hazard and unsafe within
the meaning of this code. All such unsafe buildings, structures
or appendages are hereby declared to be public nuisances and
shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in
accordance with the procedures set forth in the code or which
alternate procedures as may have been or may be adopted by this
jurisdiction. As an alternative, the Building Official or official of this
jurisdiction as designated by the governing body may institute any
other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
(35) Section 123.1, Application for survey, is amended by adding the
following sentence to the existing section: "The applicant shall post
a sum as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners as bond to secure payment of the third member fee
as provided in Section 123.3." [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 1808]
(36) Section 123.3, Compensation of Board of Survey, is deleted in its
entirety and the following substituted therefor:
123.3 Compensation of Board of Survey: The third member of
the Board shall be entitled to charge a fee for his services to be
paid by the applicant.
(37) Section 124.0, Means of Appeal, is deleted in its entirety.
(38) Section 201.0, General Definitions, is amended by adding, deleting
and changing definitions to read as follows:
PERSON — Any natural person, association, fiduciary, partnership,
corporation or other entity. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty or imposing a fine or
imprisonment or both, the term "person" as applied to an
association or partnership shall include the members thereof and,
as applied to a corporation, the officers thereof.
(39) Section 401.1, General, is deleted in its entirety and the following
substituted therefor:
401.1 General: All buildings erected or to be erected, altered or
extended in height or area shall be classified in any one or in a
§ 92-2 AUCTIONS § 92-2
81:133
combination of the six construction types defined in Sections 402.0
through 407.0.
(40) (Reserved)46
(41) Section 619.4, Underground storage tanks, is added to read:
619.4 Underground storage tanks.
619.4.1 New installations: All underground tanks of volatile
flammables, liquefied petroleum gases and fuel oil shall be set on
a bed of at least six inches of limestone screenings, well tamped
and compacted. Backfill around and over tank shall be limestone
screening with at least 12 inches of cover. Where soil or rock
conditions are such that a concrete base is required or in flood
areas, a concrete pad shall be placed according to accepted
engineering design and practice. Tanks in floodplain areas and
areas in which the water table may be higher in elevation than the
bottom of the tank shall be held down with steel cable anchored to
the concrete base. Concrete base shall be a minimum of nine inches
thick and shall be placed as directed by the Building Official.
619.4.2 Inspection plug: A direct inspection or gauge pipe, three
inches or larger, shall be installed to the underground tank and
shall extend directly to the surface with no bends. A removable
plug shall be installed at ground level or as directed by the Building
Official for inspection purposes. If the inspection plug is located in
the area of vehicular traffic, the inspection plug shall be encased
with a concrete pad six inches thick and 12 inches times 12 inches
in width. Pipe shall be insulated to prevent bonding to the concrete
pad.
619.4.3 Removal: All flammable or combustible liquids shall be
removed from the tank and connecting lines. Disconnect all fill,
inlet and outlet lines. The tank shall be rendered gas-free on the
premises.
619.4.4 Disposal: If the tank is to be disposed of as junk, it shall
have a sufficient number of holes or openings in it to render it unfit
for further use.
619.4.5 Abandonment in place: Tanks shall not be abandoned
in place. A permanent abandonment of the premises shall be in
accord with Sections 619.4.3 and 619.4.4.
619.4.6 Rendering tanks temporarily out of service: Tanks
shall be considered temporarily out of service only when it is
planned that they will be returned to active service at the same
location within one year or pending removal within one year. The
46.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(40), Flood-Resistive Construction, as amended was
repealed 9-26-2012 by Ord. No. 1991. For current provisions, see Ch. 138, Flood Damage
Prevention.
§ 92-2 RIDLEY CODE § 92-2
81:134
Building Official, depending upon the circumstances and its
determination, may extend or shorten the aforesaid time period or
prohibit said temporary abandonment. A change of occupancy of
the premises shall constitute a permanent abandonment and shall
be in accord with Sections 619.4.3 and 619.4.4.
(42) Section 905.1, General, is deleted in its entirety and the following
substituted therefor:
905.1 General: All exterior walls of less than one hour
construction or having openings of any kind shall have a fire
separation distance of six feet or greater.
(43) Section 905.2, Fireresistance ratings, is amended by changing the
fire separation distance now reading "0 to 5 feet" to read "0 to 6
feet" and the fire separation distance now reading "greater than 5
to 10" to read "greater than 6 to 10."
(44) Section 905.3, Openings, is amended by adding the following
sentence to the existing section: "Openings will not be permitted in
exterior walls that have a fire separation distance of less than six
feet."
(45) Table 905.3 is amended be deleting the first two fire separation
distances and changing the number "5" in the third column heading
to read "6."
(46) Section 907.6, Continuity of walls, is amended by changing the
words "2 feet 8 inches (813 mm)" appearing in the second line to
read "8 inches."
(47) Section 907.6.2, Combustible roofs, is deleted in its entirety.
(48) Section 1106.1, Uniform live load, is deleted in its entirety and the
following substituted therefor:
1106.1 Uniform live load: The plans of all buildings and
structures intended for other than residential uses shall specify the
live loads for which each floor or part thereof has been designed;
the minimum uniformly distributed live load in pounds per square
foot (psf) shall be as provided in Table 1106.1 and for all
concentrated loads wherever they occur as provided in Section
1107.0.
(49) Section 1205.1, Frost protection, is amended by changing the
number "100" appearing in the third line to read "120" and by
adding the following sentence to the existing section: "The bottom
of all footings shall be a minimum of 36 inches below grade in
virgin soil."
(50) Section 1205.1.1 is added to read:
§ 92-2 AUCTIONS § 92-2
81:135
1205.1.1 Porches, chimneys, entry landings and steps are to have
foundations and footings extending to solid bearing in virgin soil,
the bottom of which shall be a minimum of 36 inches below finish
grade.
(51) Section 1209.3, Thickness, is deleted in its entirety and the
following substituted therefor:
1209.3 Thickness: All concrete footings shall be a minimum of
eight inches thick and extend in width a minimum of four inches on
each side of the supported wall.
(52) Section 1210.0, Masonry-unit footings, is deleted in its entirety.
(53) Section 1222.2, Minimum thickness, is deleted in its entirety and
the following substituted therefor:
1222.2 Minimum thickness: All concrete masonry unit
foundation walls shall be a minimum thickness of 12 inches and
shall extend to the first floor line of the building supported. All
concrete foundation walls shall be a minimum thickness of 10
inches and shall extend to the first floor line of the building being
supported.
(54) Section 1222.2.2, Hollow and solid unreinforced masonry and plain
concrete, is deleted in its entirety and the following substituted
therefor:
1222.2.2 Hollow and solid unreinforced masonry and plain
concrete: The thickness of unreinforced masonry foundation walls
shall not be less than 12 inches thick. Where height of unbalanced
fill (height of finished grade above basement floor or inside grade)
exceeds eight feet, foundation wall thickness shall be determined
by structural analysis as required in Section 1223.2.
(55) Table 1222.2.2, Thickness of foundation walls, is deleted in its
entirety.
(56) Section 1507.1, General, is amended by adding the following
sentence to the existing section: "Steel pipe and tubing for use in
exterior columns shall have a minimum wall thickness of 3/16
inch."
(57) Section 1702.1.2, Spans, is amended by adding the following
sentence to the existing section: "Twenty-four-inch spans may be
used for roofs when the thickness is increased to 3/4 inches."
(58) Table 1702.1.2.1a, Allowable spans for plywood floor and roof
sheathing continuous over two or more spans and face grain
perpendicular to supports, is amended by deleting the thicknesses
5/16 and 3/8 inches and substituting therefor 1/2 inch; and by
deleting all maximum spans over 16 inches and substituting
therefor 16 inches.
§ 92-2 RIDLEY CODE § 92-2
81:136
(59) Table 1702.1.2.1b, Allowable loads for plywood roof sheathing
continuous over two or more spans and face grain parallel to
supports, is amended by deleting the thickness 15/32 inches and
substituting therefor 1/2 inch; and by deleting the span 24 inches
and substituting therefor 16 inches.
(60) Table 1702.2.2, Allowable spans for particleboard subfloor and
combination subfloor underlayment, is amended by deleting the
maximum spacing of supports which are greater than 16 inches
and substituting therefor 16 inches.
(61) Section 1702.2.3, Roof sheathing, is amended by adding the
following sentence to the section: "Twenty-four-inch spans may be
used for roofs when the thickness is increased to 3/4 inches."
(62) Table 1702.2.3, Allowable live loads for particleboard roof
sheathing, is amended by deleting the thicknesses 3/8 and 7/16
inches and substituting therefor 1/2 inch; and by deleting the
maximum on-center spacing of supports 24 inches and substituting
therefor 16 inches.
(63) Table 1703.2.8, Minimum thickness of wall sheathing, is amended
by deleting the plywood and particle boards thicknesses 5/16 inch
and 3/8 inch and substituting therefor 1/2 inch.
(64) Section 2703.1.1, Temporary electrical service for building, is
added to read:
2703.1.1 Temporary electrical service for building: The switch
box shall be attached to a wooden pole four inches by four inches
by 16 feet or larger; the pole shall be set no less than two feet
into solid ground and shall be braced with three braces in tripod
fashion, braces to be two inch by four inch stock. The switch
box shall be of any approved metal type, cover to box shall be
locked and the energizing switch locked in the "off" position when
not in use. The approved metal switch box may be enclosed in a
wooden box and this box locked, installation to be weatherproof
construction. If receptacles are used on the pole or anywhere in the
temporary circuit, the circuits shall be polarized and grounded for
120 to 240 volts and placed five feet above the ground level.
(65) Section 2903.1, Notice of unsafe signs, is amended by adding the
following sentence to the existing section: "It shall be unlawful to
maintain any sign that has been abandoned."
(66) Section 2906.1, Filing, is completed by inserting "not less than an
amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners" at the third and fifth lines in the spaces entitled
"amount." [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
(67) Section 3005.3.1, Maintenance, is amended by adding the
following paragraph to the existing section: "In the case of an
§ 92-2 AUCTIONS § 92-2
81:137
§ 92-3. Start of construction.
For purposes of implementation of these provisions, construction shall be
considered to have started with the first placement of permanent
construction of the site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any
work beyond the stage of excavation. For a structure without a basement
or poured footings, the start of construction includes the first permanent
framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its pilings
or foundation, or the affixing of any prefabricated structures or mobile
home to its permanent site. "Permanent construction" does not include
land preparation, land clearing, grading, filling, excavation for basement,
footings, piers or foundations, erection of temporary forms, the installation
of piling under proposed subsurface footings or the installation of sewer,
gas and water pipes or electric or other service lines from the street.
§ 92-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any person or member of a partnership or corporation who shall violate
the provisions of this code or who shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair or
demolish a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive
of the Building Official or a permit or certification issued under the
provisions of the Building Code shall be guilty and subject to a fine of
not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution, collectible as provided by
law, and in default of payment of such fine and costs, said violator may be
imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
existing party wall or an existing exposed wall which is structurally
sound and which is not intended to be used by the person causing
the demolition and further that the surface of the said wall is
to remain exposed, such person causing the demolition shall
preserve, at his own expense, the party or exposed wall by insuring
that the exposed surfaces shall be made permanently waterproof
by the application of stucco, brickote, bunite or other
noncombustible materials."
(68) Section 3023.0, Drainage nuisances, is added to read:
3023.0 DRAINAGE NUISANCES
3023.1 General: Any surface or roof drainage which creates a
structural or health hazard, or any other nuisance to the owners
or occupants of adjacent premises, or to the public by reason of
discharge into or across any adjacent buildings, premises or public
thoroughfare, shall be abated by the owners of the improperly
drained area; and the Building Official shall require the drainage
to be disposed of in accordance with provisions of the plumbing
code and storm sewer ordinances.
§ 92-2 RIDLEY CODE § 92-5
81:138
§ 92-5. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the BOCA National Building Code herein
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceedings now pending
in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action accrued or existing under any act or ordinance. Nothing
in this chapter or in the BOCA National Building Code herein adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceedings now pending in any court, or
any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
accrued or existing under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. No right or
remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 92-5 AUCTIONS § 92-5
81:139

ARTICLE II
International Building Code
[Adopted 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 1857]
§ 92-6. Adoption of Code. [Amended 12-20-2006 by Ord. No. 1917;
12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1959; 1-23-2013 by Ord. No. 1998]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of
Code Enforcement of Ridley Township, being marked and designated as
the International Building Code, 2009 edition, including Appendix Chapters
F, G, H, and K, and Accessibility Standard ANSI 117.1, as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building
Code of Ridley Township, in the State of Pennsylvania, for regulation and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation
of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the
demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building
Code on file in the Office of Code Enforcement are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 92-7 of
this article. The existing Chapter 11 and Appendix E of the 2009 edition of
the International Building Code are revoked, and in its place Chapter 11
and Appendix E of the 2012 International Building Code are adopted.
§ 92-7. Revisions. [Amended 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1959]
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Ridley Township
Section 1612.3 Ridley Township
Section 1612.3 November 18, 2009
Section 3410.2 June 23, 2004
Section 3412.2 June 23, 2004
§ 92-8. Effect on preexisting provisions.
That Chapter 92 of the Code of the Township of Ridley, entitled Building
Construction and Floodplain Management, which portions of that chapter
equal or exceed the requirements of this code shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of this code, as amended from time to time;
otherwise any parts in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 92-6 AUCTIONS § 92-8
81:141

ARTICLE III
International Existing Building Code
[Adopted 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 1860]
§ 92-9. Adoption of code. [Amended 12-20-2006 by Ord. No. 1917;
12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1965]
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
Code Enforcement of Ridley Township, being marked and designated as the
International Existing Building Code, 2009 edition, including all Appendix
chapters, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Existing Building Code of Ridley Township, in the State of
Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change
of occupancy, addition relocation of existing buildings, including historic
buildings, as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Existing Building Code on file in the
Office of Code Enforcement are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 92-10 of this article.
§ 92-10. Revisions.
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Ridley Township
Section 112 Board of Appeals is deleted. A substitute
procedure is adopted by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
Section 1201.2 June 23, 2004
§ 92-11. Effect on preexisting provisions.
That Chapter 92 of the Code of the Township of Ridley, entitled Building
Construction and Floodplain Management, which portions of that chapter
equal or exceed the requirements of this code shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of this code, as amended from time to time;
otherwise any parts in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 92-9 AUCTIONS § 92-11
81:143

ARTICLE IV
International Residential Code
[Adopted 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 1865]
§ 92-12. Adoption of code. [Amended 12-20-2006 by Ord. No. 1917;
12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1958]
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office
of Code Enforcement of Ridley Township, being marked and designated
as the International Residential Code, 2009 edition, including all Appendix
chapters, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Residential Code of Ridley Township, in the State of
Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing the construction, alteration,
movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal
and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height
with separate means for egress as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential
Code on file in the Office of Code Enforcement are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 92-13 of
this article.
§ 92-13. Revisions. [Amended 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1958]
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section R101.1 Ridley Township
Section R112 Board of Appeals is deleted. A substitute
procedure is adopted by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
Section R301.2(1) See attached Table marked Exhibit A.47
Section P2603.6.1 Sewer depth, is completed by inserting the words
"30" in the first space entitled "number" and
inserting the words "12" in the second space
entitled "number."
§ 92-14. Effect on preexisting provisions.
That Chapter 92 of the Code of the Township of Ridley, entitled Building
Construction and Floodplain Management, which portions of that chapter
equal or exceed the requirements of this code shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of this code, as amended from time to time;
otherwise any parts in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
47.Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 92-12 AUCTIONS § 92-14
81:145

ARTICLE V
Neighborhood Blight Reclamation and Revitalization
[Adopted 10-26-2011 by Ord. No. 1979]
§ 92-15. Short title.
This article may be cited as the "Township of Ridley Neighborhood Blight
Reclamation and Revitalization Ordinance."
§ 92-16. Purpose.
§ 92-17. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ACT — The Act of October 27, 2010 (P.L. 875, No. 90), 53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 61,
known as the "Neighborhood Blight Reclamation and Revitalization Act."
BUILDING — A residential, commercial or industrial building or structure
and the land appurtenant to it.
A. This article is to implement in the Township of Ridley the provisions of
the Act of October 27, 2010 (P.L. 875, No. 90), 53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 61,
known as the "Neighborhood Blight Reclamation and Revitalization
Act."
B. There are deteriorated properties located in the Township of Ridley as a
result of neglect by their owners in violation of applicable state and
municipal codes; and
C. These deteriorated properties create public nuisances which have an
impact on crime and the quality of life of our residents and require
significant expenditures of public funds in order to abate and correct
the nuisances; and
D. In order to address these situations, it is appropriate to deny certain
governmental permits and approvals in order:
(1) To prohibit property owners from further extending their financial
commitments so as to render themselves unable to abate or correct
the code, statutory and regulatory violations or tax delinquencies.
(2) To reduce the likelihood that this municipality and other
municipalities will have to address the owners' neglect and
resulting deteriorated properties.
(3) To sanction the owners for not adhering to their legal obligations to
the Township of Ridley, as well as to tenants, adjoining property
owners and neighborhoods.
§ 92-15 AUCTIONS § 92-17
81:147
CODE — A building, housing, property maintenance, fire, health or other
public safety ordinance enacted by a municipality. The term does not
include a subdivision and land development ordinance or a zoning
ordinance enacted by a municipality.
COURT — The Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County.
MORTGAGE LENDER — A business association defined as a "banking
institution" or "mortgage lender" under 7 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 61 (relating to
mortgage loan industry licensing and consumer protection) that is in
possession of or holds title to real property pursuant to, in enforcement of
or to protect rights arising under a mortgage, mortgage note, deed of trust
or other transaction that created a security interest in the real property.
MUNICIPALITY — A city, borough, incorporated town, township or home
rule, optional plan or optional charter municipality or municipal authority
in this commonwealth and any entity formed pursuant to the Act of Dec.
19, 1996 (P.L. 1158, No. 177), § 1, 53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 23 (relating to
intergovernmental cooperation).
MUNICIPAL PERMITS — Privileges relating to real property granted by
the Township of Ridley that are building permits issued under the authority
of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, zoning permits, special
exceptions, conditional uses and variances granted under the Township of
Ridley Zoning Ordinance48 any certificate of use issued under the rental
dwelling ordinance in Chapter 225 of the Township's General Code, as
well as any other ordinance authorizing a municipal permit affecting real
property for which the municipality desires to deny permits under this
article. The term does not include decisions on the substantive validity of
a zoning ordinance or map, such a validity variance or the acceptance of a
curative amendment.
OWNER — A holder of the title to residential, commercial or industrial
real estate, other than a mortgage lender, who possesses and controls
the real estate. The term includes, but is not limited to, heirs, assigns,
beneficiaries and lessees, provided this ownership interest is a matter of
public record, including lessees under leases for which a memorandum of
lease is recorded in accordance with the Act of June 2, 1959 [P.L. 254 (Vol.
1), No. 86], 21 P.S. § 405.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Property which, because of its physical condition or
use, is regarded as a public nuisance at common law or has been declared
by the Building or Code Official a public nuisance in accordance with
International Property Maintenance Code adopted by Ordinance 1947,49 or
by the court.
REMEDIATION PLAN — A plan for the correction of violations of state
law or code that is part of an agreement between the owner and the
municipality in which the real property containing the violations is located.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 325, Zoning.
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 224, Property Maintenance.
§ 92-17 RIDLEY CODE § 92-17
81:148
SERIOUS VIOLATION — A violation of a state law or a code that poses an
imminent threat to the health and safety of a dwelling occupant, occupants
in surrounding structures or a passerby, that is a building ordered vacated
in accordance with the Department of Labor and Industry's Regulations,
34 Pa. Code § 403.84, as amended, implementing the Uniform Construction
Code, the Act of November 10, 1999 (P.L. 491, No. 45), as amended, 35
P.S. §§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103; a building placarded as unfit for human
habitation so as to prevent its use under the Township of Ridley's Property
Maintenance Code adopted by Ordinance No. 1947;50 or a vacant building
whose exterior violates Section 304 of the 2009 ICC Property Maintenance
Code adopted Ordinance No. 1947, or any successor statute, regulation or
Property Maintenance Code.
STATE LAW — A statute of the commonwealth or a regulation of an agency
charged with the administration and enforcement of commonwealth law.
SUBSTANTIAL STEP — An affirmative action as determined by a property
codes official or officer of the court on the part of a property owner or
managing agent to remedy a serious violation of a state law or municipal
code, including, but not limited to, physical improvements or repairs to the
property, which affirmative action is subject to appeal in accordance with
applicable law.
TAX DELINQUENT PROPERTY — Tax delinquent real property as defined
under:
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE — The Act of November 10, 1999 (P.L.
491, No. 45), as amended, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103 as implemented
by Ordinance No. 1856.54
§ 92-18. Actions against owner of property with serious code
violations.
The Act of July 7, 1947 (P.L. 1368, No. 542), known as the Real Estate
Tax Sale Law;51
A.
The Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153), referred to as the
Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Act;52
B.
The Act of October 11, 1984 (P.L. 876, No. 171) known as the Second
Class City Treasurer's Sale and Collection Act,53 located in any
municipality in this commonwealth; or
C.
D. Any successor law to any of the above statutes.
A. Actions. In addition to any other remedy available at law or in equity,
the Township of Ridley may institute the following actions against the
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 224, Property Maintenance.
51.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5860.101 et seq.
52.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
53.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 27101 et seq.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 92-17 AUCTIONS § 92-18
81:149
§ 92-19. Denial of permits.
owner of any real property that is in serious violation of a code or for
failure to correct a condition which causes the property to be regarded
as a public nuisance:
(1) An in personam action may be initiated for a continuing violation
for which the owner takes no substantial step to correct within six
months following receipt of an order to correct the violation, unless
the order is subject to a pending appeal before the administrative
agency or court. As authorized by the Act, the Township of Ridley
reserves the right to recover in a single action under this section an
amount equal to any penalties imposed against the owner and any
costs of remediation lawfully incurred by or on behalf of the
municipality to remedy any code violation.
(2) A proceeding in equity.
B. Asset attachment.
(1) General rule. A lien may be placed against the assets of an owner of
real property that is in serious violation of a code or is regarded as
a public nuisance after a judgment, decree or order is entered by a
court of competent jurisdiction against the owner of the property
for an adjudication under Subsection A (relating to actions).
(2) Limitations under the Act. In proceedings under the Act, except as
otherwise allowed by law, where the owner is an association or
trust no lien shall be imposed upon the individual assets of any
limited partner, shareholder, member or beneficiary of the owner.
C. Reservation of rights and remedies under law other than the Act. The
Township of Ridley reserves all rights and remedies existing under
statutes other than the Act, its ordinances implementing them, and
applicable case law to obtain recovery for the costs of preventing and
abatement of code violations and public nuisances to the fullest extent
allowed by law from mortgage lenders, trustees, and members of
liability companies and general partners and limited partners who
provide management services to the real property, officers, agents, and
operators that are in control of a property as an owner or otherwise
hold them personally responsible for code violations as well as owners
themselves. Such owners, mortgage lenders, partners, members of
limited-liability companies, trustees, officers, agents and operators in
control of a real property with code violations shall be subject to all
actions at law and in equity to the full extent authorized by such
statutes, ordinances and applicable case law. Such action may be joined
in one lawsuit against responsible parties with an action brought under
the Act.
A. Permit application form.
§ 92-18 RIDLEY CODE § 92-19
81:150
(1) In addition to the requirements set forth in the governing
ordinance, regulations or rules for the specific municipal permit
being applied for under the ordinances referenced in the definition
of "municipal permit" in § 92-17, all applications for a municipal
permit shall include:
(a) If the owner is an individual, the home address of the owner.
(b) If the owner is an entity, its registered office and principal
place of business, type of entity, in what state it was formed,
and whether the entity has qualified to do business as a foreign
entity in Pennsylvania by filing with the Corporation Bureau of
the Pennsylvania Department of State under Title 15 of the
Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes.
(c) The applications shall also include a provision requiring the
owner to disclose real properties owned by the owner both
inside of the Township of Ridley as well as in all other
municipalities of the commonwealth in which there is a serious
violation of state law or a code and the owner has taken no
substantial steps to correct the violation within six months
following notification of the violation and for which fines or
other penalties or a judgment to abate or correct were imposed
by a Magisterial District Judge or municipal court, or a
judgment at law or in equity was imposed by a court of
common pleas and real property owned in the commonwealth
by the owner for which there is a final and unappealable tax,
water, sewer or refuse collection delinquency on account of the
actions of the owner. This provision shall require the owner to
disclose the street address, tax parcel number, municipality,
and county of each such real property. The provision shall
require the disclosure be under penalty as provided in 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 4904(a) for an unsworn falsification to a
government officer or employee (public servant) performing
official functions.
(2) All applicants for a municipal permit shall accurately complete the
Permit Applicant Disclosure Form55 as from time to time adopted by
the Board of Commissioners subject to a penalty as described in 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 4904.
B. Municipal permit denials and appeals.
(1) Permit denial.
(a) The Building Official, Housing Inspector, or the Zoning
Hearing Board under Subsection B(1)(f), may deny issuing to
an applicant a municipal permit if the applicant owns real
property in any municipality for which there exists on the real
property:
55.Editor's Note: Said form is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 92-19 AUCTIONS § 92-19
81:151
[1] A final and unappealable tax, water, sewer or refuse
collection delinquency on account of the actions of the
owner; or
[2] A serious violation of state law or a code and the owner has
taken no substantial steps to correct the violation within
six months following notification of the violation and for
which fines or other penalties or a judgment to abate or
correct were imposed by a Magisterial District Judge or
municipal court, or a judgment at law or in equity was
imposed by a court of common pleas. However, no denial
shall be permitted on the basis of a property for which the
judgment, order or decree is subject to a stay or
supersedeas by an order of a court of competent
jurisdiction or automatically allowed by statute or rule of
court until the stay or supersedeas is lifted by the court or
a higher court or the stay or supersedeas expires as
otherwise provided by law. Where a stay or supersedeas is
in effect, the property owner shall so advise the
municipality seeking to deny a municipal permit.
(b) The Building Official, Housing Inspector or the Zoning Hearing
Board shall not deny a municipal permit to an applicant if the
municipal permit is necessary to correct a violation of state law
or a code, provided all other conditions for the issuance of a
municipal permit have been met.
(c) The municipal permit denial shall not apply to an applicant's
delinquency on taxes, water, sewer or refuse collection charges
that are under appeal or otherwise contested through a court
or administrative process.
(d) In issuing a denial of a municipal permit based on an
applicant's delinquency in real property taxes or municipal
charges or for failure to abate a serious violation of state law or
a code on real property that the applicant owns in this
commonwealth, the Building Official, Housing Inspector or
Zoning Board shall issue the denial in writing and indicate the
street address, municipal corporation and county in which the
property is located and the court and docket number for each
parcel cited as a basis for the denial. The denial shall also state
that the applicant may request a letter of compliance from the
appropriate state agency, municipality or school district, in a
form specified by such entity as provided in the Act. The denial
shall be delivered by U.S. certified, registered, or express mail,
return receipt requested (and such receipt is obtained or
delivery refused); personal service in manner provided by the
Pennsylvania Rules of Court for Civil Procedure for original
process; hand delivery by a member of the codes enforcement
staff; or a private delivery service that provides for a receipt
(and such receipt is obtained or delivery refused).
§ 92-19 RIDLEY CODE § 92-19
81:152
(e) The information on the real property forming the basis for a
municipal permit denial may be obtained by the Building
Official, Housing Inspector or other employee or agent of the
Township of Ridley from the information disclosed by the
owner in accordance with § 92-19A or any other reliable
information obtained through a search of records using
governmental systems online or through direct contact with
the office maintaining the systems such as the court docket
systems maintained by the Administrative Office of the
Pennsylvania Courts, county/city department of records,
offices of the recorder of deeds, municipal and county tax
collectors and treasurers, county tax claim bureaus,
prothonotary and clerk of court, private online fee-based
search services, and free searches on the Internet. Prior to
making a determination on whether to deny a municipal
permit, the Building Official, Housing Inspector or Zoning
Hearing Board using the services of the Zoning Administrator
or other municipal staff or contracted service provider may
conduct a search using the sources described in this
Subsection B(1)(e).
(f) Zoning Hearing Board.
[1] Municipal permits may be denied by a board in accordance
with the requirements of this section to the extent that
approval of the municipal permit is within the jurisdiction
of the board. For purposes of this section, "board" shall
mean the Zoning Hearing Board of the Township of Ridley
granted jurisdiction to render decisions in accordance
with the Act of July 31, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.56
[2] In any proceeding before a board other than the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of Ridley, the Township
may appear to present evidence that the applicant is
subject to a denial by the Board in accordance with this
section.
[3] For purposes of this subsection, a municipal permit may
only be denied to an applicant other than an owner if:
[a] The applicant is acting under the direction or with the
permission of an owner; and
[b] The owner owns real property satisfying the
conditions of Subsection B(1)(a).
(2) Applicability of other law. A denial of a municipal permit shall be
subject to the provisions of 2 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 5, Subch. B (relating to
practice and procedure of local agencies) and Ch. 7, Subch. B
56.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 92-19 AUCTIONS § 92-19
81:153
(relating to judicial review of local agency action) or the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,57 for denials subject to
the act.
(a) The Building Official, Housing Inspector or Zoning Hearing
Board shall review the disclosure form and the searches, if any,
in accordance with Subsection B(1)(e) prior to any plan or
construction reviews or inspections to determine if such a
review or inspection is unnecessary due to a municipal permit
being denied under this Subsection B.
(b) Right of appeal. The owner shall have a right to appeal the
denial of a municipal permit in accordance with the applicable
law governing such municipal permit. In the case of a denial by
the Building Official or Housing Inspector, the appeal shall be
made with 30 days of the denial to the Board of Appeals
established under the Uniform Construction Code unless the
owner has submitted to the Board of Appeals proof before the
expiration of the 30 days that the owner is seeking proof of
compliance under Subsection B(3), which case the municipal
permit and the denial shall be held in abeyance until the fortyfive-
day period for obtaining proof of compliance under
Subsection B(3) has expired. In case of a denial by the
Township Zoning Hearing Board, the appeal shall be to the
Court of Common Pleas.
[1] With respect to a denial under the grounds authorized by
the Act, the denial may only be reversed for the following
reasons:
[a] An authentic proof of compliance letter in accordance
Subsection B(3).
[b] Evidence of substantial steps taken to remedy a
serious violation set forth on the denial confirmed by
an order of the court or the Building Official or
Housing Inspector.
[c] Evidence of an approved remedial plan to address a
serious violation set forth on the denial.
[d] Evidence of a timely appeal or administrative contest
of a tax, water, sewer, or refuse collection delinquency.
[e] A failure of a state agency, school district or
municipality to issue a proof of compliance within 45
days of a request.
57.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 92-19 RIDLEY CODE § 92-19
81:154
[f] A failure of a state agency or municipality to provide
the relief required under Section 6144 of the Act to an
heir or devisee.
[g] Any other verifiable evidence that establishes by a
perponderance of the evidence that a serious violation
or collection delinquency of tax, water, sewer, or
refuse accounts does not exist.
[2] With respect to denials for reasons other than those
authorized by the Act, the provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code or applicable zoning law shall govern.
[3] The owner shall be informed of the right, time and place to
make an appeal.
(3) Proof of compliance.
(a) All municipal permits denied in accordance with this
subsection shall be withheld until an applicant obtains a letter
from the appropriate state agency, municipality or school
district indicating the following:
[1] The property in question has no final and unappealable
tax, water, sewer or refuse delinquencies;
[2] The property in question is now in state law and code
compliance; or
[3] The owner of the property has presented and the
appropriate state agency or municipality has accepted a
plan to begin remediation of a serious violation of state law
or a code. Acceptance of the plan may be contingent on:
[a] Beginning the remediation plan within no fewer than
30 days following acceptance of the plan or sooner, if
mutually agreeable to both the property owner and
the municipality.
[b] Completing the remediation plan within no fewer than
90 days following commencement of the plan or
sooner, if mutually agreeable to both the property
owner and the municipality.
(b) In the event that the appropriate state agency, municipality or
school district fails to issue a letter indicating tax, water,
sewer, refuse, state law or code compliance or noncompliance,
as the case may be, within 45 days of the request, the property
in question shall be deemed to be in compliance for the
purpose of this section [provided a copy of the request has
been delivered to the municipality where the municipal permit
has been applied for in accordance with Subsection B(3)(d)].
The appropriate state agency, municipality or school district
§ 92-19 AUCTIONS § 92-19
81:155
§ 92-20. Miscellaneous.
shall specify the form in which the request for a compliance
letter shall be made.
(c) Letters required under this section shall be verified by the
appropriate municipal officials before issuing to the applicant a
municipal permit.
(d) An owner seeking to obtain a proof of compliance in order to
obtain a municipal permit that would otherwise be denied shall
submit a copy of the owner's request for proof of compliance
within five days of the date that request is sent to the
appropriate state agency, municipality or school district, to the
municipality from which a municipal permit is sought or submit
the copy of the request with the application for the municipal
permit if such application is made at a later date.
A. Conflict with other law. In the event of a conflict between the
requirements of this article and federal requirements applicable to
demolition, disposition or redevelopment of buildings, structures or
land owned by or held in trust for the government of the United States
and regulated pursuant to the United States Housing Act of 1937 (50
Stat. 888, 42 U.S.C. § 1437 et seq.) and the regulations promulgated
thereunder, the federal requirements shall prevail.
B. Relief for inherited property. Where property is inherited by will or
intestacy, the devisee or heir shall be given the opportunity to make
payments on reasonable terms to correct code violations or to enter
into a remediation plan in accordance with § 6131(b)(1)(iii) of the Act
and § 92-19B(3)(a)[3] (relating to municipal permit denial) with the
Township of Ridley to avoid subjecting the devisee's or heir's other
properties to asset attachment or denial of permits and approvals on
other properties owned by the devisee or heir.
§ 92-19 RIDLEY CODE § 92-20
81:156
Chapter 95
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
268.
§ 92-20 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 92-20
95:157

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 88 of the 1975 Code]
§ 95-1. Preparation of plan of numbering system.
The Planning Commission of the Township of Ridley is directed to prepare
a plan of all roads, streets, highways and alleys in the Township of Ridley,
showing the subdivision of all lots adjacent thereto within the Township, and
to indicate on said plan a system for numbering all buildings now erected or
to be erected facing such roads, streets, highways or alleys.
§ 95-2. Posting of notices to obtain and display number.
When said maps and plans have been completed and approved by the
Board of Commissioners of Ridley Township, the Township Secretary shall
cause 50 notices to be printed and posted in conspicuous places in the
Township. Said notice shall state that owners of all building facing such
roads, streets, highways or alleys within the Township of Ridley shall, on
or before a certain date (which date shall not be less than 30 days after
the posting of said notices), apply to the Township Secretary and obtain the
proper number or numbers for his, her, its or their building or buildings and
shall cause such numbers to be displayed on the front of such building or
buildings in figures of not less than 2 1/2 inches in height and at least three
feet above the level of the ground at the building line and in such a position
that the same will always be visible from the sidewalk or curbline.
§ 95-3. Existing and new structures: time for compliance.
Every owner of any building or buildings now erected and facing any
road, street, highway or alley within the Township of Ridley shall, within
the time specified in the aforesaid notice, comply with the requirements
concerning the numbering of said building or buildings as set forth in the
said notice. Every owner or owners of any building or buildings in the
process of construction, and every owner or owners of any building or
buildings hereafter erected facing any road, street, highway or alley within
the limits of Ridley Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, shall comply
with the requirements for numbering buildings as set forth in this article
within 30 days after the completion of any such building or buildings.
§ 95-4. Numbers issued with building permit.
The Secretary of the Township is hereby directed to furnish all applicants
for a building permit with the proper number or numbers to be displayed on
the building or buildings in accordance with the requirements of this article,
at the time such building permit is issued.
§ 95-1 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 95-5
95:159
§ 95-5. Violations and penalties.58
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
58.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 95-5 RIDLEY CODE § 95-5
95:160
ARTICLE II
Numbering of Apartment Buildings
[Adopted 10-26-1994 by Ord. No. 1723]
§ 95-6. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the followings
meanings:
APARTMENT BUILDING — Any structure which is divided into four or more
residential units, including condominiums.
APARTMENT COMPLEX — A property which contains two or more
apartment buildings.
OWNER — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization who has title to an apartment building or
apartment complex.
§ 95-7. Requirement of numbering of apartment buildings.
§ 95-8. Violation and penalties.59
Any owner found to be in violation of any part of this article shall, upon
conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine and
costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days.
A. Every owner of an apartment building or apartment complex shall be
responsible for displaying the proper street address numbers on the
side of their buildings facing the street or a central parking lot, as well
as any central access door to each individual building. This excludes
buildings which are attached which need only display the street address
in one, centrally located and unobstructed location.
B. In addition, each individual unit within an apartment complex shall be
clearly numbered and/or lettered for identification purposes.
C. All numbers and/or letters displayed on apartment buildings shall be in
figures not less than five inches in height and not less than three feet
above the level of the ground at the building line.
D. All numbers and/or letters shall be displayed in such a manner so that
they are clearly visible from the street or central parking lot or central
access door at all times and are not obstructed in any way.
E. All numbers and/or letters displayed pursuant to this article shall be
illuminated at all times between sunset and sunrise.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 95-6 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 95-8
95:161
Chapter 99
CABLE TELEVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advisory Committee on Cable
Television — See Ch. 9, Art. VII.
Telecommunications Committee — See Ch. 9,
Art. VIII.
Utility installations in improved streets — See
Ch. 264, Art. VI.
Telecommunications — See Ch. 282.
Utility lines — See Ch. 294.
§ 99-1. Findings and purpose.
A. The Township of Ridley finds that the development of cable
communications has the potential of having great benefit and impact
upon the people of Ridley Township. Because of the complex and rapidly
changing technology associated with cable communications, the
Township further finds that the public convenience, safety and general
welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which
should be vested in the Township and the Advisory Committee on Cable
Television. It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments
to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible public
interest and public purpose in these matters, and any franchise issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an
integral part thereof.
B. Further, it is recognized that cable communications systems have the
capacity to provide not only entertainment and information services to
the Township's residents but can provide a variety of interactive
communications services to institutions and individuals.
C. For these purposes, the following goals underlie the regulations
contained herein:
(1) Communications services should be available to the maximum
number of Township residents.
(2) The cable communications system should be capable of
accommodating both the present and reasonably foreseeable
future communications needs of the Township.
(3) The cable communications system should be improved and
upgraded if necessary during the franchise term so that the new
facilities necessary for the operation of this system shall be
integrated to the maximum extent possible with existing facilities.
(4) Any cable communications system authorized by this chapter and
the franchise shall be responsible to the needs and interests of the
§ 95-8 RIDLEY CODE § 99-1
95:162
§ 99-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON CABLE TELEVISION — The committee
designated by the Township to oversee the granting of cable franchises
within the Township and monitor the quality of services being provided by
the grantee.
AFFILIATED ENTITY — Any corporation, partnership or other business
entity that owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common
ownership or control with Comcast.
BASIC SERVICE TIER — The service tier that shall include the
retransmission of local broadcast television signals.
CABLE SERVICE — The transmission to subscribers of video programming
or other programming and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required
for the selection of such video programming or other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and
which is provided to multiple subscribers within the municipality, but such
term does not include:
COMPLAINT — Any written or oral communication from or by a subscriber
to Comcast that communicates the occurrence of a service interruption that
requires a work order/service call or billing issue.
local community and shall provide a wide diversity of information
sources and services to the public.
(5) The public, educational and governmental needs for access to the
cable communications system should be met.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations;
A.
B. A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way;
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of Title II of the Cable Communications Act, except
that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for
purposes of Section 521 of the Cable Communications Act) to the extent
that facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to
subscribers unless the extent of that use is solely to provide interactive
on demand services;
C.
An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Cable
Communications Act; or
D.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems.
E.
§ 99-1 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 99-2
95:163
DROP — The coaxial or fiber optic or other cable that connects a home or
building to the subscriber network.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISEE OR GRANTEE — The natural person(s), partnership(s),
domestic and foreign corporations(s), association(s), joint venture(s) or
organization(s) of any kind which has been legally granted a franchise by
the Township and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
GROSS REVENUE — All revenue received directly by Comcast from the
operation of Comcast's cable system in the franchise area to provide cable
services. Gross revenues shall include the following: basic service fees, fees
charged to subscribers for any other tier of cable service other than basic
service; fees charged to subscribers for any optional, per-channel or perprogram
services; revenue from the provision of any other cable service;
charges for installation, additional outlets, relocation, disconnection,
reconnection and change-in-service fees for video or audio programming;
rental or sales of any and all subscriber equipment, including converters
and remote control devices; any and all local advertising revenue (excluding
agency commissions); revenue or commissions from home shopping
channels; fees for video-on-demand; late payment fees; NSF check charges;
and franchise fees. Gross revenues shall not include revenues received
for the following services or activities: bad debt expenses or any taxes on
services furnished by Comcast and imposed directly upon any subscriber or
user by the municipality, state, federal or other governmental unit.
LOCAL FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — The Township of Ridley, Delaware
County, Pennsylvania.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases,
normal business hours must include some evening hours at least one night
per week and/or some weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Business conditions within
Comcast's service department which are within the control of Comcast.
Those conditions which are not within the control of Comcast include, but
are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages,
telephone network outages and severe and unusual weather conditions.
OUTLET — An interior receptacle that connects a television set to the cable
system.
PUBLIC WAY — The surface of, and the space above and below, any public
street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard,
sidewalk, way, lane, public way, drive, circle or other public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility
strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary
or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter
held by the franchising authority in the franchise area which shall entitle
the franchising authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose
of installing operating, repairing and maintaining the cable system. Public
way shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the franchising
§ 99-2 RIDLEY CODE § 99-2
95:164
authority within franchise area for the purpose of public travel, or for utility
or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other
easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use and meaning
entitle the franchising authority and the grantee to the use thereof for
the purposes of installing, operating, and maintaining the grantee's cable
system over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may
be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system.
SUBSCRIBER — A member of the general public who receives video
programming distributed by a cable television system and does not further
redistribute it.
§ 99-3. Grant of franchise.
A. Authority to grant franchise; terms.
(1) Grant of authority. In consideration of the faithful performance and
observance of the conditions and reservations of this chapter and a
franchise agreement, the Township may grant the nonexclusive
right (hereinafter referred to as "franchise") to a franchisee
(hereinafter referred to as "grantee") to construct, own, operate
and maintain a community antenna cable system and to erect,
maintain and operate television transmission and distribution
facilities and additions thereto in, under, over, along, across and
upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, bridge and other public places
in the Township of Ridley, Delaware County, Pennsylvania and
subsequent additions thereto, for the purpose of transmission and
distribution of audio visual impulses in accordance with the laws
and regulations of the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the ordinances and
regulations of the Township of Ridley, now in effect or hereinafter
enacted. The duration of the rights, privileges and authorities
hereby granted shall be specified in the franchise agreement
between the Township and the grantee and shall commence on the
date of the acceptance of the agreement by the Township.
(2) Noninterference. In exercising rights pursuant hereto, the grantee
shall not endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or interfere
with any installations of the Township, any public utility serving the
Township or any other person permitted to use the streets and
public grounds nor unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of
the streets and public grounds. The grant of one franchise does not
establish priority for use over the other present or future permit or
franchise holders or the Township's own use of the streets and
public grounds. The Board of Commissioners of the Township shall
at all times control the distribution of space in, over, under or
across all streets or public grounds and occupied by the cable
communications system. All rights granted for the construction and
operation of the cable communications system shall be subject to
the continuing right of the Board of Commissioners to require such
§ 99-2 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 99-3
95:165
§ 99-4. Use of public streets and ways.
For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications
system in the Township, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along
the public streets and ways within the Township such wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary
to the operation of the cable communications system; provided, however,
that the grantee complies with all design, construction, safety and
performance provisions contained in this chapter, the franchise and other
applicable local ordinances.
§ 99-5. Use of grantee facilities.
No poles shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of the
Township with regard to location, height, type and any other pertinent
aspects. However no location of any pole of the grantee shall be a vested
right, and such poles shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own
expense whenever the Township determines that the public convenience
would be enhanced thereby. The grantee shall utilize existing poles and
conduits where possible.
§ 99-6. Franchise territory.
The franchise territory shall be the entire Township or portions thereof for
which a franchise is granted under authority of a franchise agreement. The
service area shall be the entire territory defined in the franchise agreement.
reconstruction, relocation, change or discontinuance of the
appliances used by the cable communications system in the streets,
alleys, avenues and highways of the Township as shall, in the
opinion of the Board of Commissioners, be necessary in the public
interest.
(3) Nonexclusivity. Any franchise is nonexclusive and shall not affect
the right of the Board of Commissioners to grant to any other
person a grant or right to occupy or use the streets or portions
thereof for the construction and operation of a cable
communications system within the Township. No privilege or
power of eminent domain is bestowed on the grantee by the grant
of a franchise.
(4) Compliance with Township ordinances. Any franchise granted by
the Township is hereby made subject to the general ordinance
provisions now in effect and hereafter made effective. Nothing in
the franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the
various codes and ordinances of the Township regarding permits,
fees to be paid, or the manner of construction.
§ 99-3 RIDLEY CODE § 99-7
95:166
§ 99-7. Term of franchise.
The term of the franchise shall commence as specified in the franchise
agreement and shall continue for a period specified in the franchise
agreement, unless sooner terminated, as provided in the franchise
agreement.
§ 99-8. Franchise required.
No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the
streets of the Township or be allowed to operate without a franchise.
§ 99-9. Township's right to perform public works.
Nothing in this chapter or the franchise shall be in hindrance to the right
of the Township or any governmental authority to perform or carry on,
directly or indirectly, any public works or public improvements of any
description. Should the cable communications system in any way interfere
with the construction, maintenance or repair of such public works or public
improvements, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, protect or
relocate its cable communications system or part thereof as reasonably
directed by the Township officials or any governmental authority.
§ 99-10. Removal or abandonment.
Upon termination of the franchise by the passage of time or otherwise
and unless the grantee transfers the cable communications system to a
subsequent grantee approved by the Board of Commissioners, the grantee
shall remove its supporting structures, poles, transmission and distribution
systems and all other appurtenances from the streets and public grounds
and shall restore the area to as good a condition or better. Such removal
shall be made so as not to conflict with public health, safety or convenience.
However, the grantee shall not be required to remove or relocate its
supporting structures, poles, transmission and distribution systems, and/
or other appurtenances that facilitate internet access, digital voice, or any
other service not governed by Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934,
as amended, or any portion thereof as a result of revocation, termination,
denial of renewal or any other action to forbid or disallow grantee from
providing cable service.
§ 99-11. No waiver of rights.
No course of dealing between the grantee and the Township nor any delay
on the part of the Township in exercising any rights hereunder shall operate
as a waiver of any such rights of the Township or acquiescence in the
actions of the grantee in contravention of such rights, except to the extent
expressly waived by the Township or expressly provided for in the franchise.
§ 99-12. Transfer of ownership or control.
§ 99-7 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 99-12
95:167
§ 99-13. Regulation of franchise.
A. Transfer of franchise. Any franchise granted hereunder cannot in any
event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including
but not limited to by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation,
receivership or other means, without the prior consent of the Township.
B. Transfer of control or ownership. The grantee shall promptly notify the
Township of any actual or proposed change in control of the grantee.
"Change in control" means transfer.
C. Township authorization. Prior Township authorization is required for
every change, transfer or acquisition of control of the grantee. For the
purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change,
transfer or acquisition of control, the Township may inquire into the
legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest
qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall
assist the Township in any such inquiry. Failure to provide all transferrelated
information reasonably requested by the Township as part of
said inquiry shall be grounds for denial of the proposed change,
transfer or acquisition of control.
D. No waiver of rights. The consent or approval of the Township to any
transfer of the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the
rights of the Township in and to the streets, and any transfer shall, by
its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of the
franchise.
E. Time frame. The Township shall act on a request to transfer the
franchise within the period of time specified in the franchise
agreement.
A. General. The Township shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority
under the provisions of this chapter and applicable law. This authority
shall be vested in the Board of Commissioners or its designee to provide
day-to-day administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter and any franchise granted hereunder and to carry out the
Township's responsibility with regard to cable communications. The
Township may from time to time adopt such reasonable rules and
regulations that it may deem necessary in the exercise of its municipal
powers.
B. Regulatory authority. The Township shall have the responsibility for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter and the franchise,
including but not limited to the following duties, powers and authority,
which may be delegated at its discretion:
(1) To administer and/or enforce all provisions of this chapter and any
franchise granted hereunder.
(2) To receive and investigate complaints regarding substandard
service and to initiate any action necessary pursuant to this chapter
§ 99-12 RIDLEY CODE § 99-13
95:168
§ 99-14. Response to Township inquiries.
In accordance with the terms of this chapter and the franchise, the
Township may, at any time, make reasonable inquiries concerned with the
management and affairs of the cable communications system. The grantee
shall respond to such inquiries in a timely fashion specified in the franchise
agreement.
§ 99-15. Nonexclusivity of remedy.
No decision by the Township to invoke any remedy under this chapter or
under any statute, law or ordinance shall preclude the availability of any
other such remedy.
§ 99-16. Notification.
The grantee shall file with the Township schedules which shall describe all
services offered by the grantee, all rates and charges of any kind and all
terms or conditions relating thereto. Thereafter, the grantee shall file with
the Township all changes in services, all rates and charges of any kind and
all terms and conditions relating thereto.
§ 99-17. Free connections.
The grantee shall provide, upon request and free of charge, drops and
services to public buildings as set forth in the franchise agreement. The
grantee shall discuss the location of each connection with the proper
officials of each such institution receiving free connection.
or the franchise or any applicable law or regulation to correct the
service deficiencies.
(3) To represent the Township's interest before local, state or federal
government agencies in cable communications matters.
(4) To receive, evaluate and file all data and reports required by this
chapter and to rule on such matters as appropriate under this
chapter and state and federal law or regulation.
(5) To inspect at any time all construction, installation and ongoing
operation of the cable communications system and to make such
tests as it reasonably deems necessary to ensure compliance with
the terms of this chapter and the franchise and other applicable
laws and regulations.
(6) To receive applications for rate increases, if the Township has the
authority to regulate rates, and to provide assistance in the
analysis and recommendations thereto.
(7) To monitor the grantee's adherence to operational standards and
service requirements.
§ 99-13 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 99-18
95:169
§ 99-18. Rate regulation.
To the extent that federal or state law or regulation may now or may
hereafter be amended to authorize the Township to regulate the rates
for any particular service tiers, service packages, equipment or any other
services provided by the grantee, the Township shall have the right to
exercise rate regulation to the full extent authorized by law.
§ 99-19. Franchise fee entitlement.
The Township of Ridley shall be entitled to receive from the grantee a
franchise fee of a percentage of the grantee's gross Township revenue. The
percentage and terms of the franchise fee shall be specified in the franchise
agreement.
§ 99-20. Audit.
Tender or acceptance of any payment shall not be construed as an accord
that the amount paid is correct, nor shall such acceptance of payment
be construed as a release of any claim the Township of Ridley may have
for additional sums, including interest payable under this chapter or the
franchise. All amounts paid shall be subject to audit by an independent
auditor chosen by the Township. If, after audit, an unpaid fee is owed to
the Township, such fee shall be paid according to terms set forth in the
franchise agreement. The interest on such unpaid fee shall be specified in
the franchise agreement.
§ 99-21. Right of inspection.
A. Records. The Township shall have the right to inspect all books,
records, reports, maps, plans, financial statements and other materials
of the grantee as provided in this chapter or the franchise agreement at
any time during normal business hours.
B. Construction. The Township shall have the right to inspect all
construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of
the franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other pertinent
provisions of law.
C. Property. At all reasonable times and for the purpose of enforcement of
this chapter and the franchise, the grantee shall permit examination by
any duly authorized representative of the Township of all cable
communications systems and facilities together with any appurtenant
property of the grantee situated within the Township and outside of the
Township if it is utilized in the operation of the Township's cable
communications system.
§ 99-18 RIDLEY CODE § 99-22
95:170
§ 99-22. Franchise renewal.
Upon completion of the term of any franchise granted under this chapter,
the Township may grant or deny renewal of the franchise of the grantee in
accordance with the provisions of the Cable Act and any other applicable
federal, state and local laws if the parties wish to renew the franchise.
§ 99-23. Performance bond.
The grantee shall obtain and maintain during the entire term of the
franchise and any extensions and renewals thereof, at its cost and expense,
and file with the Township a performance bond, in an amount specified
in the franchise agreement, to guarantee the faithful performance of the
grantee of all of its obligations provided under this chapter and the
franchise. Failure to timely obtain, file and maintain said bond shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 99-24. Insurance.
The grantee shall maintain and, by its acceptance of any franchise granted
hereunder, specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of
the franchise liability insurance insuring the Township and the grantee in
the amounts specified in the franchise agreement and in compliance with
all insurance provisions of the franchise agreement.
§ 99-25. Indemnification.
§ 99-26. Responses to service complaints.
The grantee shall respond to requests for repair service in a prompt manner
specified by guidelines included in the franchise agreement. The grantee
shall keep a record of all such complaints in compliance with state law and
shall provide the record to the Township as requested.
A. The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend
and hold harmless the Township, its officers, boards, commissions,
employees and agents against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability,
losses and judgments for damages, including but not limited to
expenses for reasonable legal fees, the Township may suffer as a result
of claims, demands, suits, actions or proceedings of any kind or nature
arising out of the construction, upgrade, installation, removal,
operation or maintenance of all or part of its cable system, including the
actions of any contractor or subcontractor acting within the scope of its
engagement.
B. The Township shall be required to notify the grantee of its obligation to
indemnify and defend the Township according to terms agreed upon
and set forth in the franchise agreement.
§ 99-22 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 99-27
95:171
§ 99-27. Public, educational and municipal access.
The grantee shall ensure the development and propagation of public,
governmental and educational access as a vital community resource. The
Township shall establish requirements in the franchise agreement with
respect to the designation of channel capacity, facilities, equipment and
services for public, educational and governmental use. Specific channels
shall be included as part of the franchise agreement.
§ 99-28. Location of cable communications systems.
The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain all elements of the
cable communications system within the Township in accordance with the
maps and other documents submitted in connection with this chapter or the
franchise. Poles, towers and other obstructions shall be erected so as not to
interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic over public ways and places.
The erection and location of all poles, towers and other obstructions shall
be fixed with the prior written approval and under the supervision of the
Township pursuant to local regulation; provided, however, that the grantee
shall not have a vested interest in such location; and such construction shall
be removed by the grantee, at its sole cost and expense, whenever, in the
judgment of the Township, the same restricts or obstructs the operation or
location or any future operation or location of public ways and places or
whenever the Township closes or abandons any public way or place.
§ 99-29. Disconnection and relocation.
The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate in the same street or other streets and public grounds
or remove from any street or any other public way or place any of its
property for the reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street
construction, change or establishment of street grade or the construction of
any public improvement or structure by any Township department.
§ 99-30. Private property.
The grantee shall be subject to all laws, ordinances or regulations regarding
private property in the course of constructing, installing, operating or
maintaining the cable communications system in the Township of Ridley.
The grantee shall promptly repair or replace all private property, both
real and personal, damaged or destroyed as a result of the construction,
installation, operation or maintenance of the cable communications system
at its sole cost and expense.
§ 99-31. Repairs and restorations.
The grantee shall restore any street it has disturbed and shall, at its
own cost and expense, restore and replace any other property disturbed,
damaged or in any way injured by or on account of its activities to as good
as the condition such property was in immediately prior to the disturbance,
§ 99-27 RIDLEY CODE § 99-31
95:172
damage or injury. Restoration must be in accordance with the rules and
regulations established by the Township.
§ 99-32. Tree trimming.
The grantee may trim trees or other vegetation owned by the Township to
prevent branches, leaves or roots from touching or otherwise interfering
with its wires, cables or other structures as approved by the Township.
§ 99-33. Underground facilities.
In all areas of the Township where cables, wires and other like facilities of
the telephone and electric utilities are already underground, the grantee
must also place its facilities underground. At such time as these facilities
are placed underground by the telephone and electric utility companies or
are required, as are telephone and/or electric, to be placed underground by
the Township, the grantee shall likewise place its facilities underground at
its sole cost and expense.
§ 99-34. Township property.
Where any damages or alterations occur to the Township's water, sewage
or drainage lines or to any other municipal structures in the streets during
the construction due to the presence, negligence, operation or maintenance
of the cable communications system, the sole cost of such repairs, including
all services and materials, shall be paid by the grantee.
§ 99-35. Construction notice.
The grantee shall give appropriate notice to the Township and residents
within a reasonable period of time of proposed construction, excavation,
laying or stringing of cable under streets or on poles, but in no event shall
such notice be given less than seven days before such commencement.
§ 99-36. Safety and construction standards.
The construction, installation, operation, maintenance and/or removal of
the cable communications system shall meet all of the applicable safety,
construction and technical specifications and codes and standards.
§ 99-37. Contractors and subcontractors.
All contractors or subcontractors of the grantee must be properly licensed
under all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. The
grantee shall be responsible for all acts or omissions of any such contractor
or subcontractor in the construction, installation, maintenance or operation
of the grantee's cable communications system.
§ 99-31 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 99-38
95:173
§ 99-38. Construction plan approval.
Prior to the erection or installation by the grantee of any towers, poles,
underground conduits or fixtures for use in connection with initial
construction, rebuild, upgrade or line extension of the cable
communications system under this chapter, the grantee shall make
available for Township approval a concise description of the facilities
proposed to be erected or installed, including strand maps, if required,
together with a map and plans indicating the proposed location of all such
facilities. Approval by the Township shall not be unreasonably withheld
and shall be completed in a timely manner. No erection or installation
of any tower, pole, underground conduit or fixture for use in the cable
communications system shall be commenced by any person until approval
therefor has been received from the Township pursuant to local regulation.
§ 99-39. Erection, removal and common use of poles.
§ 99-40. Right to inspection of construction.
The Township or its designee shall have the right to inspect at any time all
construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this
chapter and the franchise and to make such test as it shall deem necessary
to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter, the franchise and all
other applicable law. The grantee shall cooperate fully with the Township
during all inspections and tests and shall provide access to all equipment,
records and other materials and information necessary for such inspections
and tests.
A. No poles shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of the
Township with regard to location, height, type and any other pertinent
aspect. However, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of
the grantee shall give rise to a vested interest, and such poles or
structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own
expense whenever the Township determines that the public
convenience would be enhanced thereby.
B. Where poles that already exist for use in serving the Township are
available for use by the grantee but it does not make arrangements for
such use, the Township may require the grantee to use such poles and
structures if it determines that the public convenience would be
enhanced thereby and the terms of the use available to the grantee are
just and reasonable.
C. Where a public utility serving the Township desires to make use of the
poles or other wire-holding structures of the grantee but agreement
thereof with the grantee cannot be reached, the Township may require
the grantee to permit such use for such consideration and upon
payment of the prevailing public utility rates for make ready and pole
attachment rental if the Township determines that the use would
enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with
the grantee's operation.
§ 99-38 RIDLEY CODE § 99-41
95:174
§ 99-41. Maintenance and inspection.
§ 99-42. Records.
§ 99-43. Compliance required.
The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and
conditions of this chapter or franchise by any failure of the Township upon
any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any
such terms or conditions.
Chapter 103
A. General. The grantee shall maintain wires, cables and all other real and
personal property and facilities constituting the cable communications
system in good condition, order and repair at all times during the term
of the franchise.
B. Maintenance records. The grantee shall maintain records showing the
date, approximate time and duration and type and probable cause of all
cable communications system outages, whole or partial, due to causes
other than routine testing or maintenance. The entries in such log shall
be subject to inspection and copying by the Township or its designee
during the grantee's regular business hours upon reasonable request.
A. Books and records. The Township reserves the right to inspect all
pertinent books, records, maps, plans, financial statements and other
like material of the grantee upon reasonable notice and in accordance
with terms specified in the franchise agreement.
B. Availability of records. If any of such maps or records is not kept in the
Township or, upon notice, the grantee is unable to provide the records
in the Township, and if the Township shall determine that an
examination of such maps or records is necessary or appropriate to the
performance of any of its duties, then all travel and maintenance
expenses necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid
by the grantee.
C. The grantee shall file with the Township all reports specified under the
provisions of the franchise agreement.
D. Additional information. The grantee shall furnish to the Township such
additional information and records with respect to its operation, affairs,
transactions or property as may be reasonably necessary and
appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties
of the Township in connection with this chapter or the franchise.
E. Records required. The grantee shall at all times maintain a record of all
complaints received and interruptions or degradation of service
experienced as well as a full and complete set of plans, records and
maps showing the exact location of all cable installed or in use in the
Township, exclusive of subscriber service drops.
§ 99-41 CLAIMS, MUNICIPAL § 99-43
103:175
CLAIMS, MUNICIPAL
§ 99-43 RIDLEY CODE § 99-43
103:176
ARTICLE I
Attorney Fees
[Adopted 6-26-1997 by Ord. No. 1768]
§ 103-1. Collection of delinquent accounts.
Pursuant to the authority provided in the Municipal Claims and Lien Act, as
amended,60 the reasonable and appropriate attorney fees for collection of
delinquent accounts shall include:
A. Attorney's time billed at the regular hourly rate of the Township
Solicitor; and
B. Filing fees; and
C. Out-of-pocket costs.
60.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 103-1 CLAIMS, MUNICIPAL § 103-1
103:177
Chapter 105
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of appeals — See Ch. 9, Art. IX.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 120.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 122.
Excavations and grading — See Ch. 129.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Fuel gas code — See Ch. 140, Art. IV.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 181.
Plumbing — See Ch. 216.
Sewers — See Ch. 237.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 260.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 264.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
268.
Walls and fences — See Ch. 310.
Zoning — See Ch. 325.
§ 105-1. Election to administer and enforce.
Ridley Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 105-2. Adoption of Code.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of Ridley Township.
However, the exceptions listed in § 403.42(c)(1) and § 403.62(c)(1) and (2)
are deleted and, to the extent that they currently or will in the future
require permits, then the permitting requirements will continue in full force
and effect.
§ 105-3. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within Ridley Township shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by the governing
body of Ridley Township from time to time by resolution:
A. By the designation of an employee of Ridley Township to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of Ridley Township;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Ridley Township;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
§ 103-1 RIDLEY CODE § 105-3
105:178
§ 105-4. Board of appeals.61
§ 105-5. Effect on preexisting ordinances.
§ 105-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by Ridley Township for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be established by
the Board of Commissioners by resolution from time to time.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of Ridley
Township;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. A board of appeals shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners of Ridley Township in conformity with the requirements
of the relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time,
and for the purposes set forth therein.
B. If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken jointly with
one or more other municipalities, said board of appeals shall be
established by joint action of the participating municipalities.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by Ridley Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
or exceed the requirements of this code shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirement of this code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Ridley Township not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 9, Art. IX.
§ 105-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 105-6
105:179
Chapter 108
DAY-CARE HOMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning regulation of day-care homes — See
§ 325-91 of Ch. 325.
§ 108-1. Title.
The name of this chapter shall be the "Ridley Township Day-Care Home
Ordinance."
§ 108-2. Definitions.
The following words have special meanings for the purpose of this chapter:
DAY-CARE HOME — A dwelling which is also used to provide care for no
more than six nonresident children for part of the day and is licensed or
registered with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for that purpose.62
NONRESIDENT CHILD — A child who does not ordinarily reside in a
dwelling which is used as a day-care home.
§ 108-3. License required.
No person shall maintain or operate a day-care home in the Township of
Ridley unless and until he has obtained a day-care home license from the
Township Manager.
§ 108-4. Inspection of facility.
Upon receipt of an application for a day-care home license, the Manager
shall order an inspection of the facility to be used for the day-care home to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 108-5. Conditions for granting of license.
Before granting an application for a day-care home license, the Manager
shall be satisfied of the following:
A. That the applicant has received a license or been registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. That the location and facilities of the proposed day-care home comply
with Chapter 325, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Ridley in
connection with such a use.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 105-6 RIDLEY CODE § 108-5
108:180
§ 108-6. Limit on number of children.
No more than six children may receive care at one time.
§ 108-7. Required fire-protection devices.
The operator of the day-care home shall maintain a working smoke alarm
and at least one working fire extinguisher.
§ 108-8. Interior play area requirements.
The interior play area shall have a minimum of 40 square feet of space
for each child, measured wall to wall, and including space occupied by
cupboards, shelves, furniture and equipment, but excluding halls,
bathrooms, kitchens and related areas. The play area shall be located on a
floor with two separate doors to the exterior.
§ 108-9. Exterior play area requirements.
The exterior play area shall be located within the rear yard of the dwelling
and must be completely enclosed by a fence at least 48 inches high.
Furthermore, it must contain a minimum of 65 square feet of accessible
play space for each child. Outdoor play space is considered accessible if it
is contiguous to the dwelling.
§ 108-10. Required supervision.
During the time when children are receiving care or at any time when there
are nonresident children on the premises of the day-care home, there shall
be an adult person in charge of the home and care of said children. An adult
person is a person who is at least 18 years of age.
§ 108-11. Maximum number of children on premises.
At no time shall the number of children receiving care at the home exceed
six in number, excluding relatives of the operator of the day-care home.
C. That the building and equipment comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. That the operator of the proposed day-care home has received a copy of
this chapter.
E. That neither the operator nor any employee has a criminal record.
F. That the operator has business liability insurance to cover his
operations in a minimum amount of coverage as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.63
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 108-5 DAY-CARE HOMES § 108-12
108:181
§ 108-12. Maximum number of infants on premises.
There shall be no more than four infants and/or toddlers in a day-care home
at any one time. For the purpose of this chapter, an "infant" is a child under
the age of two years, and a "toddler" is a child over the age of two years but
under the age of four years.
§ 108-13. Storage of certain objects and materials.
§ 108-14. Facility standards.
A. All medicines, drugs, cleaning materials, detergents, aerosol cans and
other poisonous and toxic materials must be kept in a place inaccessible
to the children and separate from the child-care areas.
B. Hot-water pipes, fixed and portable space heaters, wood-burning stoves
and other sources of heat, exceeding 110° F., which are accessible to
children, must be equipped with protective guards or insulated to
prevent children from coming in direct contact with a heat source.
Fireplaces must be securely screened or equipped with protective
guards while in use.
C. Fixed and portable space heaters and wood-burning stoves are
permitted to be used while children are in care, only if they are
inspected and approved, in writing, by the Township Fire Marshal.
A. All floors, walls, ceilings and other surfaces, including any outdoor play
area must be kept clean and in good repair.
B. There must be at least one indoor flushing toilet and one sink with hot
and cold water available at the sink.
C. All windows and doors used for ventilation must be screened.
D. There must be one operable telephone.
E. All stairways, hallways and exits from rooms and from the day-care
home must be unobstructed.
F. Protective receptacle covers must be placed in all electrical outlets
accessible to children under five years of age.
G. Toys, play equipment and other indoor and outdoor equipment used by
the children must be kept clean, in good repair and free of rough edges,
sharp corners, pinch and crush points, splinters and exposed bolts. All
ladders on slides or any other apparatus must have guards along the
sides. Outdoor equipment, such as climbing apparatus, slides and
swings must be anchored firmly and in good repair. Outdoor equipment
may not be located on either concrete or asphalt surfaces.
H. Toys and objects with a diameter of less than one inch, objects with
removable parts that have a diameter of less than one inch, plastic bags
§ 108-12 RIDLEY CODE § 108-14
108:182
§ 108-15. Discipline; custody of children.
The operator of the day-care home and any other adult in charge of the
children shall not use any form of physical punishment. Disciplinary
methods should not humiliate, frighten or shame the children. Children
may be released from the day-care home only to the parent, the person
designated, in writing, by the child's parent to receive that child or to any
person designated by telephone by the parent.
§ 108-16. License fee.64
The annual license fee for a day-care home shall be as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 108-17. Periodic inspections; revocation of license.
The operator of a licensed day-care home shall permit inspection by
authorized Township officials at any time, without notice, when children are
in care. Other inspections may be made periodically within 24 hours' notice.
In the event that any such inspection reveals conditions which violate
any provision of this chapter, the operator may be given a period not to
exceed 48 hours to correct said condition, otherwise to suffer a suspension
of the day-care home license until said condition is corrected. If, in the
opinion of the Township Manager, a condition found in a day-care home
presents a clear and present danger to children receiving care, the license
may be suspended immediately until said condition is corrected to the
satisfaction of the Manager and other appropriate Township officials. Upon
receipt of proof of the conviction of an operator of a day-care home of any
violation of this chapter or any violation of the law of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania relating to the care of children or of any crime involving
children, the Township Manager shall have the authority to suspend or
revoke the day-care home license.
§ 108-18. Violations and penalties.65
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default
of payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Chapter 113
and Styrofoam objects must not be accessible to infants and/or
toddlers.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 108-14 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 108-18
113:183
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 69.
Drugs and drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 117.
Loitering and curfew — See Ch. 176.
Noise and odors — See Ch. 190.
§ 113-1. Enumeration of disorderly acts.
Pursuant to the authorization granted by the Section 1502, Clause IX, of
the First Class Township Code,66 disorderly practices within the limits of the
Township of Ridley are hereby defined as follows:
§ 113-2. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
Each and every of the foregoing acts, words or conduct herein defined is
hereby declared to be unlawful.
§ 113-3. Conflicting regulations.
Nothing herein contained is intended to be in conflict with any Act of
Assembly, and if any act, word or conduct alleged to have been committed
by the accused constitutes an offense under any provision of any Act of
Assembly, prosecution for such offense is hereby directed to be exclusively
under such Act of Assembly.
§ 113-4. Violations and penalties.67
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and in default
of payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
A. Using offensive, vile, profane, vulgar, abusive or indecent language;
cursing, swearing or any loud or boisterous talking which disturbs the
peace and quiet entitled to be enjoyed by others, even though the same
does not originate on a public highway or place.
B. Molesting religious or other lawful meetings.
C. Begging for personal gain.
D. Drunkenness.
66.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 56509.
67.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 108-18 RIDLEY CODE § 113-4
113:184
Chapter 117
DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 69. Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 113.
§ 113-4 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 113-4
117:185

ARTICLE I
Drug Paraphernalia
[Adopted 7-21-1982 by Ord. No. 1534]
§ 117-1. License required to sell.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons as principal, clerk, agent or
servant to sell any items, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which
is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or other drugs or
controlled substances as defined by the Law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, without obtaining a license therefor. Such licenses shall be in
addition to any and all other licenses held by an applicant.
§ 117-2. Application for license.
The application for a license to sell any item, effect, paraphernalia,
accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal
cannabis or other drugs shall be on a form obtained from the Office of the
Township Manager and shall include affidavits by the applicant, owner and
every employee authorized to sell such items that such person has never
been convicted of a drug-related offense or placed on ARD Probation for or
because of a drug-related offense.
§ 117-3. Sale to minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to sell or give items as described in § 117-1 in any form
to any child under 18 years of age.
§ 117-4. Records to be kept.
Every licensee must keep a record of every item, effect, paraphernalia,
accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal
cannabis or other illegal drugs which is sold and this record shall be open to
the inspection of any police officer at any time during the licensee's hours of
business. Such record shall contain the name and address of the purchaser,
the name and quantity of the product sold, the date and time of the sale
and shall contain the signature of the licensee or the licensee's agent who
actually made the sale. Such records shall be retained for not less than two
years from the date of the sale.
§ 117-5. Identification of purchaser.
The licensee or his agent, employee or servant shall require that persons
purchasing said items produce a valid operator's license or Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board card that shows the purchaser's full name, address
and date of birth. This information shall be included in the record of the
purchase as required in § 117-4. A sign notifying potential purchasers of this
requirement shall be visibly displayed on the premises.
§ 117-1 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 117-6
117:187
§ 117-6. Use of false identification prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to show a licensee or clerk or employee of
a licensee false identification in order to induce said licensee or employee of
a licensee to sell or give any item, effect paraphernalia, accessory or thing
which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or other illegal
drugs.
§ 117-7. Licenses to be posted.
Licenses shall be posted in such a place in the establishment where they
can be viewed clearly by the general public.
§ 117-8. Inspections of premises.
Periodic inspections shall be conducted at the discretion of the Captain
of Police to determine if licensees are making and retaining records in
accordance with this article.
§ 117-9. Display of paraphernalia.
All items designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or illegal drugs
shall be stored or displayed so that children under the age of 18 years of
age will not be able to handle them.
§ 117-10. License fee.68
Every licensee shall pay to the Township of Ridley the sum as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners when said license is
issued.
§ 117-11. Term of license; renewal.
Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period not
greater than one year and shall be renewed on or before July 1 of each year.
§ 117-12. Violations and penalties.69
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined a sum of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall undergo imprisonment of not more
than 30 days. Each day that a violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense. Furthermore, upon conviction a licensee shall
forfeit his license for the remainder of the year in which the conviction shall
occur.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 117-6 RIDLEY CODE § 117-12
117:188
ARTICLE II
Drug-Free School Zones
[Adopted 9-27-1989 by of Ord. No. 1653]
§ 117-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by establishing school safety zones in designated areas near public,
private and parochial schools to implement Act 31 of 198870 enacted by
the Pennsylvania Legislature. This Act creates additional penalties and a
minimum two-year prison term for persons over 18 years of age convicted
of a violation of Section 13(a)(14) or (30) of the Controlled Substance, Drug,
Device and Cosmetic Act71, where the delivery or possession with the intent
to deliver such controlled substances to a minor is within such school safety
zone.
§ 117-14. Designation of zones.
The areas within 1,000 feet of the school property within the Township on
which is located a public, private or parochial school are designated as
school safety zones pursuant to Act 31 of 1988.
§ 117-15. Installation of signs.72
Traffic Maintenance is directed to obtain appropriate signs designating
such areas as school safety zones and to coordinate for their placement with
the Ridley School District Superintendent of Buildings and Grounds and/or
a designated representative of a private or parochial school.
70.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6314(b).
71.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 117-13 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 117-15
117:189
Chapter 120
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of appeals — See Ch. 9, Art. IX.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 122.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
268.
Zoning — See Ch. 325.
§ 117-15 RIDLEY CODE § 117-15
117:190
ARTICLE I
ICC Electrical Code
[Adopted 3-24-2004 by Ord. No. 185573; 12-20-2006 by Ord. No.
1917]
§ 120-1. Adoption of code. [Amended 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 1859;
12-20-2006 by Ord. No. 1917]
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of
Code Enforcement of Ridley Township, being marked and designated as the
ICC Electrical Code-Administrative Provisions, 2006 edition, as published
by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Electrical Code of Ridley Township, in the State of Pennsylvania, for
regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of electrical systems as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Electrical Code on file at the Ridley Township Municipal Building are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 120-2 of this ordinance.
§ 120-2. Revisions and additions. [Amended 6-23-2004 by Ord No.
1859]
A. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Ridley Township
Section 404.2 Fee Schedule shall read: "A schedule adopted by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners."
Chapter 11 Means of Appeal is deleted. A substitute procedure
is adopted by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
B. Additional definitions.
(1) "Electrical work" shall mean installation, construction, alteration,
assembly of any device, equipment, apparatus or any other object
which is used or intended to be used for the transmission of electric
energy or impulse except when performed by or on behalf of any
regulated public utility or any regulated radio or television
transmission system on equipment, cables, wires or equivalent
facilities or on electrical circuits connected to or supported by such
equipment or facilities if the use of the equipment or facilities is
required in the operation of or services rendered by the regulated
entity. It shall not include the manufacture of any device,
73.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Chapter 120, Electrical Standards, Art.
I, Electrical Outlets, adopted 4-2-1975 by Ord. No. 1410.
§ 120-1 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 120-2
117:191
equipment, apparatus or other object used or intended to be used
for the transmission of any electrical energy or impulse but shall
include electrical wiring, systems connected to air-conditioning
equipment, protective signaling devices and swimming pools.
(2) "Approved inspection agency" shall mean any electrical inspection
agency approved by the Board of Commissioners by resolution.
C. Electrical registration required.
(1) No electrical work of any kind shall be performed within the
Township by any person, firm or corporation until the person, firm
or corporation who is to perform such electrical work obtains a
current contractor registration. The applicant shall register his/her
or its name and address and other pertinent information on a form
to be submitted with the electrical registration application. A
certificate of insurance in an amount not less that $1,000,000 shall
be submitted with the application for registration. Upon issuance,
such registration shall continue in full force and effect following its
issuance to and including the 31st day of December in the year of
issuance, unless sooner revoked.
(2) Any applicant who is refused a registration or whose registration is
revoked prior to expiration shall have the right to appeal such
action pursuant to the appeals section of this article. Failure to
comply with the registration requirement in this section or
evidence of unsatisfactory knowledge or performance pursuant to
the requirements of the ICC Electrical Code shall be cause for
revocation or refusal to issue or renew an electrical registration.
D. Requirements for electrical work.
(1) All electrical work in the Township shall be performed in
accordance with the ICC Electrical Code requirements and
standards.
(2) No person shall perform any electrical work in the Township unless
he first obtains a permit from the Code Official. An applicant for a
permit shall make application on a form supplied by the Township
setting forth:
(a) The nature of the electrical work to be performed.
(b) The place where the electrical work will be done.
(c) Plans and specifications for the electrical work to be done.
(d) The name and address of the person who will perform the
electrical work.
(e) Any other information which the Code Official deems
necessary or desirable.
§ 120-2 RIDLEY CODE § 120-2
117:192
(f) Electrical drawings shall be required for all new commercial,
public and industrial buildings and apartments. Drawings shall
be sealed by a registered professional electrical engineer.
E. Exemptions. Maintenance work will not require a permit.
"Maintenance" is defined as "changing of appliances within an existing
wired outlet box."
F. Fees for registration and permits. Fees for electrical registration and
permits required by this article shall be calculated using the fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the Township Board of
Commissioners.
G. Inspection and tests.
(1) All decisions as to whether or not electrical work complies with the
provisions of this article shall be made by the Code Official or his
designee, who is hereby authorized to stop any electrical work in
progress and order the removal thereof if he shall determine that
such work is not being installed in conformity with the provisions of
the ICC Electrical Code and this article.
(2) Inspections and tests to determine whether the provisions of the
ICC Electrical Code have been complied with shall be made by an
inspecting agency. Upon completion of any electrical work, a
certificate of inspection and approval shall be issued by an
approved inspecting agency not later that five days after
completion of the installation of the electrical work. Schedules of
the fees charged by the approved inspecting agency shall at all
times be kept on file in the office of the Code Official and open to
the public for inspection.
(3) The Code Official shall not accept any certificate of inspection from
an inspecting agency which has not been approved by the Board of
Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners shall investigate the
qualifications, methods of operation, completeness of inspection
activity and type of report before approving any such inspecting
agency.
H. Revocation notice. When the Code Official determines that reason(s)
exist for the revocation of a permit, he shall serve notice upon the
holder of such permit stating the nature of the violation and that
compliance with all requirements shall be achieved within 10 days of
receipt of said notice. The notice may also prescribe a course of
remedial action.
I. Violations and penalties.
(1) In case any work for which a permit is required by this article is
started prior to obtaining a permit, the fee specified shall be
doubled. However, payment of such double fee shall not relieve any
person or firm from fully complying with requirements of this
§ 120-2 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 120-2
117:193
article in the execution of the work or from any other penalty
prescribed herein.
(2) Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(3) Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply
with this article or the code adopted herein shall be guilty of a
summary offense and punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000
for each offense or, in default thereof, may be imprisoned in the
Delaware County prison for a period not to exceed 30 days.
J. Appeals. Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any decision of
the Code Official arising out of this article or code adopted hereby may
appeal from such decision according to the procedure adopted by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners.74 [Amended 6-23-2004 by
Ord. No. 1859]
74.Editor's Note: See Chapter 9, Art. IX, Board of Appeals.
§ 120-2 RIDLEY CODE § 120-2
117:194
Chapter 122
ENERGY CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of appeals — See Ch. 9, Art. IX.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 120.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Fuel gas code — See Ch. 140, Art. IV.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
268.
Zoning — See Ch. 325.
§ 122-1. Adoption of code. [Amended 12-20-2006 by Ord. No. 1917;
12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1963]
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office
of Code Enforcement of Ridley Township, being marked and designated
as the International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, including
the Appendix, as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of Ridley Township, in
the State of Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing energy-efficient
building envelopes and installation of energy-efficient mechanical, lighting
and power systems as herein provided; conditions and terms of said Energy
Conservation Code on file in the Office of Code Enforcement are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 122-2 of this chapter.
§ 122-2. Revisions.
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Ridley Township
Chapter 124
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and floodplain
management — See Ch. 92.
Fencing of excavations — See Ch. 129, Art. I.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 260.
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
264, Art. IV.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
268.
§ 120-2 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 124-1
124:195
§ 124-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Ridley
Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance".
§ 124-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the modification of the natural
terrain, the alteration of drainage and the maintenance of artificial
structures and surfaces within the Township of Ridley so as to assure and
safeguard the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of
the Township of Ridley.
§ 124-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following definitions shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan of a system
of coordinated devices to prevent the dislocation and transportation of soil
during a period of time when natural vegetation is disturbed.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan for controlling water runoff
so that it will not cause erosion or flooding and for minimizing the effects of
impervious areas on water runoff.
§ 124-4. Activities requiring permit.
§ 124-5. Application for permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in
earthmoving activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including,
but not limited to, excavations, embankments, land development,
subdivision development, mineral extraction and the moving,
depositing or storing of soil, rock, earth or other materials within the
Township of Ridley without first securing a permit as hereunder
provided. [Amended 8-27-2000 by Ord. No. 1806]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to disturb,
modify, block, divert or affect the natural overland or subsurface flow of
stormwater within the Township of Ridley without first securing a
permit as hereunder provided.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
erect or install any drainage dam, ditch, culvert, drain pipe, bridge or
any other structure or obstruction affecting the drainage of any
premises in the Township of Ridley without first securing a permit as
hereunder provided.
A. Any person, firm or corporation proposing to engage in an activity
requiring a permit shall apply for a permit by written application on a
form furnished by the Township.
§ 124-1 RIDLEY CODE § 124-5
124:196
B. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a plan of the
property showing as a minimum:
(1) The property boundaries of the site on which the work is to be
performed.
(2) The topographic features of the site both existing and proposed.
(3) The topographic features surrounding the site or property which
are of importance to the proposed development and its drainage
consideration.
(4) The soil types on the site.
(5) Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures proposed for the
work as well as permanent stormwater management features
which will be incorporated into the finished topography.
C. In addition to the above, unless waived by the Township, the application
shall be accompanied by a detailed Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Plan and a permanent Stormwater Management Plan. These
plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer with
expertise in the field of hydrology and hydraulics. Supporting data and
engineering calculations shall be submitted with the plan. Minimum
design criteria, unless waived by the Township, shall be as follows:
(1) The peak rate of discharge at any time may not exceed the existing
peak (predevelopment) rate of discharge.
(2) The U.S. Soil Conservation Service Soil-Cover Complex Method for
determining the rate and quantity of water runoff shall be used.
Areas under one acre shall use the Rational Method for
determining the rate and quantity of water runoff.
(3) Storage requirements for water and sediment during construction
shall be based on the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm
frequency, which is 7.2 inches of rainfall within a twenty-four-hour
period.
(4) Water storage for permanent stormwater management shall be
based on a twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour storm frequency,
which is 5.7 inches of rainfall within a twenty-four-hour period.
(5) On-site ameliorating measures shall be incorporated into the final
plan to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer. These measures
shall serve to eliminate any increase whatsoever in the rate of
runoff from proposed impervious areas.
(6) Silt retention devices shall be removed and permanent,
maintenance-free drainage structures shall be constructed upon
the complete restabilization of soil as determined by the Township
Engineer.
§ 124-5 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 124-5
124:197
§ 124-6. Approval of permit.
Upon the submission of an application which conforms to the provisions
of this chapter, the Township Manager, after consultation with and the
approval of the Township Board of Commissioners if deemed necessary,
shall issue the necessary permit.
(7) All drainage facilities shall be designed in the most practicable
fashion to carry surface water in such a manner as to prevent
erosion or uncontrolled overflow.
(8) No slopes deeper than two horizontal to one vertical shall be
permitted. Slopes steeper than three to one shall be peg-sodded, or
seeded and covered with jute matting or similar method.
(9) The design, installation and maintenance of erosion and
sedimentation control measures shall be in accordance with
guidelines as may be established from time to time, by the Soil
Conservation Service of the United States Department of
Agriculture and the Township Engineer.
(10) All grades surfaces shall be seeded, sodded and/or planted or
otherwise protected as required in Subsection C(8) hereof from
erosion as soon as practicable and shall be watered, tended and
maintained until growth is well established at time of completion
and final inspection. The disturbed area and duration of exposure
shall be kept to a practical minimum.
(11) All trees in areas of extreme grade change shall be removed unless
protected with suitable tree wells or mounds. However, extreme
precautions shall be taken to prevent the unnecessary removal of
trees.
(12) When required, adequate provisions shall be made for dust control
measures as are deemed acceptable by the Township.
(13) When required, the applicant shall agree to the granting and
recording of easements for drainage facilities, including
acceptance of the discharge water on the property of others,
provisions for maintenance of slopes and swales, and access for the
maintenance of antierosion facilities.
D. The application for a permit to grade shall be accompanied by a permit
fee computed in accordance with a schedule to be established from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
E. All applicants for a permit involving an area greater than one acre shall,
before any permit is granted, post a bond with the Township of Ridley,
in a sum to be determined by the Township Engineer, with corporate
surety to be approved by the Township Solicitor, the conditions of which
shall be a full and complete compliance with this chapter and all terms
of the permit.
§ 124-5 RIDLEY CODE § 124-7
124:198
§ 124-7. Standards for issuance of permit.
A. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any condition of the
permit, the permittee is responsible for the prevention of damage to
other property, or personal injury which may be affected by the activity
requiring a permit.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall modify, fill, excavate or regrade
land in any manner so close to a property line as to endanger or damage
any adjoining public street sidewalk, alley, or any other public or
private property without supporting and protecting such property from
settling, cracking, erosion, sediment, or other physical damage or
personal injury which might result.
C. No person, firm or corporation shall deposit or place any debris or any
other material whatsoever, or to cause such to be thrown or placed, in
any drainage ditch or drainage structure in such a manner as to
obstruct free flow.
D. No person, firm or corporation shall fail to adequately maintain in good
operating order any drainage facility on his premises. All drainage
ditches, culverts, drain pipes, and drainage structures shall be kept
open and free flowing at all times.
E. The owner of any property on which any work has been made pursuant
to a permit granted under the provisions of this article shall
continuously maintain and repair all grades surfaces and anti-erosion
devices, retaining walls, drainage structures and other protective
devices, plantings and ground cover installed or completed.
F. All plans and specifications accompanying applications for permits shall
include provisions for both interim (temporary) and ultimate
(permanent) erosion and sediment control.
(1) The design, installation and maintenance of erosion and sediment
control measures shall be accomplished in accordance with
guidelines as may be established from time to time by the Delaware
County Soil and Water Conservation District as adopted from
Standards and Specifications of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
(2) All graded surfaces shall be seeded, sodded and/or planted or
otherwise protected from erosion as soon as practicable and shall
be watered, tended and maintained until growth is well established
at time of completion and final inspection. The disturbed area and
duration of exposure shall be kept to a practical minimum.
G. Natural and/or existing slopes exceeding five horizontal to one vertical
shall be benched or continuously stepped into competent materials
prior to placing all classes of fill.
§ 124-7 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 124-7
124:199
§ 124-8. Enforcement.
H. Fills toeing out on natural slopes steeper than four horizontal to one
vertical shall not be made unless approved by the Township Engineer,
or by a Soil Engineer certifying that he has investigated the property,
made soil tests and that in his opinion such steeper slopes will safely
support the proposed fill.
I. All trees in areas of extreme grade change shall be removed unless
protected with suitable tree wells. However, extreme precautions shall
be taken to prevent the unnecessary removal of trees.
J. The following provisions apply to the carrying and disposal of storm
water runoff:
(1) All drainage facilities shall be designed, in the most practicable
fashion, to carry surface water in such a manner as to prevent
erosion, overflow or ponding.
(2) The ponding water shall not be permitted above cut or fill slopes or
on drainage terraces nor shall water be impounded on adjacent
property. Adequate drainage facilities shall be provided to prevent
such ponding.
(3) The applicant shall make adequate provisions to prevent any
surface waters from damaging the face of any excavation or fill. All
slopes shall be temporarily and permanently protected from
surface water runoff from above any interceptor and diversion
berms, swales, brow or berm ditches and shall be sodded, seeded
and planted, unless the Township determines such treatment is
unnecessary and specifically waives this requirement.
(4) All drainage terraces interceptor and diversion berms, swales and
brow or berm ditches shall be designed and constructed and, when
required, by the Township Engineer, shall be piped or paved or
otherwise improved to the satisfaction of the Township.
K. When required, adequate provisions shall be made for dust control
measures as are deemed acceptable by the Township.
L. When required, the applicant shall agree to the granting and recording
of easements for drainage facilities, including acceptance of the
discharge of water on the property of others, provisions for
maintenance of slopes and swales, and access for the maintenance of
antierosion facilities.
A. The applicant, in any activity requiring a permit, and which involves 10
or less single-family residences, after commencing initial operation,
shall request, in writing, inspection by the Township Engineer.
§ 124-7 RIDLEY CODE § 124-8
124:200
(1) Upon completion of stripping, the stockpiling of topsoil and
disposal of all unsuitable material, but prior to beginning any other
preparation of the ground.
(2) Upon completion of preparation of ground to receive fill, but prior
to beginning any placement.
(3) Upon completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development improvements and
ground covers.
(4) Upon completion of final grading; permanent drainage and erosion
control facilities, including established ground covers and planting,
and all other work of the permit.
B. The applicant, in all other cases other than that referred to in
Subsection A, after commencing initial operations, shall request, in
writing, inspection by the Township Engineer, at the following stages in
the development of the site, or of each subdivision thereof:
(1) Prior to commencement of grading operations to determine
suitability of all proposed fill materials.
(2) Upon completion of stripping, the stockpiling of topsoil and
disposal of all unsuitable material, but prior to beginning or any
other preparation of the ground.
(3) Upon completion of the preparation of an area to receive fill and
prior to the beginning of placement, an inspection shall be made of
the proof rolling procedure.
(4) Upon completion of structural fill placement such that the following
earthfill procedures are assured:
(a) Prior to placing fill in any area, grading should be performed as
required to provide for drainage. Ditching or filling around the
area should be performed to intercept or divert all surface
water. Within the area on which fill is to be placed, the ground
should be graded so as to provide for unobstructed drainage
from every point to some disposal point.
(b) The area should be closely examined to determine whether
excessive wetness, springs, or other seepage of water can be
observed. If such conditions exist, drainage must be provided
before placement of fill is undertaken.
(c) When the fill area has been prepared as specified, the existing
ground surface should be compacted by the specified method
for compacting fill.
(d) Fill should begin at the lowest section of the area. Fill should
be spread in six-inch layers prior to compaction. Each layer
§ 124-8 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 124-8
124:201
§ 124-9. Cost of inspections.
All applicants shall bear all costs of inspection required hereunder, and
shall deposit with the Township Treasurer such sums as the Township Board
of Commissioners shall determine, to guarantee payment of the costs of
such inspections. The cost of inspections shall be at the rate charged to the
Township by the Township Engineer.
should be approximately horizontal, but small slopes can be
permitted in order to provide for surface runoff.
(e) Each layer of fill should be inspected prior to compaction. All
roots, vegetation, or debris should be removed. Stones larger
than 6 inches in diameter should be removed or broken. The
moisture content of each layer should be determined to be
suitable for compaction.
(f) The compaction of the fill should be done with a sheeps-foot
roller, rubber tired roller or a vibratory roller. Other
compaction equipment should be used only after it has
demonstrated that satisfactory results can be obtained with it.
(g) Each layer of compacted fill should be tested to determine its
dry density as per ASTM D 1556. The density of each layer
should be not less than 95% of.maximum dry density as
determined by ASTM D 1557. The moisture content of the
compacted layer should be not more then 4% less or 2%
greater than the optimum moisture as determined by ASTM D
1557.
(h) Only when the compacted layer has been shown to be as
specified, should other layers of fill be placed above it.
(i) Visual inspection of borrow materials should be made
periodically to assure that no variation in the fill material has
occurred.
(5) Upon completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development improvements and
ground covers.
(6) Upon completion of trench backfilling operations so that testing
can be performed as specified in Subsection B(4).
(7) Upon completion of final grading, permanent drainage and erosion
control facilities, including established ground covers and planting,
and all other work of the permit.
§ 124-8 RIDLEY CODE § 124-10
124:202
§ 124-10. Violations and penalties.75
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter
shall, upon summary conviction before any District Justice of the Peace, be
sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and cost of prosecution, and in
default of payment of the fine for a term of not more than 30 days. Each and
every day in which any person, firm or corporation shall be in violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 129
EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
264, Art. IV.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 124-10 EXCAVATIONS § 124-10
129:203

ARTICLE I
Fencing of Excavations
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch.52, Art. I, of the 1975 Code]
§ 129-1. Fencing required.
The owner, tenant or occupant of any land in the Township of Ridley upon
which there is contained or maintained any quarry or excavation in excess
of 12 feet in depth at the deepest point, or upon which water in excess
of three feet in depth at the deepest point is permitted to accumulate and
remain in any quarry or excavation for a period of 48 hours, which said
quarry or excavation is within 500 feet of a public road, street, highway,
school, church, park, playground, recreation center or private dwelling, is
hereby required to erect and maintain in good condition, at his own cost
and expense, a fence of permanent material to a height of not less than six
feet around the rim of such quarry or excavation in order to protect the life
or safety of persons.
§ 129-2. Gates.
The fence hereby required shall be securely enclosed at all times, except for
ingress or egress, by means of a gate or gates, which gates shall be locked
when not in use.
§ 129-3. Warning notices on fence.
Conspicuous notices warning of the dangerous condition of the lands shall
be posted on said fences and gates.
§ 129-4. Notice to owner to erect fence.
Immediately upon the adoption of this article, each Commissioner of the
Township of Ridley shall certify to the Township Secretary what lands or
quarries are maintained in the ward wherein he resides which require
the fencing as herein provided. Thereupon the Township Secretary shall
immediately send a copy of this article to the owner of such land, together
with a notice requiring such owner to comply with the provisions of this
article within 30 days from the date of the receipt of said notice. Service of
said notice may be by registered mail or by personal service on the owner of
said lands. In the event that the Secretary is unable to so serve such owner
of said lands, posting the property shall be good and sufficient notice.
§ 129-5. Compliance with notice or request for hearing.
Any person receiving the notice set forth in § 129-4 herein may, in lieu of
erecting a fence as required, remove the hazardous conditions by forthwith
draining the water from the quarry or excavation and, within five days from
the receipt of such notice, advise the Township Secretary, in writing, that he
desires a hearing before the Board of Township Commissioners in order to
determine if an additional period of time will be allotted in order to fill such
§ 129-1 EXCAVATIONS § 129-5
129:205
quarry or excavation or to so grade the excavation as to eliminate danger to
life or limb. It shall thereupon become the duty of the Township Secretary to
place the matter on the agenda for the next scheduled meeting of the Board
of Township Commissioners. At such meeting the Board shall determine
what period of time shall be proper in order to permit such person to so
fill such quarry or excavation. The failure to fill such quarry or excavation
within the time allotted by the Board of Township Commissioners shall
operate to require fencing as hereinbefore set forth without any additional
notice whatsoever. The failure to give the notice to the Township Secretary
within said five days, requesting a hearing as aforesaid, shall operate as a
waiver of any request for additional time to fill the quarry or excavation and
shall further operate to require fencing as hereinabove set forth.
§ 129-6. Violations and penalties.76
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
76.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 129-5 RIDLEY CODE § 129-6
129:206
Chapter 135
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 22.
Alarms and alarm systems — See Ch. 66.
Building construction and floodplain
management — See Ch. 92.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 181.
Recovery of costs for police services — See
Ch. 220.
§ 129-6 EXCAVATIONS § 129-6
129:207

ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 1-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1797]
§ 135-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on the file in the office of the
Township of Ridley, Delaware County being marked and designated as the
"BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Tenth Edition, 1996", as published
by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is
hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the Township of Ridley in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; for the control of buildings, structures and
premises as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions, and terms of said BOCA National Fire Prevention
Code, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set
out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if
any, prescribed in § 135-2 of this article.
§ 135-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section F-101.1, insert "Township of Ridley."
B. The references throughout the code to "the Code Official" shall be
changed to "the Fire Marshal."
C. Section F.107.2.3, Permits, shall state: "Permits shall be for the
following activities and at the fees as set from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Commissioners: blasting (per day or per week); and
storage of explosives or blasting agents (annual)." [Amended
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
D. Section F-112.3, Penalty for violations, shall state: "Any person, firm or
corporation who shall violate any provision of this code or fall to comply
with any order issued pursuant to any section thereof, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not less than $100, and
not than $1,000 and costs of prosecution, collectible as provided by law,
and in default of payment of such fine and costs, said violator may be
imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day
a violation of this code continues shall constitute a separate offense."
[Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
E. Sections F-113.1 through F-113.7. Sections F-113.1 through F-113.7
shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:
§ 135-1 EXCAVATIONS § 135-2
129:209
F-113.1 Application for appeal: Any person shall have the right
to appeal a decision of the Fire Marshal to the Citizens Building
Committee. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that
the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder
have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not
fully apply, or an equally good or better method of fire prevention is
proposed. The application shall be filed on a form obtained from the
Fire Marshal within 20 days after the notice was served.
F-113.2 Notice of hearing: The Citizens Building Committee shall
conduct a hearing within 30 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated
periodic meetings.
F-113.3 Open hearing: All hearings before the Citizens Building
Committee under this section shall be open to the public. The
appellant, the appellant's representative, the Fire Marshal and any
person whose interests and affected shall be given an opportunity to
be heard.
F-113-3.3.1 Procedure: The Committee shall adopt, and make
available to the public, procedures under which a hearing will be
conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict
rules of evidence, shall mandate that only relevant information be
received. Decisions shall be made by a majority vote of the members
present.
F-113.3.2 Court review: Any person, whether or not a previous party
of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for
a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall
be made in the manner and time required by law after the filing of the
decision.
F. Section F - 403.3 shall be amended to add the following: No person
shall kindle or maintain a rubbish fire or burning of recyclable
materials, including leaf and yard waste, or authorize any such fire to
be kindled or maintained on any private land. [Added 9-26-2001 by
Ord. No. 1816]
§ 135-2 RIDLEY CODE § 135-2
129:210
ARTICLE II
Smoke and Heat Detectors
[Adopted 2-18-1981 by Ord. No. 1513]
§ 135-3. Detectors required.
Every building within the Township of Ridley used for human habitation
shall be equipped with at least one functioning smoke or heat detector
which is of the type approved by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and/or
the National Board of Fire Underwriters. Where buildings are divided into
family units, each unit shall be equipped with at least one detector.
§ 135-4. Inspections; certificates of occupancy.
§ 135-5. Liability.
The Township disclaims any liability or responsibility to any property owner
for failure by said owner to install or maintain a smoke- or heat-detecting
device as provided in § 135-3 herein, and the Township further disclaims
any liability or responsibility for any personal injury or property damage
that may occur by reason of either failure to install said smoke- and/or
heat-detecting device or a malfunction of said smoke- and/or heat-detecting
device.
§ 135-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord. No.
1639; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article
shall be fined not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default
of payment of said fine and costs shall be imprisoned for not more than 30
days, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
A. The Fire Marshal shall inspect all apartment buildings and converted
homes with two or more apartments at least once annually to determine
whether the smoke- or heat detection equipment meets the
requirements of this article.
B. The Building Inspector and/or the Code Enforcement Officer may
inspect the installation of the smoke- or heat detecting devices required
by this article after due and timely notice of not less than 24 hours has
been delivered to the property owner.
C. A certificate of occupancy shall be required on transfer of title, and no
certificate of occupancy shall issue, except on presentation of proof of
compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 135-3 EXCAVATIONS § 135-6
129:211

ARTICLE III
Defective Fire Alarms
[Adopted 11-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1640]
§ 135-7. Responsibility of building owner.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any building within the
Township of Ridley that is equipped with a fire alarm system to see that such
alarm systems are kept in a state of maintenance and repair so as to ensure
that the system will not fail to operate or operate in a defective manner.
§ 135-8. When system considered defective.
A fire alarm system is defective when, without the intervention of an outside
agency, it gives off an alarm indicating that there is a fire when no such
fire has occurred. Where the alarm is set off by an unintentional outside
agency, which results in a location response by a fire company, this shall
be considered a defect until such time as such measures are taken so as to
protect the mechanism from the unintentional outside agency.
§ 135-9. Violations and penalties.
A. Upon the occurrence of the first such fire alarm in any calendar year,
the Fire Marshal shall issue written notice to the property owner
directing that the defective alarm system be repaired.
B. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall be fined not more than $100 for the second offense, $300
for the third offense, $600 for the fourth offense and $1,000 for the fifth
or subsequent offense, and cost of prosecution. In default of payment of
the fine and cost the violator shall be imprisoned for not more than 30
days. Each and every day in which a violation or noncompliance occurs
or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 135-7 EXCAVATIONS § 135-9
129:213

ARTICLE IV
International Fire Code
[Adopted 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 1861]
§ 135-10. Adoption of code. [Amended 12-20-2006 by Ord. No.
1917; 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1962]
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office
of Code Enforcement of Ridley Township, being marked and designated
as the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, including Appendix Chapters
B, C, D, E, F, G and I, as published by the International Code Council,
be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of Ridley Township, in the
State of Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing the safeguarding of
life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage,
handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from
conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and
premises as herein provided for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the Office of Code
Enforcement are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as
if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in § 135-11 of this article.
§ 135-11. Revisions. [Amended 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1962]
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Ridley Township
Section 108 Board of Appeals is deleted. A substitute procedure
is adopted by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
Section 109.3 Violation Penalties, is completed by inserting the
words "summary offense" in the space entitled
"specify offense," inserting words "$1,000" in the
space entitled "amount," and inserting the words "30
days" in the space entitled "number of days."
Section 111.4 Failure to Comply, is completed by inserting the
words "250" in the first space entitled "amount" and
inserting the words "$1,000" in the second space
entitled "amount."
§ 135-12. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
That all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed.
§ 135-10 EXCAVATIONS § 135-13
129:215
§ 135-13. Effect on pending action.
That nothing in this article or in the Fire Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 135-11 of this article, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
§ 135-13 RIDLEY CODE § 135-13
129:216
ARTICLE V
International Urban-Wildland Interface Code
[Adopted 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 1866]
§ 135-14. Adoption of code. [Amended 12-20-2006 by Ord. No.
1917; 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1966]
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office
of Code Enforcement of Ridley Township, being marked and designated as
the International Urban-Wildland Interface Code, 2009 edition, including
Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and H, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Urban-Wildland
Interface Code of Ridley Township, in the State of Pennsylvania, for
regulating and governing the mitigation of hazard to life property from the
intrusion of fire from wildland exposures, fire from adjacent structures and
prevention of structure fires from spreading to wildland fuels; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Urban-Wildland Interface Code on file in the Office of Code Enforcement
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out
in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 135-15 of this article.
§ 135-15. Revisions.
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Ridley Township
Section 104 Appeals is deleted. A substitute procedure is adopted
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 135-16. Effect on pending action.
Nothing in this article or in the Urban-Wildland Interface Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed as cited in § 135-15 of this article, nor shall any just or legal right
or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
§ 135-17. Urban-wildland areas delineated.
Specific boundaries of natural or man-made features of urban-wildland
interface areas shall be as shown on the wildland area interface map.
§ 135-14 EXCAVATIONS § 135-17
129:217

ARTICLE VI
Consumer Fireworks
[Adopted 7-26-2006 by Ord. No. 1913]
§ 135-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Includes any combustible or explosive
composition or any substance or combination of substances intended to
produce visible and/or audible effects by combustion and which is suitable
for use by the public that complies with the construction, performance,
composition and labeling requirements promulgated by the Consumer
Products Safety Commission in Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations
(relating to commercial practices) or any successor regulation, and which
complies with the provisions for consumer fireworks as defined in the
American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1 or any successor
standard. The term fireworks does not include devices listed as ground and
hand held sparkling devices, novelties, and toy caps in APA Standard 87-1,
the sale, possession and use of which shall be permitted at all times in the
Township.
§ 135-19. Facility regulations.
All facilities licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture shall
comply with the following regulations as per the State Uniform
Construction Code and codes referenced therein:
A. The facility shall be located no closer than 250 feet from any
residentially occupied building.
B. The facility shall be located no closer than 100 feet from any street or
railroad.
C. The facility is required to develop and maintain a written emergency
plan that shall be approved annually by the Township Fire Marshal.
D. The facility shall provide material safety data sheets to the Township
Fire Marshal annually.
E. Sales records shall be developed and maintained for a period of three
years.
F. The facility shall name the Township as an additional insured on its
public and product liability insurance policy in a minimum amount of
$2,000,000.
G. A minimum of one-hour fire separation shall exist between the storage
area and the internal occupancy areas.
§ 135-18 EXCAVATIONS § 135-19
129:219
§ 135-20. Permit required.
Prior to issuance of an occupancy certificate, any facility operator shall
obtain a permit from the Township for the sum of $100 annually.
§ 135-21. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article
shall be fined not more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, shall be imprisoned for not more than
30 days for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during which or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
H. Facilities shall not exceed one story in height and shall be without
basements and no other temporary structures or trailers shall be used
for storage of materials.
I. Storage quantities per control area are limited to 125 pounds net
weight (600 pounds gross weight).
J. A Knox box or other secured storage container shall be provided on site
for MSDS, keys, contact information and other important data.
§ 135-19 RIDLEY CODE § 135-21
129:220
Chapter 138
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 124.
Excavations — See Ch. 129.
Landscaping — See Ch. 168.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 260.
Wastewater treatment — See Ch. 314.
Zoning — See Ch. 325.
§ 135-21 EXCAVATIONS § 135-21
129:221

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 138-1. Legislative authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,77 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Ridley
does hereby order as follows.
77.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 138-1 EXCAVATIONS § 138-1
129:223

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 138-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 138-3. Applicability.
§ 138-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 138-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 138-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Township of Ridley unless a permit
has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
§ 138-2 EXCAVATIONS § 138-6
129:225
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Ridley or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 138-6 RIDLEY CODE § 138-6
129:226
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 138-7. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 138-8. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Township of Ridley.
§ 138-9. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Administrator may:
(1) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations;
(2) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees; or
(3) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of
these regulations.
B. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall
not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as
set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
C. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Manager of Ridley
Township.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);78 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);79 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);80 and the United States
78.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
79.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
80.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 138-7 EXCAVATIONS § 138-9
129:227
§ 138-10. Application procedures and requirements.
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Commissioners
for whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/
manager.
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Township of Ridley.
Such application shall contain the following:
§ 138-9 RIDLEY CODE § 138-10
129:228
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
§ 138-10 EXCAVATIONS § 138-10
129:229
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC or latest edition thereof
adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within any identified floodplain area (See
§ 138-18.) when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not cause any increase in the
base flood elevation. AE areas adjacent to floodways are
exempt.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of flood proofing measures which have
been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
§ 138-10 RIDLEY CODE § 138-10
129:230
§ 138-11. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 138-12. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
§ 138-13. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 138-25F, Storage, and § 138-26, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 138-25F and 138-26 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 138-26
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 138-10 EXCAVATIONS § 138-13
129:231
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 138-14. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard,
or similar document, which shall be displayed on the premises during
the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number
of the permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
§ 138-15. Start of construction.
§ 138-16. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first, alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
§ 138-13 RIDLEY CODE § 138-16
129:232
§ 138-17. Appeals.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a summary offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine
to Township of Ridley, of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties all other actions
are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
the Board of Commissioners to be a public nuisance and abatable as
such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.81
81.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 138-16 EXCAVATIONS § 138-17
129:233

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 138-18. Identification.
§ 138-19. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of the Township of Ridley, classified as special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
September 2, 2015, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study; and
(2) Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments are hereby adopted by the Township of Ridley and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection regional office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
§ 138-18 EXCAVATIONS § 138-19
129:235
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
(2) AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE
Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which
base flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been
determined.
(a) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development would not, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE at any
point.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection regional
office.
C. A Area/District.
(1) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where
other acceptable information is not available, the base flood
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
(2) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
D. Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where the
Township of Ridley has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas, as
delineated and adopted on a local flood hazard map using best available
topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of
record, historic high water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
§ 138-19 RIDLEY CODE § 138-20
129:236
§ 138-20. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Commissioners where studies or information provided by a qualified agency
or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any
such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained
from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such information becomes available, a community
shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by
submitting technical or scientific data. See § 138-23B for situations where
FEMA notification is required.
§ 138-21. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator and any
party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Board
of Commissioners. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 138-22. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 138-20 EXCAVATIONS § 138-22
129:237

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 138-23. General.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development, shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When the Township of Ridley proposes to permit the following
encroachments: any development that causes a rise in the base flood
elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones
A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a
rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or
relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts
and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 138-23 EXCAVATIONS § 138-23
129:239
§ 138-24. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Within any identified floodplain area any new construction or substantial
improvements shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained for new
construction or substantial improvements in the identified floodplain area
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply:
D. Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse unless a permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection regional
office.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with § 138-19C.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34
Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized,
where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be
designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the
regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed up to, or
above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance
with § 138-19C.
§ 138-23 RIDLEY CODE § 138-24
129:240
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations,"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above referenced standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34
Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized,
where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Basements are prohibited.
(2) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(3) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) There shall be a minimum of two openings having a net total
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
§ 138-24 EXCAVATIONS § 138-24
129:241
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer.
Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet. [Amended
10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2022]
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) There shall be a minimum of two openings having a net total
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 138-24 RIDLEY CODE § 138-25
129:242
§ 138-25. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
A. Fill. Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be
prohibited unless a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria
in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
(1) If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to,
and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages," and "The
International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
§ 138-25 EXCAVATIONS § 138-25
129:243
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 138-26, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
§ 138-25 RIDLEY CODE § 138-25
129:244
§ 138-26. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, below, shall be prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The Standards and
Specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as
amended and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and sub-sections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof
adopted by the State of Pennsylvania: Sections 801, 1202, 1403,
1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania: Sections
R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,82
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
82.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 138-25 EXCAVATIONS § 138-26
129:245
§ 138-27. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision and Letter of Map Revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be
prohibited. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
§ 138-26 RIDLEY CODE § 138-28
129:246
§ 138-28. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any identified floodplain area manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
§ 138-29. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
§ 138-28 EXCAVATIONS § 138-29
129:247

ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Activities
§ 138-30. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,83 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
83.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 138-30 EXCAVATIONS § 138-30
129:249

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 138-31. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 138-132 shall apply.
§ 138-32. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any identified floodplain area that would cause any increase in
BFE. In A Area/District(s), BFEs are determined using the methodology
in § 138-19C.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or most recent
revision thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
D. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 138-31 EXCAVATIONS § 138-32
129:251

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 138-33. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Township of Ridley may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 138-34. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Township of Ridley in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 138-17 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area
that would cause any increase in BFE. In A Area/District, BFEs are
determined using the methodology in § 138-19C.
(2) No variance shall be granted for: development which may
endanger human life (§ 138-26), manufactured homes (§ 138-28),
recreational vehicles (§ 138-29) and prohibited activities (Article
VI).
(3) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(4) In granting any variance, the Township of Ridley shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(5) Whenever a variance is granted, the Township of Ridley shall notify
the applicant, in writing, that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(6) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township of Ridley
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will neither:
[1] Result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense; nor
§ 138-33 EXCAVATIONS § 138-34
129:253
[2] Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Township of Ridley. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to the FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 138-34 RIDLEY CODE § 138-34
129:254
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 138-35. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 138-36. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 138-35 EXCAVATIONS § 138-36
129:255
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters form any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 138-36 RIDLEY CODE § 138-36
129:256
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 138-18 and 138-19 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement of relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after September 2, 2015, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after January 6,
1983, and before September 2, 2015, is subject to the ordinance in effect
at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was
within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
§ 138-36 EXCAVATIONS § 138-36
129:257
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — Is a structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated January 6,
1983, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — Is a structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or
before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated
January 6, 1983, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to
be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is
shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 138-36 RIDLEY CODE § 138-36
129:258
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development: Provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage" or "repetitive loss" regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
§ 138-36 EXCAVATIONS § 138-36
129:259
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 138-36 RIDLEY CODE § 138-36
129:260
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 138-37. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on September 2, 2015, and shall remain in
force until modified, amended or rescinded by Township of Ridley, Delaware
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 138-37 EXCAVATIONS § 138-37
129:261
Chapter 140
FUEL AND HEATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 151.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 224.
§ 138-37 RIDLEY CODE § 138-37
129:262
ARTICLE I
Kerosene Heaters
[Adopted 3-21-1984 by Ord. No. 1574]
§ 140-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED PORTABLE KEROSENE HEATER — Any listed portable
kerosene heater which:
ASSEMBLY OCCUPANCY — The use of a building or structure or any
portion thereof by a gathering of persons for the purpose of amusement,
entertainment, instruction, worship, transportation, sports, military drills or
similar purposes, with admission either public or private.
EDUCATIONAL OCCUPANCY — The use of a building or structure or any
portion thereof by persons assembled for the purpose of learning or of
receiving educational instruction.
A. Has a fuel capacity of not more than two gallons.
Emits no more than 0.04% carbon monoxide in an air-free sample
of flue gases at maximum heat output and no more than 0.08% at
recommended low-fire setting.
B.
Has a minimum tipping angle of no more than 33° from the vertical with
a full fuel reservoir.
C.
Has an automatic shutoff safety device or inherent design feature which
extinguishes the heating flame upon tip-over in not more than 10
seconds.
D.
E. Includes as standard equipment a pump or siphon for refueling.
Is packaged with instructions advising the purchaser of proper
maintenance and operation.
F.
Bears labeling, in conspicuous letters, cautioning and informing the
purchaser as to:
The need for an adequate source of ventilation when the heater is
in operation.
(1)
(2) The use of only suitable fuel for the heater.
(3) Proper manner of refueling.
(4) Proper placement and handling of the heater when in operation.
Proper procedures for lighting, flame regulation and extinguishing
the heater.
(5)
G.
§ 140-1 EXCAVATIONS § 140-1
129:263
HEALTH CARE OCCUPANCY — The use of a building or structure or any
portion thereof to provide medical or other treatment or care of persons
suffering from physical or mental disease or infirmity; or to provide care of
infants, convalescents or aged persons.
HIGH HAZARD OCCUPANCY — The use of a building or structure or any
portion thereof that involves high combustible, highly flammable, hazardous
chemical or explosive material, or which has inherent characteristics that
constitute a special fire hazard.
INDUSTRIAL OCCUPANCY — The use of a building or structure or any
portion thereof for assembling, fabricating, finishing, manufacturing,
packaging or processing operations.
KEROSENE FUEL RETAILERS — Any person, business or corporation
selling or offering for sale kerosene to individual consumers, whether from
a place of business located in the Township of Ridley or by delivery of fuels
directly to consumers within the Township of Ridley.
LISTED PORTABLE KEROSENE HEATER — Any portable kerosene heater
which has been tested by an independent, nationally recognized testing or
inspection agency acceptable to the Secretary of State and which has been
determined to meet a generally accepted standard for such heaters. Such
determination shall be evidenced by either the inclusion of the heater on a
list published by such agency or by the heater bearing the listing mark of
such agency.
MERCANTILE OCCUPANCY — The use of a building or structure or any
portion thereof for the displaying, selling or buying of goods, wares or
merchandise.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A dwelling which is either rented, leased, let or
hired out to be occupied or which is occupied as the residence or home of
two or more families living independently of each other and shall include
dwelling portions of hospitals, nursing homes, convents, monasteries and
public institutions.
OWNER — The owner of any real property or of a lesser estate therein, a
mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor,
trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm or corporation directly or
indirectly in control of real property.
PERSON — Includes the owner, mortgagee or vendee in possession,
assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other
person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a structure or
part thereof.
PORTABLE KEROSENE HEATER — Any non-flue-connected, self-contained,
self-supporting, kerosene-fueled heating appliance equipped with an
integral reservoir, designed to be carried from one location to another.
STORAGE OCCUPANCY — The use of a building or structure or any portion
thereof for the storage of goods, wares, merchandise, raw materials,
agricultural or manufactured products, including the sheltering of livestock
and other animals.
§ 140-1 RIDLEY CODE § 140-1
129:264
STRUCTURE — Any completed construction of any kind, including but
not limited to private dwellings or to any structure used for business,
commercial or industrial purposes, buildings under construction or
buildings used solely for agricultural purposes.
§ 140-2. Approved models required.
Portable kerosene heaters which do not meet the requirements set forth
in the definition of "approved portable kerosene heater" in § 140-1 above
are prohibited in structures. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any
portable kerosene heater except an approved portable kerosene heater in
any portion of a structure or, being the owner of such structure, to provide
or place or cause to be provided or placed in any portion of a structure any
portable kerosene heater except an approved portable kerosene heater for
use by any occupant of such structure.
§ 140-3. Sale of unapproved heaters.
§ 140-4. Restricted use.
Portable kerosene heaters are prohibited in the following classes of
structures and occupancies:
A. All unapproved portable kerosene heaters offered for sale in the
Township shall have printed thereon or attached thereto the following
statement: "This heater is not approved for residential or commercial
use." There shall also be printed thereon or attached thereto such other
information as may be required by the Fire Marshal of the Township of
Ridley.
B. It shall be a violation of this article to sell or offer to sell an unapproved
kerosene heater for use in a residential or commercial structure.
A. Assembly occupancy.
B. Educational occupancy.
C. Health care occupancy.
D. High hazard occupancy.
E. Industrial occupancy.
F. Mercantile occupancy.
G. Multiple dwelling.
H. Storage occupancy.
I. In any other structure where combustible or flammable liquids, readily
combustible materials or hazardous materials are stored, handled,
manufactured or processed.
§ 140-1 EXCAVATIONS § 140-4
129:265
§ 140-5. Sale of kerosene fuel.
§ 140-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord No.
1639]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions in this article shall,
upon summary conviction before any District Justice, be subject to a fine of
not exceeding $1,000, and costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of
fine and costs, the violator may be imprisoned in the county jail for not more
than 30 days. Each and every day which any person shall be in violation of
this article shall constitute a separate offense.
J. In any commercial structure which has no openable windows for
ventilation and in which the HVAC system recirculates a portion of the
return air.
A. All kerosene fuel sold within the Township of Ridley must be sold
according to the standard grades established by the American Society
for Testing and Materials for kerosene as follows:
(1) 1-K kerosene: suitable for use in portable, non-flue-connected
kerosene heaters.
(2) 2-K kerosene: not to be used in portable, non-flue-connected
kerosene heaters.
B. Sellers of kerosene fuel, wholesale and retail, must provide the
purchaser with a receipt indicating the grade of fuel sold.
C. Sellers of kerosene fuel may only dispense kerosene into an approved
container or safety can. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
D. All kerosene fuel containers filled by a retailer must be clearly labeled
by the retailer to indicate the contents thereof. [Amended 10-25-2000
by Ord. No. 1808]
§ 140-4 RIDLEY CODE § 140-6
129:266
ARTICLE II
Delivery of Fuel
[Adopted 4-15-1987 by Ord. No. 1609]
§ 140-7. Title.
The name of this article shall be the "Ridley Township Nighttime Fuel
Delivery Ordinance."
§ 140-8. Definitions.
The following words have special meanings for the purpose of this article.
DELIVERY — Any quantity of fuel received at a service station by any
method designed to place such fuel into the dispensing pumps of the service
station.
DELIVERY PERSON — Any party responsible to transport, deliver or unload
such fuel at a service station.
DELIVERY VEHICLE — Any vehicle equipped to transport and/or deliver
such fuels as are covered by this article.
FUELS — Any material that may be used to power any motor vehicle or
appliance, including but not limited to gasoline, diesel oil and kerosene
that is dispensed by a service station pump. Materials such as motor oil
sold prepackaged in cans or other sealed dispensers are not fuels for the
purpose of this article.
ON LOCATION — The actual place for the delivery of fuel as accomplished
by dispensing such fuel into the pumps of the service station.
PUMP — Any mechanism designed to dispense such fuels or any storage
facilities thereof.
SERVICE STATION — Any facility which is equipped to dispense fuel oils
by pump, irrespective of whether or not it provides any other automotiverelated
services.
§ 140-9. Notification of nighttime delivery. [Amended 7-15-1987 by
Ord. No. 1613]
When any delivery of fuels is made to any service station in the Township
of Ridley between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., local time, it shall
be the duty of the delivery person to notify the Police Department of Ridley
Township that such delivery is being made.
§ 140-10. Time of notification.
Such notification need not be made until the actual arrival of the delivery
vehicle at the service station which is receiving the delivery of such fuel oils.
§ 140-7 EXCAVATIONS § 140-11
129:267
§ 140-11. Attendance on location required.
Once the delivery process begins, the delivery person must remain on
location until the delivery of such fuel is completed.
§ 140-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 1808]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions in this article shall,
upon conviction before any District Justice, be subject to a fine of not
exceeding $1,000, and costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of
fine and costs, the violator may be imprisoned in the county jail for not more
than 30 days. Each and every day which any person shall be in violation of
this article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 140-11 RIDLEY CODE § 140-12
129:268
ARTICLE III
Storage of Firewood
[Adopted 4-15-1987 by Ord. No. 1610]
§ 140-13. Definitions; word usage.
§ 140-14. Requirements for storage.
Pursuant to the authorization provided by Section 1502, Clause XLIV, of
the First Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 56544, and in order to promote
the health, safety, cleanliness, beauty, convenience, comfort and general
welfare of the Township of Ridley and the inhabitants thereof, any person
wishing to store firewood upon his residential property must store such
firewood according to the following requirements:
§ 140-15. Enforcement. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
This article shall be enforced by the Health Officer.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning. Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a
meaning of standard usage.
COOKING DEVICE — Any indoor or outdoor wood-burning device used
for cooking, such as but not limited to a grill or a barbecue.
DWELLING — Any building designed to provide for the residence of one
or more family units.
FIREWOOD — Wood or like material commonly used for burning in a
residential fireplace or cooking device.
PERSON — The legal owner, or beneficial owner, of any residence,
whoever holds dominion and control over such residence, whether such
owner is an individual, partnership, association or corporation.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any area within Ridley Township which
contains a dwelling.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. All such firewood must be contained in an area at least six inches off the
ground.
B. The maximum amount of firewood that may be stored at any one time is
five cords.
C. The maximum height of any such stored firewood is six feet.
D. The storage area for any such firewood must be no closer than six feet
to the property line.
§ 140-13 EXCAVATIONS § 140-16
129:269
§ 140-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 1808]
Any person, herein defined, who permits such storage of firewood upon his
residential property so as to violate the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction before any District Justice, be subject to a fine of not exceeding
$1,000, and costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of fine and costs,
the violator may be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 30 days.
Each and every day which any person shall be in violation of this article
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 140-16 RIDLEY CODE § 140-16
129:270
ARTICLE IV
Fuel Gas Code
[Adopted 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 1862]
§ 140-17. Adoption of code. [Amended 12-20-2006 by Ord. No.
1917; 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1964]
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office
of Code Enforcement of Ridley Township, being marked and designated as
the International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 edition, including Appendix Chapters
A, B, C, and D, as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of Ridley Township, in the State of
Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired
appliances as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code on file in the Office of
Code Enforcement are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in § 140-18 of this article.
§ 140-18. Revisions. [Amended 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1964]
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Ridley Township
Section 106.6.2 Fee Schedule, shall read "A schedule adopted
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners."
Section 106.6.3 Fee Refunds, is amended to provide that a
request to refund fees be made to the Board of
Commissioners.
Section 108.4 Violation Penalties, is completed by inserting
the words "summary offense" in the space
entitled "specify offense," inserting words
"$1,000" in the space entitled "amount," and
inserting the words "30 days" in the space
entitled "number of days."
Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders, is completed by inserting
the words "250" in the first space entitled
"amount" and inserting the words "$1,000" in
the second space entitled "amount."
Section 109 Means of Appeal, is deleted. A substitute
procedure is adopted by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.
§ 140-19. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 140-17 EXCAVATIONS § 140-20
129:271
§ 140-20. Effect on pending action.
Nothing in this article or in the Fuel Gas Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 140-18 of this article, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
§ 140-20 RIDLEY CODE § 140-20
129:272
Chapter 147
HANDBILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 209.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 224.
Littering — See Ch. 264, Art. I.
§ 147-1. Purpose.
To protect the citizens of the Township of Ridley from the nuisance of
and incident to the promiscuous distribution of commercial handbills and
circulars, with the resulting detriment and danger to public health and
safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity require the regulation
thereof, and to that end the purposes of this chapter are specifically
declared to be as follows:
§ 147-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or
literature which:
A. To protect the citizens against the unlawful activities or operations of
wanton persons representing themselves to be handbill distributors, by
requiring the registration of all such distributors, together with the
names and addresses of their employers.
B. To protect residents against trespassing by handbill solicitors upon the
private property of such residents if such residents give reasonable
notice that they do not desire to receive handbills or advertising matter.
C. To protect the residents against the health and safety menace of
littering the streets and clogging the sewer systems.
D. To protect the residents from looting and other crimes.
E. To preserve the constitutional right to receive and disseminate
information not restricted under rules of decency, good morals and
public order, by distinguishing between the nuisance created by
promiscuous distribution of advertising and commercial circulars and
the right to deliver noncommercial handbills and circulars.
A. Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; or
§ 140-20 HANDBILLS § 147-2
147:273
HANDBILL DISTRIBUTOR — Any person engaging or engaged in the
business for hire or gain of distributing commercial handbills, other than
newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving
compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of such handbills.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling house, building or other
structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys or
other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas,
grounds and buildings.
§ 147-3. Distribution of commercial handbills in public places
prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast
any commercial handbill in or upon any public place within this Township,84
and it shall also be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell
any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall
not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to
the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill in any public place to any
person willing to accept such noncommercial handbill.
§ 147-4. Littering on private premises prohibited. [Amended
7-22-1992 by Ord. No. 1692]
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any commercial handbill in or upon private premises,
whether inhabited or uninhabited, except as otherwise provided for in this
chapter.
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales; or
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit; or
C.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
84.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 264, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. I, Littering.
§ 147-2 RIDLEY CODE § 147-5
147:274
§ 147-5. Distribution prohibited where posted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any commercial handbill upon any premises if requested by
anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on said premises in a
conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words:
"No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any
similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises
do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed or to
have any such handbills left upon such premises.
§ 147-6. Manner of distribution where permitted.
No person holding a permit under the provisions of this chapter, or any
other person, shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any
commercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are inhabited
except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner,
occupant or any other person then present in or upon such private
premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises
which are not posted as provided in this chapter, the aforesaid licensed
or other person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to
do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited
private premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or
prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or
elsewhere, except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by
federal postal laws or regulations.
§ 147-7. Permit required; application. [Amended 8-26-1998 by Ord.
No. 1789]
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute commercial handbills or
circulars within the Township of Ridley in public or private places without
obtaining a permit from the Police Department of the Township of Ridley.
A. Applications for such permits shall set forth or be accompanied by:
(1) The applicant's name and address.
(2) The name and address of his/her employer, if any.
(3) The criminal record of the applicant, if there be any such criminal
record.
(4) A photograph of the applicant.
(5) A physical description of the applicant.
(6) A statement as to the length of time the applicant intends to
distribute said handbills or circulars in the Township of Ridley.
(7) The number of individuals distributing the handbills or circulars.
§ 147-5 HANDBILLS § 147-7
147:275
§ 147-8. Revocation of permit.
Any permit obtained by false or fraudulent representation shall be revoked
and declared void and shall be surrendered to the Police Department.
§ 147-9. Appeal.
The refusal to issue any permit or the revocation of any permit that has been
issued may be appealed to the Board of Township Commissioners, whose
action thereon shall be final.
§ 147-10. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the
distribution of mail nor to any religious tracts.
§ 147-11. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-22-1992 by Ord. No.
169286]
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine and costs shall be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each incident and each day
for which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 151
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135. Recovery of costs for police services — See
Ch. 220, Art. II.
B. The Captain, Superintendent, Chief or other head of the Police
Department or his/her duly authorized agent shall review the
application and determine whether it is in proper form. If the
application is in proper form, a permit shall be issued. Said police
official shall refuse to issue any such permit to any person who is under
the influence of liquor or drugs or who is addicted thereto, or to any
person convicted of a felony or misdemeanor.
C. An application fee shall accompany any application for a permit to
distribute commercial handbills or circulars. The fee is intended only to
compensate the Township for the cost of reviewing and issuing a permit
under this section, and shall be as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners per year for the primary application, and
for each additional individual distributing the handbills or circulars.85
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 147-7 RIDLEY CODE § 147-11
151:276
§ 151-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Transportation and Storage of
Hazardous Material Ordinance."
§ 151-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly
indicates differently:
CFR — The Code of Federal Regulations. The numbers "CFR" shall refer
to the volume, divisions and sections used to identify parts of the Code of
Federal Regulations.
COMPRESSED GAS — Any substance regulates as a compressed gas by the
United States Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR
173.300.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID — Any substance regulated as a flammable liquid by
the United States Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49
CFR 173.115.
FLAMMABLE SOLID — Any substance regulated as a flammable solid by
the United States Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49
CFR 173.150.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS —
POISON — Any liquid or gas that is life-threatening when mixed with air
in small amounts, and shall also include all of those substances regulated
as a Class A poison by the United States Department of Transportation by
regulations found in 49 CFR 173.326.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS — Any substance required by the Untied States
Department of Transportation to have Type A packing or Type B packaging
under regulations found in 49 CFR 173.426.
Any substance defined in this section as compressed gas, explosive,
flammable liquid, flammable solid, oxidizer, poison, radioactive
materials or any material, liquid, solid, gas or other matter included by
the United States Department of Transportation within the provisions
of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations now in effect or
hereinafter amended or enacted and 35 P.S. § 7301 et seq. now in effect
or hereinafter amended or enacted.
A.
It is to be expressly understood by virtue of this chapter that all such
substances currently listed or subsequently added to the provisions of
the United States Code of Federal Regulations Title 49 and the Worker
and Community Right to Know Act, 35 P.S. § 7301 et seq., are expressly
made and to be considered hazardous materials under this chapter
without further amendment.
B.
§ 147-11 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 151-2
151:277
STORAGE FACILITY — Any building, structure, enclosure or area that is or
has been established to serve the purpose for the consignment, placement
and/or safekeeping of any item, good and/or article.
§ 151-3. Exceptions.
The regulations set out in this chapter shall not apply to any vehicle
carrying no hazardous material except flammable liquid in a container
or containers having a total capacity of not over 110 gallons or 41.635
dekaliters by volume.
§ 151-4. Vehicles.
No hazardous material will be carried off any permitted route for delivery
in any vehicle larger than a tractor with one trailer.
§ 151-5. Condition of vehicles, storage containers and storage
facilities.
A. All vehicles used to transport hazardous materials anywhere in the
Township shall comply with all federal and state statutes, laws and
administrative rules and regulations governing the transportation of
hazardous materials now in effect or subsequently amended or
maintained in a condition that complies with all federal and state
statutes, laws and administrative rules and regulations governing the
operation and automotive conditions of such vehicles now in effect or
subsequently amended or enacted.
B. All storage containers used to contain hazardous materials anywhere in
the Township shall comply with all federal and state statutes, laws and
administrative rules and regulations governing the physical make up
and construction of such storage containers now in effect or
subsequently enacted or amended.
C. All storage facilities used to house hazardous materials anywhere in the
Township shall comply with all Federal and State statutes, laws and
administrative rules and regulations governing the construction of such
facilities, the location of such facilities, the identification of such
facilities, the placement of hazardous materials within such facilities,
route of egress and ingress to, from and within such facilities, fire and
safety protection in such facilities, alarms for such facilities and the
method and manner of movement and storage of hazardous material
within such facilities now in effect or subsequently enacted or
amended.
D. In addition to the foregoing, all vehicles, storage containers and storage
facilities shall strictly comply with Chapter 135, Fire Prevention, of the
Code of the Township of Ridley in effect in the Township of Ridley as of
the date of the passage of this chapter or any subsequent enactments,
amendments or supplements to said Chapter 135.87
§ 151-2 RIDLEY CODE § 151-6
151:278
§ 151-6. Containment and removal of spills.
§ 151-7. Reporting procedure.
A. In the event of a breakdown of a vehicle carrying hazardous materials
within the Township accompanied by a spill or escape of such materials
onto Township streets or private property, the person, firm or
corporation transporting such material as well as the owner and/or
consignee of the material shall be jointly and severally responsible for
its physical containment, recovery and removal and further shall be
liable for any costs incurred by the Township or other responsible
persons or agencies acting with the same purpose of containment,
recovery and removal from the environment.
B. In the event of a spill or escape of hazardous material from a storage
container while it is housed in a storage facility or while it is being
moved to, from or within a storage facility, causing such material to spill
or escape onto Township streets or private property, the person, firm or
corporation providing the storage facility as well as the owner and/or
consignee of the material shall be jointly and severally responsible for
its physical containment, recovery and removal and further liable for
any costs incurred by the Township or other responsible person or
agencies acting with the same purpose of containment, recovery and
removal from the environment.
A. In the event of a breakdown of a vehicle carrying hazardous materials
within the Township, accompanied by a spill or escape of such material
onto Township streets, public or private property, any waterway,
sanitary sewer line, stormwater sewer line or into the atmosphere or
air, the person, firm or corporation transporting such hazardous
material shall immediately notify the Township of Ridley Police
Department, Township of Ridley Fire Department, the Office of the
Township Secretary and the Township Emergency Management
Coordinator stating the location of the spill, identity of the hazardous
material and all other relevant information known at that time by the
person, firm or corporation transporting said hazardous material.
B. In the event of a spill or escape of hazardous material from a storage
container while it is housed in a storage facility or while it is being
moved to, from or within a storage facility, causing such material to spill
or escape onto Township streets, public or private property, any
waterway, sanitary sewer line, stormwater sewer line or into the
atmosphere or air, the person, firm or corporation storing or housing
such hazardous material shall immediately notify the Township of
Ridley Police Department, Township of Ridley Fire Department, the
Office of the Township Secretary and the Township Emergency
Management Coordinator stating the location of the spill, identity of the
hazardous material and all other relevant information known at that
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 151-6 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 151-7
151:279
§ 151-8. Dumping prohibited.
Any dumping or spilling of any hazardous material, as defined in this
chapter, in or on Township streets, public or private property, any waterway,
sanitary sewer, stormwater sewer line or into the atmosphere or air for
the purpose of unlawful disposal of same is an expressed violation of this
chapter. Failure to promptly report a spill of hazardous material in or on
Township street, public or private property, any waterway, sanitary sewer,
stormwater sewer line or into the atmosphere or air or an attempt to
disguise or otherwise cover up said dumping or spilling, shall be considered
conclusive evidence of an intentional violation of this section.
§ 151-9. Violations and penalties.88
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, for each offense, and in default
of payment of such fine and costs, shall be imprisoned for not more than
30 days; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on
which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 155
HEALTH CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 77.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 151.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 209.
Plumbing — See Ch. 216.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 224.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 271.
time by the person, firm or corporation storing or housing said
hazardous material.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 151-7 RIDLEY CODE § 151-9
151:280
ARTICLE I
Public Eating and Drinking Places
§ 155-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person who handles food or drink during its preparation
or serving or comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils or who
is employed in a room in which food or drink is prepared or served. This
shall include the proprietor or any member of the proprietor's family who
handles food and drink. The masculine shall be interpreted to include the
feminine and neuter pronoun.
ITINERANT PUBLIC EATING AND DRINKING PLACE — One operating
for a temporary period in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public
exhibition or other similar gathering.
LICENSE — The permission granted to a licensee to conduct a public eating
and drinking place.
LICENSEE — A holder of a license.
LICENSOR or BOARD — The Board of Health of Ridley Township.
NEW ESTABLISHMENT — Any place which has been newly constructed
and/or in which a change of ownership has taken place.
PROPRIETOR — Any person, partnership, association or corporation
conducting or operating within the limits of the Township a public eating or
drinking place.
PUBLIC EATING AND DRINKING PLACE — Restaurant, coffee shop,
cafeteria, short-order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, soda
fountain, private club, hospital kitchen, dining room or snack bar, industrial
kitchen, dining room, cafeteria or snack bar, school lunchroom or cafeteria
or any other place where food, drinks or refreshments are served, sold
or prepared and sold or given away, to be consumed on the premises;
provided, however, that this definition shall not be interpreted to include
boardinghouses or private homes.
§ 155-2. Licenses and inspections. [Amended 2-18-1981 by Ord. No.
1512; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808; 3-27-2002 by Ord. No. 1826]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public eating and
drinking place in the Township who does not possess a license from the
Board of Health of Ridley Township. Licenses shall be granted for a
period of one year or portion thereof. Said year shall commence when
the license is issued and shall be valid until the last day of the month
issued one year later. Such license shall be conspicuously displayed at
all times in the place thereby licensed and shall not be transferable.
Application for renewal of a license shall be made at least 30 days
before the expiration of the existing license. Licenses may be
§ 155-1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-2
151:281
§ 155-3. Employees; contagious diseases.
suspended or revoked for violations by the owner thereof of these rules
and regulations. No license shall be suspended or revoked without the
licensee being given a hearing before the Board of Health. A late fee
computed at 10% of the license fee shall be assessed for each month,
or part thereof, that the license fee is paid more than 30 days after the
due date.
B. Computation of fees.
(1) The Director of Health and/or Health Officer or any proper
authorities of the Board of Health shall make periodic inspections
of any licensee for public eating and drinking places within the
Township. Such licensee shall be required to pay a fee for such
license as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners, based upon the square footage of the
establishment as follows:
Floor area (square feet)
Under 1,000
1,001 to 1,500
1,501 to 2,500
2,501 to 5,000
5,001 to 7,500
7,501 to 10,000
10,001 to 15,000
15,001 and over
(2) A "snack bar," which is a counter area in an enclosed facility where
food, drinks and/or refreshments are served or sold and to be
consumed on the premises, which are primarily intended for
recreational or entertainment purposes, other than a public eating
or drinking place, shall have its square footage of floor area
computed based upon the snack bar service area and restroom
facilities only.
(3) The licensee for itinerant public eating and drinking place shall be
considered to be the entity hosting the event and shall pay a fee for
the license valid for one year from the issue date, as set forth from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners, based
upon the number of food vendors operating at an event, with one
fee for the first vendor and another fee for each additional vendor.
A. No proprietor shall hereafter keep in his employ any employee known
to be afflicted with a disease in a communicable form. No proprietor or
manager of any establishment covered in this chapter shall employ or
continue to employ any person as a food handler if such proprietor or
§ 155-2 RIDLEY CODE § 155-3
151:282
§ 155-4. Approval of plans.
manager has valid reason to suspect that such person is afflicted with a
disease in a communicable form.
B. The Director of Health and/or the Health Officer shall have full power
and authority at any time to require examinations and tests as may be
necessary to determine whether any food handler has a disease in a
communicable form or is a carrier of a communicable disease. It shall
be the duty of all food handlers to submit to such examinations at the
request of the Director of Health and/or the Health Officer, and any food
handler who shall refuse to submit to such examination shall not be
employed or continue as a food handler in any public eating and
drinking place in the Township.
C. Disease control. No person who is infected with any disease in a
communicable form or is a carrier of such disease shall work in a public
eating or drinking place, and the proprietor of each place shall not
employ any such person or persons suspected of being infected with
any disease in a communicable form or being a carrier of such disease.
If the proprietor suspects that any employee has contracted any such
disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such
disease, he shall notify, in writing, the Township Director of Health and/
or the Health Officer immediately.
D. Procedure when infection is suspected. Where there is reasonable
ground for the Director of Health and/or the Health Officer to suspect
that there is transmission of an infectious disease from any employee of
a public eating or drinking place to the public, the Director of Health
and/or the Health Officer is authorized to require the proprietor of the
said eating and drinking place to forthwith carry out any of the
following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from the said public
eating and drinking place.
(2) The immediate closing of the public eating or drinking place until
the danger of disease outbreak ceases to exist.
(3) Adequate medical examinations of the employee and of his
associates, including appropriate laboratory examination.
E. Food handlers. All employees are required to obtain a food handler's
certificate from the Director of Health and/or the Health Officer within
five days of employment. All employees who work five days in any one
calendar month shall have a certificate.
A. Unless otherwise specifically exempt from the requirements of this
section, no person shall undertake to remodel or alter any existing
building or portion thereof which is being used or is proposed for use as
a public eating and drinking place, or shall undertake to construct a
new building which is to be used in whole or in part as a public eating
§ 155-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-4
151:283
§ 155-5. Construction and cleanliness.
and drinking place, without first having submitted plans thereof in
duplicate to the Director of Health and/or the Health Officer for
approval.
B. Such plans shall be accompanied by data completely describing the
public eating and drinking place or the addition or alteration proposed.
If approved, one set of plans bearing such approval in writing shall be
returned to the applicant. If not approved, the manner in which such
plans do not meet the requirements of these rules and regulations shall
be marked on both sets of plans, and one set of plans will be returned to
the applicant.
C. The Director of Health and/or the Health Officer shall be guided by the
provisions of these rules and regulations affecting such construction,
the proposed methods of receiving and distributing perishable food or
drink and any applicable laws relating to the handling or processing of
food or drink.
A. Floors. The floors of all rooms in which food or drink is prepared or
stored or in which utensils are washed shall be of such construction as
to be easily cleaned, shall be smooth and shall be kept clean and in good
repair. In the case of all new establishments, the floors of all rooms in
which food or drink is prepared or stored or in which utensils are
washed shall be constructed of material impervious to water and shall
be provided with a sanitary base and with adequate and sufficient
drains to permit cleaning.
B. Walls and ceilings. Walls and ceilings of all rooms in which food or drink
is prepared, served or stored or utensils are washed or stored shall be
kept clean and in a sanitary condition. The walls of all such rooms shall
have a smooth washable surface up to the level exposed to soiling by
splash or spray and shall be finished in a light color. No paper or oilcloth
coverings are permitted on walls of kitchens and food preparation
rooms. In the case of all new establishments, all rooms in which food or
drink is prepared or served or in which utensils are washed shall have a
clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet.
C. Construction of kitchens. The rooms in which food is prepared shall be
of adequate size and construction to permit easy cleansing and the
unhampered performance of all kitchen operations.
D. Construction and location of utensils and equipment.
(1) All eating and cooking utensils and all showcases and display cases
or windows, counters, shelves, tables, booths and refrigerating and
other equipment shall be of a sanitary design and construction and
so located as to be easily cleaned and shall be kept clean and in a
sanitary condition. In new establishments or in establishments
where new installations of equipment are made, all equipment used
§ 155-4 RIDLEY CODE § 155-5
151:284
for the preparation, storing, handling or serving of food or drink
shall be equivalent to or in excess of that specified in the National
Sanitation Foundation standards. Such equipment shall be spaced
away from walls and corners so as to permit access for cleaning.
Thirty inches of working space shall be required between all units
of new equipment, unless such equipment is movable. A minimum
of 30 inches of working space shall be provided between counters,
back bars and work tables wherever located.
(2) No cooking unit of any kind shall be permitted to be placed or
located in any bay window. All new installations of equipment shall
be elevated at least six inches from the floor on pear-shaped legs or
sealed tight to the floor with a three-inch cove base or stainless
steel removable kickplates. Where equipment with closed bottoms
without air spaces is set on a masonry base, the top of the base
shall be waterproofed with mastic.
(3) Plates, cups, saucers, dishes, crockery or chinaware which are
cracked, chipped or broken shall not be used to contain food or
drink. All such cracked, chipped and broken plates, cups, saucers,
dishes, crockery or chinaware will be destroyed and discarded at
the time of inspection. Food-contact surfaces of equipment and
utensils shall be smooth; shall be free of breaks, open seams,
cracks, chips, pits and similar imperfections; shall be in good
repair; and shall be easily cleaned.
(4) In cases of all new construction, shelves shall be constructed at
least two inches from the wall unless tightly stripped to eliminate
cracks.
E. Doors and windows. When flies are prevalent, all openings into the
outer air shall be effectively screened (April 1 to December 1) with not
less than sixteen-mesh wire. Doors shall be self-closing, unless other
effective means are provided to prevent the entrance of flies. All screen
doors shall open outward. Doors and windows shall be kept clean,
inside and out. The presence of flies or flying insects shall be
presumptive evidence of failure to comply with this section.
F. Lighting. All rooms in which food or drink is prepared or in which
utensils are washed shall be well-lighted, with adequate natural or
artificial lighting sufficient to produce an intensity of not less than 15
footcandles at 30 inches from the floor. In rooms where food is stored,
lighting shall be provided sufficient to produce an intensity of not less
than five footcandles at 30 inches from the floor.
G. Ventilation. All rooms in which food or drink is prepared or served or in
which utensils are washed shall be well-ventilated. There shall be
openings to the outer air at least equal to 5% of the floor area. In the
case of artificial ventilation where food is prepared, facilities must be
provided for at least eight air changes per hour. In no case shall
recirculation of air be permitted. All rooms in which food or drink is
§ 155-5 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-5
151:285
§ 155-6. Toilet facilities.
§ 155-7. Lavatory facilities.
All kitchen, stands and counters where food is prepared shall be equipped
with or have adjacent thereto separate hand-washing facilities for the
washing and cleansing of the hands, equipped with automatic running hot
and cold water, soap and sanitary towels.
§ 155-8. Water supply.
Automatic running hot and cold water under pressure of not less than 15
pounds per square inch shall be easily accessible to all rooms in which food
is prepared or utensils are washed and shall be adequate and of a safe,
sanitary quality.
served shall be provided with at least five air changes per hour, and
not more than 50% recirculation shall be permitted. All cooking units
shall be hooded and vented to the outside air by forced draft; provided,
however, that the latter requirement shall not apply to a simple bread
toaster and to a coffee urn. When cooking units are vented to the
outside air, the vents shall be carried above the highest window of this
or adjacent buildings. All ventilation systems shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition.
A. In all new establishments or establishments where alterations are
made, separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex.
B. Toilet rooms shall not open directly into any room in which food or drink
is prepared or handled. No entrance to a toilet room shall lead through
living quarters or through an area where food or drink is stored,
prepared or handled. An intervening vestibule of at least three by three
feet shall be provided. The doors of all toilet rooms and vestibules shall
be self-closing.
C. Toilet rooms shall be kept clean, in good repair, well-lighted and
properly ventilated by exterior windows or mechanical means. The
walls and ceilings shall be of a smooth washable surface and shall be
finished in a light color.
D. Hand-washing facilities with automatic running hot and cold water,
sanitary towels and soap shall be in or adjacent to the toilet room. The
use of the common towel is prohibited. Hand-washing signs shall be
posted in each toilet room used by food handlers. No food handler shall
return to work after using the toilet without first washing his hands.
E. In all new establishments or establishments where alterations are
made, the floors of the toilet rooms shall be constructed of a material
and joints impervious to water and shall be provided with a sanitary
base.
§ 155-5 RIDLEY CODE § 155-9
151:286
§ 155-9. Washing facilities.
A. In all public eating and drinking places where dish or utensil washing is
done by other than mechanical means, no less than three compartment
sinks shall be provided and equipped with running hot and cold water.
(1) Procedure.
(a) Wash (water 110° to 130° F.).
(b) Rinse (warm water).
(c) Sanitize (water 180° F. for two minutes).
(2) Alternative.
(a) Wash (water 110° to 130° F.).
(b) Rinse (warm water).
(c) Sanitize with a chemical such as hypochlorite compounds or
chlorine-containing compounds of equal efficiency at a
minimum concentration of 100 parts per million for at least 30
seconds; Quaternary ammonium compounds at a minimum
concentration of 200 parts per million for at least 30 seconds;
or iodoform compounds at a minimum concentration of 12.5
parts per million for at least 30 seconds.
B. There shall be a drainboard of a material impervious to moisture affixed
to each end of the unit. In new establishments or establishments where
alterations are made, each compartment of the sink shall be of a size
not less than 16 inches square by 14 inches deep. Each compartment
for sinks in soda fountains and bars shall be no less than 12 inches
square by 10 inches deep. Mechanical dishwashing machines shall be
equipped to provide a minimum water temperature in the machine of at
least 180° F. Mechanical dishwashers shall be equipped with two
thermometers for indicating the wash and sterilizing temperatures.
Prerinse or presoak facilities shall be provided for either mechanical or
manual dishwashing.
C. Cleaning and bactericidal treatment of utensils and equipment. All
equipment, including display cases or windows, counters, shelves,
tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods or sinks, shall be kept clean and free
from dust, dirt, insects and other sources of contamination. All clothes
used by waiters, chefs and other employees shall be kept clean. All
eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned and subjected
to an approved bactericidal process after each use and at the time of
service to the public be thoroughly clean and sterilized. All multiuse
containers and utensils used in the preparation, cooking and serving of
food and drink shall be thoroughly cleansed and subject to an approved
bactericidal process immediately following the day's operation. Towel
drying is not permitted.
§ 155-9 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-9
151:287
§ 155-10. Disposal of waste.
All liquid waste resulting from the cleansing and rinsing of utensils and
floors and from flush toilets and lavatories must be disposed of in a public
sewer or, in the absence of a public sewer, by methods approved by
provisions of Chapter 216, Plumbing, of the Code of the Township of Ridley.
All garbage must be stored in nonleaking metal containers with tight-fitting
lids or in an approved garbage storage room, and all waste material must
be kept free of garbage and stored in nonleaking metal containers with
tight-fitting lids or in an approved waste material storage room and be
covered at all times. Garbage and other waste materials must be removed
from the premises as often as necessary to prevent a nuisance and shall be
disposed of in a manner to be approved by the Board. All garbage and waste
receptacles must be washed when emptied and treated with a disinfectant
if necessary to prevent a nuisance. Adequate can washing facilities shall be
provided.
§ 155-11. Refrigeration.
All readily perishable food or drink shall be kept at temperatures lower
than 40° F., except when being prepared or served. All refrigerators must
be equipped with an indicating thermometer accurate to plus and minus
2° F., located in the warmest part of the facility in which food is stored
and of such type and so situated that the thermometer can easily and
readily be observed for reading and maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition. Wastewater from refrigeration equipment shall be disposed of in
accordance with Chapter 216, Plumbing, of the Code of the Township of
Ridley
§ 155-12. Wholesomeness of food or drink.
D. Storage and handling of utensils and equipment. After cleansing and
sterilizing, all utensils and equipment must be stored above the level of
the floor in a clean, dry place, protected from flies, dust or other
contamination, and no utensils shall be handled except in such manner
as to prevent contamination. Single-service utensils shall be purchased
only in sanitary containers and shall be stored therein in a clean, dry
place until used and shall be handled in a sanitary manner. Kitchens
shall be used only for cooking and the storage of food products and
kitchen, cooking or eating utensils and equipment in use.
A. All food and drink shall be wholesome and free from spoilage and
contamination. All milk, ice cream and other frozen dairy products shall
be from sources approved by the Board. Milk must be served in or from
the half-pint container in which it was received from the distributor or
by other methods approved by the Board. This requirement shall not
apply to cream which may be served from the original bottle or from a
dispenser approved by the Board.
§ 155-9 RIDLEY CODE § 155-12
151:288
§ 155-13. Storage and display of food and drink.
All food and drink shall be stored, handled, cooked, processed, prepared,
displayed or dispensed as provided under Article II, § 155-26, hereof. Sugar
served in all public eating and drinking places shall be dispensed from
containers which provide protection against dirt, dust, other contamination
and human handling at all times, except in the case of lump or packaged
sugar which is individually wrapped. Unwrapped or otherwise unprotected
displayed food which is subject to contamination through public handling,
coughing or sneezing shall be protected by means of glass or similar
partitions or through other approved means.
§ 155-14. Cleanliness of food handlers.
All food handlers shall wear clean garments and shall keep their hands
and fingernails clean at all times when engaged in the handling of food,
drink, utensils or equipment. All female employees shall wear hair nets
while engaged in the preparation of food. All male employees shall wear
caps while engaged in the preparation of food. All food handlers who in any
manner come in contact with or handle food shall, before beginning work,
thoroughly wash their hands with soap and water. No employee shall use
tobacco in any form while engaged in the preparation or handling of food
and drink.
§ 155-15. Insect and rodent control.
All persons engaged in the operation of any public eating and drinking place
shall be required to take all necessary precautions to keep the premises free
of rats and vermin. In the case of rat or vermin infestation, operators shall
report such infestation to the Board for the purpose of procuring proper
advice and instructions in order to eliminate the nuisance. In the case of all
B. In the case of milk drinks, the milk used shall include the entire
contents of the original container. No part or parts of any food
previously served to the customer can again be served in any form to
other customers. This requirement includes the remaining portions of
crackers, cream, bread, slaw, unused salads, butter, jellies and all other
foods which are not served in tightly covered dispensers or any parts of
other foods that have been served as a part of a meal and with which
there has been possible human contact.
C. No cream puffs, eclairs, napoleons, cream pies, cream-filled layer cakes
and similar products containing custard or whipped cream shall be sold
or stored unless kept in a storage compartment the maximum
temperature of which is not greater than 40° F.
D. All oysters, clams and mussels shall be from approved sources. The
shells of shellfish used for service cannot be reused.
E. All ice shall be from an approved source and must meet the standards
as set forth in Article V of these rules and regulations.
§ 155-12 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-15
151:289
new establishments, all rooms in which food or drink is prepared, stored or
served shall be of a ratproof construction.
§ 155-16. General operation.
§ 155-17. Right of entry for inspections.
An official representative of the Board in the performance of any duty
imposed by this Health Code shall have full access to any place, container,
conveyance or records used in the production, preparation, manufacture,
packing, storage, transportation, handling, distribution or sale of any food.
Without any prior notice, he shall be entitled to make an examination, open
A. The premises of all public eating and drinking places shall be kept clean
and free of litter or rubbish.
B. No sleeping facilities or domestic activities shall be permitted in any
room which is part of or which opens into any room where food is
prepared, stored or served or in which utensils are washed or stored.
C. Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall be provided for employees'
clothing and shall be kept clean.
D. Soiled linens, coats and aprons shall be kept in verminproof containers
provided for this purpose.
E. No public eating and drinking places shall be located in any cellar,
basement or other place below the natural surface of the ground except
with the written permission of the Board.
F. Bulk ice cream cannot be dispensed unless running water is provided
next to the cabinet containing the ice cream. The utensils used in
dispensing bulk ice cream must be sterilized frequently, washed by
running water after each usage, and kept dry when not in use.
G. No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanic preparation
or other poisonous materials shall be used for the cleaning, disinfecting
or polish of utensils or containers used in preparing or handling any
food or drink.
H. No substance containing any cyanide, fluoride, lindane or other poison
shall be kept or used as an insecticide or exterminator in any place
where food or drink is exposed during sale, preparation, holding or
handling or in such manner as to contaminate such food or drink.
I. No person shall bring or permit to be brought any dog, cat or other
animal into the dining room, kitchen or storeroom of any public eating
or drinking place. This section shall not apply to a blind person led by a
training dog.
J. Before a new establishment can begin operation, the proprietor shall
contact the Board of Health and request an interview with the Director
of the Board of Health and/or the Health Officer.
§ 155-15 RIDLEY CODE § 155-17
151:290
any package or container, examine records and take therefrom a sample for
analysis of any food manufactured, sold, exposed for sale or found to be in
possession of the proprietor in violation of any provisions of these rules and
regulations.
§ 155-18. Samples of food for examination.
§ 155-19. Condemnation and embargo.
Such samples of food, drink, ingredients, containers or any substance used
in connection with the preparation of food or drink may be taken by a duly
authorized representative of the Board for examination as often as may be
deemed necessary for the detection of any impure or unsanitary condition.
Any food, drink or any substance used in connection with the preparation
of food or drink sold, offered for sale or kept may be condemned, removed
or destroyed by or under the direction of a duly authorized representative
of the Board if, in the judgment of such representative, such food, drink
or substance is decomposed, contaminated, impure, unfit for human
consumption or dangerous to the public health. Any such food, drink or
other substance may be stopped from sale or use and placed under an
embargo by any such representative of the Board for such reasonable
period of time as may be required to make investigation or examination,
if such may be necessary to determine that such food, drink or other
substance is decomposed, impure, unfit for human consumption or
dangerous to the public health. No such food, drink or other substance shall
be used, removed, destroyed or otherwise disposed of while under such
embargo except by or under the direction of a representative of the Board.
A. Every person who shall distribute or sell or offer for distribution or sale
or have in his possession any food shall, on request and tender of the
value by an official representative of the Board, deliver as much thereof
to such representative as may be requested as a sample.
B. If such request is not immediately complied with, the Board or its
official representative may demand and take as much of the food as it
may think necessary, tendering to the person in charge what it deems to
be its reasonable value.
C. At no time shall a proprietor have in his possession, either for sale or
not for sale, food or drink which is unfit and is likely to cause illness or
transmit disease. When, in the opinion of this Board or its official
representative, such food or drink exists it shall be ordered denatured,
removed and disposed of.
D. It shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge of such substance
to immediately remove and dispose of it at his own expense according
to the direction of the Board or its official representative. In case the
owner or person in charge shall fail to immediately remove and dispose
of such substance, as ordered, the same shall be caused to be
denatured, removed and disposed of by the Board at the expense of the
owner or person in charge.
§ 155-17 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-20
151:291
§ 155-20. Closing of premises.
A. Whenever the proprietor of a public eating and drinking place shall fail
to keep his public eating and drinking place in a sanitary condition, or
whenever food or drink or the sale of the same is likely to cause or
transmit disease, the Board, upon proper notification, shall order such
public eating and drinking place closed until it shall have been put in a
sanitary condition or until the food or drink or the sale of the same shall
be no longer likely to cause any illness or transmit disease. The
proprietor of the public eating and place, when so ordered, shall
immediately comply with and obey such order and shall not conduct
further operations until permission has been granted by the Board.
B. Failure of the proprietor to comply with the order of the Board shall
result in the Board ordering the Director of Health and/or the Health
Officer to take necessary steps to close and padlock said premises until
it shall have complied with the order of the Board of Health.
§ 155-20 RIDLEY CODE § 155-20
151:292
ARTICLE II
Food Establishments
§ 155-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CUSTARD MIX and CUSTARD-FILLED — Refer to any product, consisting
principally of flour, sugar, eggs and milk, with or without cornstarch,
heated, cooled and applied to pastry without subsequent heating and to
filled pastry, such as cream puffs or eclairs, which may be heated
subsequent to filling.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any place where food or beverage intended
for human consumption is kept, stored, manufactured, prepared, dressed,
handled, sold or offered for sale, with or without charge, either at wholesale
or retail, and not consumed on the premises; provided, however, that the
term "food establishment" shall not include a public eating and drinking
place, and the term "food," as used in this chapter, shall include not only
every article used for food by man but also every article used for or entering
into the composition of or handled for use as an ingredient in the food.
LICENSE — The permission granted to a licensee to conduct a food
establishment.
LICENSEE — A holder of a license.
LICENSOR or BOARD — The Board of Health of Ridley Township.
NEW ESTABLISHMENT — Any place that has been newly constructed or in
which a change of ownership has taken place.
OFFERED FOR SALE — Applies to any food or drink kept or displayed in
any store, place, dispenser or vehicle in the manner in which food or drink
is ordinarily kept or displayed.
PERISHABLE FOODS — Any food or beverage or ingredients, exclusive of
milk and milk products, capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth
of microorganisms which can cause food infections or food intoxication.
However, products that are processed are excluded from the terms of this
definition.
SHELLFISH — Oysters, clams, scallops or mussels, fresh or frozen; any
shrimp, crab or lobster, fresh, frozen or cooked but not placed in a sealed
container; and any other mollusks, fresh or frozen, intended for human
consumption.
§ 155-22. Licenses.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment in
the Township who does not possess a license from the Board of Health
of Ridley Township. Licenses shall be granted for a period of one year or
portion thereof. Said year shall commence when the license is issued
and shall be valid until the last day of the month issued one year later.
§ 155-21 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-22
151:293
§ 155-23. Approval of plans.
No person shall undertake to construct a new building or remodel or alter
an existing building or portion thereof for, or install equipment which is
being used or is proposed for use in, a food establishment without first
submitting plans for approval thereof as provided under Article I, § 155-4,
of these health rules and regulations.
§ 155-24. Structures.
Such license shall be conspicuously displayed at all times in the place
thereby licensed and shall not be transferable. Application for renewal
of a license shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration of the
existing license. A late fee computed at 10% of the license fee shall be
assessed for each month or part thereof, that the license fee is paid
more than 30 days after the due date. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 1808; 3-27-2002 by Ord. No. 1826]
B. Licenses may be suspended or revoked for violation by the holder
thereof of these rules and regulations. No license shall be suspended or
revoked without a licensee being given a hearing before the Board of
Health.
C. The Health Officer shall make annual inspections of any licensee within
the Township and an inspection of any retail food establishment. Such
licensee shall pay a fee for the license as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners, based on the square footage
of the establishment as follows: [Amended 2-18-1981 by Ord. No.
1512; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808; 3-27-2002 by Ord. No. 1826]
Floor Area
(square feet)
Under 1,000
1,001 to 1,500
1,501 to 2,500
2,501 to 5,000
5,001 to 7,500
7,501 to 10,000
10,001 to 15,000
15,001 and over
A. Enclosures. Every such food establishment shall be so constructed and
maintained as to provide adequate enclosure and protection of the food
or drink and the food- or drink-handling operations contained therein.
B. Floors. The floor of any room or place where food or drink is stored,
prepared or served or in which utensils are cleansed shall be of such
§ 155-22 RIDLEY CODE § 155-24
151:294
construction as to be easily cleaned, shall be smooth and shall be kept
clean and in good repair.
C. Walls and ceiling. The walls and ceiling of any room or place where food
or drink is stored, prepared or handled shall be clean and in good
repair. Such walls and ceiling shall be painted or finished in light color
and refinished as often as necessary. Walls in food preparation areas
shall have a smooth, washable surface up to the level exposed to soiling
by splash or spray.
D. Doors and windows. All openings to the outside shall be effectively
screened or otherwise protected during the period when flies are
prevalent (April 1 to December 1). Doors shall open outward and be
self-closing or otherwise effectively closed. All effective means shall be
provided to prevent the entrance of flies and other insects through such
openings. Doors and windows shall be kept clean inside and outside.
The presence of flies or flying insects within the structure shall be
presumptive evidence of failure to comply with this section.
E. Lighting. Lighting in any room or place in which food or drink is stored,
prepared or handled or in which utensils are washed shall be adequate
for all working purposes and to facilitate effective and thorough
cleaning.
F. Ventilation. Adequate ventilation shall be provided in any room where
food or drink is stored, prepared or handled or in which utensils are
washed so that such rooms are reasonably free of disagreeable odors
and condensation, undue heat or cold, toxic substances, smoke, vapor,
dust or other substance affecting or likely to affect the food or drink or
causing or likely to cause an atmospheric condition dangerous to the
health of employees or contributing to an insanitary practice or
condition. All ventilation systems shall be maintained in a clean,
sanitary manner.
G. Toilets and lavatory facilities.
(1) Adequate lavatory facilities, including toilets, hand-washing
facilities, automatic running hot and cold water, powdered or liquid
soap in appropriate dispensers, sanitary towels and toilet paper,
shall be provided for use at all times when such food establishment
is in operation.
(2) Adequate and separate toilets shall be provided for and be readily
accessible to the sexes employed as food handlers or otherwise and
shall be located on premises.
(3) Toilet rooms shall not open directly into any room in which food or
drink is prepared or handled. An intervening vestibule of at least
three feet square must be provided. The doors of all toilet rooms
shall be self-closing.
§ 155-24 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-24
151:295
§ 155-25. Personnel.
(4) The toilet shall be kept clean, in good repair, well-lighted and
properly ventilated by exterior windows or other mechanical
means. The walls and ceilings shall be of a smooth, washable
surface and shall be finished in a light color.
(5) Hand-washing facilities with automatic running hot and cold water,
sanitary towels and soap shall be in or adjacent to the toilet room.
The use of the common towel is prohibited. Hand-washing signs
shall be posted in each toilet room used by food handlers. No food
handler shall return to work after using the toilet without first
washing his hands.
(6) In all new establishments or establishments where alterations are
made, the floors of the toilet rooms shall be of a material and joints
impervious to water and shall be provided with a sanitary base. The
plumbing fixtures shall be of the wall-hung type and to facilitate
cleaning.
H. Separate hand-washing facilities required. In any food establishment
where frequent hand-washing is necessary to prevent contamination of
food during processing, manufacture or preparation, separate handwashing
facilities, including an adequate supply of powdered or liquid
soap and sanitary towels, shall be provided in the workroom and
conveniently near each such process work space.
I. Common drinking cup prohibited. Drinking cups for common use shall
not be permitted in any food establishment.
A. Personal cleanliness. Every food handler shall wear clean outer
garments, shall maintain personal cleanliness and shall keep hands and
fingernails clean at all times while engaged in handling food, drink,
utensils or equipment. No employee shall use tobacco in any form while
engaged in the handling of food or drink. All female employees shall
wear hair nets and all male employees shall wear caps while engaged in
the preparation or packaging of food.
B. Disease control. No person suffering from a communicable disease
transmissible through food or drink, or who is known to be a carrier of
the organisms causing such disease, and no person suffering from a
local infection transmissible through food, shall be employed in any
food establishment at which food or drink is prepared or dispensed. The
provisions of Article I, § 155-3A, B, C, D and E, of these rules and
regulations shall apply to all persons employed in food establishments.
C. Locker spaces. Soiled linens, aprons and other articles used in the
preparation, storage or handling of food or drink shall be kept in
verminproof containers provided for this purpose. Clothing shall not be
hung or placed in proximity to exposed food or drink. When required by
§ 155-24 RIDLEY CODE § 155-25
151:296
§ 155-26. Protection of food.
§ 155-27. Utensils and equipment.
the Director of Health and/or the Health Officer, suitable and adequate
rooms for changing clothes and locker space shall be provided.
A. General.
(1) No food or drink shall be kept, sold, offered for sale, manufactured,
cooked, processed, prepared, displayed, dispensed or transported
unless it shall be protected at all times from dust, dirt, flies, vermin,
handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage or other
contamination. Such food or drink shall be subjected to or
maintained at such temperatures while being kept, displayed,
transported or offered for sale as shall prevent undue or abnormal
deterioration, decomposition or spoilage. Food displayed or
exposed for retail sale shall be at least 24 inches above the floor
unless it is completely enclosed by coverings or containers. The
general storage of food, raw materials and reserve stock shall be
above the floor (six inches or more) on clean racks, pallets, dollies
or other clean surfaces in such a manner as to be protected from
contamination and to facilitate easy and thorough cleaning.
(2) Where unwrapped food is displayed in all types of food service
operations, including smorgasbords, buffets and cafeterias, it shall
be protected against contamination from customer and other
sources by easily cleaned counter-protector devices, cabinets,
display cases, containers or other similar types of protective
equipment. Self-service openings in counter guards shall be so
designed and arranged as to protect food from manual contact by
customers.
(3) All deliveries of perishable foods to food establishments shall be
made inside the store unless food is stored in containers approved
by the Board.
B. Animals prohibited. No live animal or fowl shall be permitted or kept in
any rooms where food or drink is stored, prepared, handled or served.
A. In all new establishments or in establishments where alterations are
made, where multiuse utensils are used, no less than a threecompartment
sink shall be provided and equipped with running hot and
cold water. Each compartment of the sink shall be a size of not less than
16 inches square by 14 inches deep. All sinks shall be equivalent to or in
excess of the specifications in the National Sanitation Foundation
standards. All eating and cooking utensils and all showcases and
display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, booths and
refrigerating and other equipment shall be of a sanitary design and
construction and so located as to be easily cleaned and shall be kept
clean and in a sanitary condition. In new establishments or in
§ 155-25 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-27
151:297
establishments where new installations of equipment are made, all
equipment used for the preparation, storing, handling or serving of
food or drink shall be equivalent to or in excess of that specified in
the National Sanitation Foundation standards. Such equipment shall be
spaced away from walls and corners so as to permit access for cleaning.
Thirty inches of working space shall be required between all units of
new equipment, unless such equipment is movable. Where equipment
with closed bottoms without air spaces is set on a masonry base, the
top of the base shall be waterproofed with mastic.
B. Accepted method of dishwashing.
(1) Three-compartment sink.
(a) Procedure.
[1] Wash (water 110° to 130° F.).
[2] Rinse (warm water).
[3] Sanitize (water 180° F. for two minutes).
(b) Alternative.
[1] Wash (water 110° to 130° F.).
[2] Rinse (warm water).
[3] Sanitize with a chemical such as hypochlorite compounds
or chlorine-containing compounds of equal efficiency at a
minimum concentration of 100 parts per million for at
least 30 seconds; Quaternary ammonium compounds at a
minimum concentration of 200 parts per million for at
least 30 seconds; or iodoform compounds at a minimum
concentration of 12.5 parts per million for at least 30
seconds.
(2) Mechanical dishwashing. The mechanical dishwashing installation
shall be approved. Heating facilities and thermostatic controls to
provide hot water at 180° F. minimum temperature for the final
rinse cycle shall be provided on mechanical dishwashing
equipment. Each mechanical dishwashing machine shall be
equipped with accurate thermometers.
(3) The proprietor of the eating and drinking establishment shall have
available upon the premises of the eating and drinking
establishment the original container in which the chemical
sanitizer currently employed was received from the distributor.
C. Cleaning process.
(1) In all food establishments, adequate cleaning of utensils is
required, and an adequate supply of automatic running hot and
cold water under pressure of not less than 15 pounds per square
§ 155-27 RIDLEY CODE § 155-27
151:298
inch, an adequate supply of suitable cleanser and suitable and
adequate facilities for the cleansing, disinfecting and storage of
utensils shall be provided.
(2) In all new establishments or in establishments where any
alterations are made, a service sink of a size not less than 20 inches
wide, 21 inches long and 12 1/2 inches deep shall be provided for
the cleaning of janitor's supplies.
D. Storage and handling of utensils and equipment. After cleansing and
sterilizing, all utensils and equipment must be stored above the level of
the floor in a clean, dry place, protected from flies, dust or other
contamination, and no utensils shall be handled or stored except in such
a manner as to prevent contamination.
E. Water supply. Automatic running hot and cold water under pressure of
not less than 15 pounds per square inch shall be easily accessible to all
rooms in which food is prepared or utensils washed and shall be
adequate and of a safe, sanitary quality, as provided in § 155-47A of
these rules and regulations.
F. Waste containers. In every food establishment, adequate and suitable
metal containers with tight-fitting lids shall be provided and used to
receive waste and refuse. Such containers shall be kept in a sanitary
condition with tightfitting lids. All refuse shall be removed from the
premises at frequent intervals so as not to create a nuisance.
G. Refrigeration.
(1) Adequate refrigeration shall be provided at all times for all
perishable food or drink. Refrigerators shall be maintained in good
repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) The following temperatures shall be maintained at all times:
Foods Temperatures
Frozen food 0° F. or below
Meat and meat products, cooked food
of animal origin, milk and milk
products and other perishable foods
40° F. or below
Seafood and fresh poultry 32° F. or below
(3) Indicating thermometers shall be provided in all refrigerators and
refrigerated cases accurate to plus and minus 2° F., located in the
warmest part of the facility in which food is stored and of such type
and so situated that the thermometer can be easily and readily
observed for reading.
§ 155-27 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-28
151:299
§ 155-28. Sale of impure food prohibited.
No food or drink which is impure, decomposed, contaminated or dangerous
to the public health or which has been so treated as to conceal inferiority
or which in its manufacture, cooking, processing, preparation, handling or
storage does not conform to the requirements of these rules and regulations
shall be kept, sold or offered for sale for human consumption.
§ 155-29. Poisonous substances.
§ 155-30. Meat and meat products.
§ 155-31. Shellfish.
A. No substance containing cyanide, fluoride, lindane or other poison shall
be kept or used as an insecticide or exterminator in any place where
food or drink is exposed during sale, preparation, holding or handling
or in such manner as to contaminate such food or drink.
B. No polish, article or substance containing cyanide or other poison shall
be used for the cleansing or disinfecting of any utensils or containers
used in preparing or handling any food or drink.
A. No meat or meat products shall be offered for sale, displayed, sold or
kept in any food establishment unless such products shall have first
been inspected and approved by either an authorized agent of the
Bureau of Animal Industry, United States Department of Agriculture, or
of the Bureau of Animal Industry, Pennsylvania Department of
Agriculture. The Board may, in its discretion, permit the sale of meat or
meat products which have been inspected and approved by a duly
authorized agent who is a qualified and licensed veterinarian appointed
under an ordinance of a municipality of this commonwealth, provided
that the procedure followed in conducting inspection, including the
facilities for making the same, the requirements with respect to the
sanitation of the establishment and the marking, branding or
identifying of meat or meat products shall conform to the regulations of
the United States Department of Agriculture or the Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture.
B. All meat or meat products offered for sale, displayed, sold or stored in
any food establishment shall be marked in a clear and legible manner
with the official meat inspection legend, as provided in the foregoing
Subsection A.
C. Any slaughtering, meat canning, curing, smoking, salting, packing,
rendering or other similar establishment where meat or meat products
are prepared for sale in the Township shall be subject to inspection by
the Board.
A. No oysters, clams or other shellfish shall be sold or offered for sale in
the Township unless such shellfish shall have been produced and
§ 155-28 RIDLEY CODE § 155-31
151:300
shipped in conformity with the regulations of the state in which they
were grown or packed, and unless the shipment shall have been
accompanied by tag, label or other mark approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health showing that the shipper has been duly certified
by the state in which this plant is operated, such certification having
been approved by the United States Public Health Service for
shipments in interstate commerce.
B. All shellfish shippers, re-shippers, packers and wholesalers shall for 60
days keep accurate records of the source, date and quantity of all lots of
shellfish received and the name and address of the consignee to whom
each lot or part thereof is consigned, with the date and quantity, in
order that lots of shellfish dispensed may be identified with
corresponding lots of shellfish received. When an original shipment of
shellfish is broken down into smaller lots, each lot shall have attached
thereto a split-lot tag of the type approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health. The said records shall be subject to inspection
by the Director of Health and/or the Health Officer. All retailers shall
keep an accurate record, subject to such inspection of the source, date
and quantity, of all lots of shellfish received.
C. Shellfish shall be so handled and stored as to maintain them in a clean,
wholesome condition.
D. Shell stock (shellfish not removed from the shell) shall be shipped in
clean containers, each container having an approved tag attached
thereto as provided in Subsection B hereof. Bulk shipment by truck or
can is prohibited.
E. All establishments in which shellfish are shucked, washed, packed,
replaced, stored or otherwise handled shall conform to all the
provisions of Article II of these rules and regulations.
F. All rooms in which shucked oysters are washed, packed, repacked,
stored or otherwise handled shall be separate and apart from the rooms
in which oysters are shucked.
G. Such establishments shall be provided with an ample and convenient
supply of pure, cold water for washing the shucked stock and flushing
purposes and hot water for cleansing receptacles and utensils.
H. All receptacles in which shucked stock is placed and other utensils
which come into contact with the shucked stock shall be of
noncorroding material, with smooth surfaces and of such shape as will
facilitate thorough cleansing. They shall be cleansed before use.
I. Shucked stock shall be thoroughly washed in pure, cold water and,
subsequent to such washing, shall not be handled except with clean
utensils.
J. Shucked stock shall be packed in clean containers, sealed in such a
manner that any tampering will be easily discernible and marked with
§ 155-31 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-31
151:301
§ 155-32. Custard-filled and whipped cream pastry; perishable
foods.
the name, address and identification mark of the packing
establishment, together with the quantity of shellfish contained therein.
K. Proper refrigeration shall be provided in all places where shucked stock
is kept and during shipment. The cooling of shellfish to a temperature of
40° F. or less shall be effected within two hours after the shellfish is
shucked. No ice or other foreign substance shall be allowed in contact
with the shucked stock.
A. Restriction of sale. No custard-filled and whipped cream pastry shall be
kept, offered for sale or sold except on the day of manufacture thereof.
The day of manufacture shall be the day on which manufacture is
completed but may include not more than two hours preceding
midnight of the previous day.
B. Manufacture. The entire custard mix to be used in the manufacture of
custard-filled pastry shall be brought to and held at a temperature of
not less than 200° F. continuously for not less than 10 minutes and,
within one hour thereafter, placed in a refrigerating temperature of not
over 40° F. and kept at or below such temperatures until applied to the
pastry.
C. Holding temperatures. No custard-filled or whipped cream pastry shall
be kept, displayed, offered for sale or transported unless, immediately
after manufacture, it shall have been cooled to and maintained at all
times at a temperature of 40° F. or lower, in clean containers filled to a
depth of not more than three inches. Other perishable food shall be held
either at a temperature of 40° F. or lower or at a temperature of 150° F.
or higher.
D. Packaging and labeling. No custard-filled pastry shall be sold either
wholesale or retail or transported for retail delivery unless it shall be
wrapped or packaged so as to protect the contents from contamination.
Such wrapper or package shall bear prominently on the outside thereof,
in legible letters, the name of the manufacturing baker, the day of
manufacture and the following statement "Refrigerate and Consume
Today."
E. Condemnation. Custard-filled or whipped cream pastry or perishable
food manufactured, kept, displayed or served in violation of the
provisions of § 155-22 of this Health Code is hereby declared to be
dangerous to the public health and, as such, subject to condemnation
by an authorized representative of the Board.
F. Transportation of bakery products. No person shall transport or deliver
bakery products unless such products are fully enclosed in a clean and
sanitary container. Multiple-use containers shall be of such design and
construction as to facilitate cleaning and shall be kept clean and
§ 155-31 RIDLEY CODE § 155-32
151:302
§ 155-33. Storage of cleaning supplies.
§ 155-34. Condemnation and embargo.
Such samples of food, drink, ingredients, containers or any substance used
in connection with the preparation of food or drink may be taken by a duly
authorized representative of the Board for examination as often as may be
deemed necessary for the detection of an impure or unsanitary condition.
Any food, drink or any substance used in connection with the preparation
of food or drink sold, offered for sale or kept may be condemned, removed
or destroyed by or under the direction of a duly authorized representative
of the Board if, in the judgment of such representative, such food, drink
or substance is decomposed, contaminated, impure, unfit for human
consumption or dangerous to the public health. Any such food, drink or
other substance may be stopped from sale or use and placed under an
embargo by any such representative of the Board for such reasonable
period of time as may be required to make investigations or examination,
if such may be necessary to determine that such food, drink or other
substance is decomposed, impure, unfit for human consumption or
dangerous to the public health. No such food, drink or other substance shall
be used, removed, destroyed or otherwise disposed of while under such
embargo except by or under the direction of a representative of the Board.
§ 155-35. Closing of premises.
sanitary. The reuse of cardboard or paper containers or liners is
prohibited.
A. No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide
preparation or other poisonous materials shall be used for the cleaning,
disinfecting or polishing of utensils or containers used in the preparing
or handling of any food or drink.
B. No substance containing cyanide, fluoride, lindane or other poison shall
be stored as an insecticide or exterminator in any place where food or
drink is exposed during sale, preparation, holding or handling or in
such manner as to contaminate such food or drink.
A. Whenever the proprietor of a food establishment shall fail to keep his
food establishment in a sanitary condition, or whenever food or drink or
the sale of the same is likely to cause or transmit disease, the Board,
upon proper notification, shall order such food establishment closed
until it shall have been put in a sanitary condition or until the food or
drink or the sale of the same shall be no longer likely to cause any
illness or transmit disease. The proprietor of the food establishment,
when so ordered, shall immediately comply with and obey such order
and shall not conduct further operations until permission has been
granted by the Board.
B. Failure of the proprietor to comply with the order of the Board shall
result in the Board ordering the Director of Health and/or the Health
§ 155-32 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-35
151:303
Officer to take necessary steps to close and padlock said premises until
it shall have complied with the order of the Board of Health.
§ 155-35 RIDLEY CODE § 155-35
151:304
ARTICLE III
Food Vendors
§ 155-36. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD VENDOR — Any person who transports, distributes or sells to the
public prepared foods or perishable food, of a kind deemed by the Board to
be capable of causing human foodborne illness, from any truck, trailer, cart,
bicycle or other vehicle or from any vending machine, container or other
type of equipment.
PERISHABLE FOOD — Any food or beverage or ingredients, exclusive of
milk and milk products, capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth
of microorganisms which can cause food infections or food intoxication.
However, products that are processed are excluded from the terms of this
definition.
VENDING EQUIPMENT — Any self-service device offered for public use
which, upon insertion of a coin or token, or by other means, dispenses
unit servings of food or beverage, either in bulk or in package, without the
necessity of replenishing the device between each vending operation.
§ 155-37. Application for license.
§ 155-38. License required; inspections.
A. Applications for licenses shall be on forms provided by the Board, which
applications shall set forth the name, residence and business address of
the applicant and the names of the persons operating the establishment
or establishments from which the prepared or perishable food will be
obtained.
B. Every food vendor shall, upon demand, furnish to the Board such
additional information as the Board may require to enable it to
determine whether the provisions of these rules and regulations are
being complied with. Failure to furnish such information promptly or
failure to secure written permission to inspect or reinspect sources of
food supplied shall result in the refusal to issue or the revocation of the
food vendor's license.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or distribute to the public
prepared or perishable food from any food vending vehicle or from any
vending equipment without obtaining a license from the Board of
Health of Ridley Township. The fee for such a license shall be as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Licenses
shall be granted for a period of one year or portion thereof, said year
shall commence when the license is issued and shall be valid until the
last day of the month issued one year later. Such license shall be
conspicuously displayed at all times in the place thereby licensed and
§ 155-36 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-38
151:305
§ 155-39. Suspension or revocation of licenses.
Licenses may be suspended or revoked for violation by the holder thereof
of these rules and regulations. No license shall be suspended or revoked
without a licensee being given a hearing before the Board of Health.
§ 155-40. Exemptions.
Article III of these rules and regulations shall not apply to:
§ 155-41. Inspection of vending equipment.
The Director of Health and/or the Health Officer shall be permitted to
enter upon any private or public property in this Township where vending
shall not be transferable. Application for renewal of a license shall be
made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the existing license.
A late fee computed at 10% of the license fee shall be assessed for
each month or part thereof, that the license fee is paid more than 30
days after the due date. [Amended 2-18-1981 by Ord. No. 1512;
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808; 3-27-2002 by Ord. No. 1826]
B. A license will not be issued to any person until the Health Officer or any
of the proper authorities has inspected and approved the establishment
and equipment from which the food is to be obtained, and such licensee,
manufacturer or producer shall pay a fee for such inspection in the
amounts as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners for the first vehicle and for each additional vehicle. In
the case of food and beverage vending machines, the annual inspection
fees shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners per location for the first two machines and for each
additional machine. A sticker shall be affixed to the apparatus
indicating that it has been licensed for the current year. [Amended
2-18-1981 by Ord. No. 1512; 10-25 2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
C. Any such establishment shall be equipped and operated in compliance
with the provisions of Article I of these rules and regulations or
requirements of the Board now in effect or hereafter adopted. The
license shall at all times be kept posted prominently in the food vending
vehicle or on the equipment.
A. The transportation and wholesale delivery of food or produce to retail
food stores for the purpose of resale.
B. The transportation and delivery of food to public eating and drinking
places duly licensed under Article I of these rules and regulations.
C. Any manufacturer or producer in the sale of meat and meat products
and milk and milk products. Nothing contained in Article III of these
rules and regulations shall, however, relieve any person engaged in the
manufacture, distribution and sale of milk and milk products from
complying with the Milk Code.
§ 155-38 RIDLEY CODE § 155-41
151:306
equipment is operating to inspect the servicing, maintenance and operation
of such equipment for the purpose of determining compliance with the
provisions of these rules and regulations. The operators of vending
machines shall make provisions for the Director of Health and/or the Health
Officer to have access to the interior of all vending machines operated by
him.
§ 155-42. Disease control.
§ 155-43. Construction and lighting equipment.
A. No person who is affected with any disease in a communicable form or a
carrier of such disease shall work as a food vendor, and no food vendor
shall employ any such person or persons suspected of being affected
with any disease in a communicable form or of being a carrier of such
disease. If the proprietor suspects that any employee has contracted
any such disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of
such disease, he shall notify the Township Director of Health and/or the
Health Officer in writing immediately.
B. Procedure where infection is suspected. Where there is reasonable
ground for the Director of Health and/or the Health Officer to suspect
that there is transmission of an infectious disease from any employee to
the public, the Director of Health and/or the Health Officer is
authorized to require the proprietor to forthwith carry out any of the
following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from their employment.
(2) The immediate closing of the vending equipment until the danger
of disease outbreak ceases to exist.
(3) Adequate medical examination of the employee and of his
associates, including appropriate laboratory examinations.
A. The floors, walls, ceiling, shelves, compartments and container holders
in food vending machines shall be of such construction as to be readily
cleaned and shall be kept clean and in good repair. Food vending
vehicles shall be equipped to provide light of not less than 10
footcandles at the face of the shelf, display or storage space at such
time as food shall be dispensed therefrom.
B. In establishments where new installation of vending equipment is
made, such equipment shall be equivalent to or in excess of that
specified by the National Sanitation Foundation standards.
C. Syphon breakers shall be installed on all water-supplied-vending
equipment.
D. Refrigerating equipment of approved design shall be provided on any
food vending vehicle or equipment from which perishable foods are
dispensed.
§ 155-41 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-43
151:307
§ 155-44. Preparation and handling of food.
§ 155-45. Garbage, trash and plumbing.
E. Cold beverages, sandwiches and other perishable foods shall be kept
under dry refrigeration at a temperature of 40° F. or lower.
A. There shall be no preparation of food on the vending vehicle. All food
shall be prepared and wrapped in a licensed establishment complying
with all of the provisions of Article I of these rules and regulations.
B. Food to be distributed by any food vendor shall be protected from
insects and the elements. All food in the possession of a food vendor
shall be packaged or wrapped and sealed in unbroken, individual
containers and remain therein until received by the customer.
Beverages shall be distributed in the original container or from an
automatic vending machine of approved type designed to dispense the
beverage in a single-service container from bulk. Water carried in food
vending vehicles shall be clean and cold and shall conform to the
provisions of Article IV of these rules and regulations.
A. Garbage and trash shall at all times be kept in metal containers with
tight-fitting lids and disposed of at frequent intervals so as not to create
a nuisance.
B. All plumbing connected with food vending equipment shall be installed
in accordance with Chapter 216, Plumbing, of the Code of the Township
of Ridley.
§ 155-43 RIDLEY CODE § 155-45
151:308
ARTICLE IV
Water Supplies
§ 155-46. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOTTLED WATER — Includes any artificial or natural mineral, spring- or
other water bottled for drinking purposes.
PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY — Any water system not classified as public,
intended primarily for the use of the occupants of the premises. The system
shall include all of the sources, treatment works and distribution piping by
which water is furnished to water taps or outlets of the system.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY — Any water system serving or intended to serve
water for human consumption for domestic uses or purposes to more than
one service connection, irrespective of payments to be made for water
service. The system shall include all of the sources, treatment works and
distribution lines to the point of service connection at the meter, property
line or any similar premises connection point which are under one
ownership, management and operation.
§ 155-47. Quality of water.
A. No person shall provide or make accessible a public water supply or
bottled water for human consumption or domestic use unless the
source, treatment and distribution of such water shall be so protected
from pollution and so maintained as to deliver a water of safe, sanitary
quality. Such delivered water shall not contain bacterial, chemical or
other contamination in such quantity as may be injurious to health or as
may indicate such water to be unsatisfactory for human consumption as
determined by test in a laboratory approved for this purpose by the
Board. Public water supplies shall conform to the United States Public
Health Service drinking water standards now in effect or hereafter
adopted.
B. Springs and wells. No spring or well classified as a public water supply
shall be used as a source of domestic water supply which does not
conform to the requirements and standards set forth in this section.
C. Private water supplies. No person shall provide or maintain a private
water supply to be used for drinking or other domestic purposes by any
person, other than the owner thereof, unless such water supply shall be
potable, protected against pollution and free from bacterial
contamination in accordance with the prevailing bacterial standards of
water quality, as defined in Subsection A.
D. Disinfection. No new or repaired water supply system or any structure
which may have become contaminated accidentally or otherwise shall
be placed in use before such system or structure has been effectively
§ 155-46 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-47
151:309
cleaned and disinfected in accordance with accepted practices and
standards of the American Water Works Association now in effect or
hereafter adopted.
E. Treatment. Whenever the Board shall determine that the water
delivered to consumers for drinking or other domestic use does not
meet the requirements of these rules and regulations, it shall so notify
the person in responsible charge of such water supply and may order
the treatment, abandonment, sealing or posting of that portion of the
distribution system or connections within the Township which does not
meet the requirements of these rules and regulations.
F. Cross-connections and interconnections. No person shall permit any
connection between a potable water supply and an unapproved
auxiliary water supply or any structure containing sewage, nonpotable
water or other substance injurious to health.
G. Discontinuance of use of well or spring. Whenever, upon examination, it
shall appear that the water from a well or spring or other source
classified as a public water supply is not suitable for human
consumption, the use of such water shall be discontinued, and the well
or spring shall be abandoned.
H. Abandoned wells. No well shall be used for any purpose than as a
source of water. Abandoned wells shall be filled with clean earth or
capped with substantial watertight slabs so as to prevent the
contamination of the underground water supply.
I. Water samples.
(1) Samples of water from any water supply classified as a public water
supply may be taken for examination by the Health Officer as often
as he or she deems necessary for the detection of pollution or
unwholesomeness. The Board shall condemn any water supply
classified as a public water supply which it examines and finds to be
polluted to the extent that it is a present or potential danger to the
public health.
(2) The Director of Health and/or the Health Officer may at his
discretion refuse to take for examination samples of water from any
private water supply which is not adequately protected from
surface contamination.
§ 155-47 RIDLEY CODE § 155-47
151:310
ARTICLE V
Manufacture, Processing and Distribution of Ice
§ 155-48. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ICE — Includes the product in any form obtained as the result of freezing
water mechanically or naturally.
ICE PLANT — Any place, vehicle or establishment where ice is
manufactured, stored or processed for sale as ice.
§ 155-49. Application for license.
§ 155-50. Licenses; standards.
A. Applications for licenses shall be on forms provided by the Board, which
applications shall set forth the name, residence and business address of
the applicant and the names of the persons operating the vehicle or
establishment where the ice is manufactured, stored or processed.
B. Every ice vendor shall, upon demand, furnish to the Board such
additional information as the Board may require to enable it to
determine whether the provisions of these rules and regulations are
being complied with. Failure to furnish such information promptly or
failure to secure written permission to inspect or reinspect sources of
ice shall result in the refusal to issue or the revocation of the ice
vendor's license.
A. Licenses.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or distribute to the public
ice from any ice vending vehicle or from any other type of vending
equipment without obtaining a license from the Board of Health of
Ridley. The fee for such a license shall be as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners per year. Licenses
shall be granted for a period of one year or portion thereof, said
year to be computed to commence January 1 of any given year.
Such licenses shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place
and shall not be transferable. Application for renewal of license
shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration of the existing
license. [Amended 2-18-1981 by Ord. No. 1512; 10-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 1808]
(2) A license will not be issued to any person until the Director of
Health and/or the Health Officer has inspected and approved the
establishment and equipment from which the ice is to be obtained.
Such licensee, manufacturer or producer of ice shall be required to
pay a fee for such inspection. Written permission for the Board to
inspect or reinspect such establishment or equipment shall be
§ 155-48 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-50
151:311
§ 155-51. Records.
furnished by the applicant. Any such establishment shall be
equipped and operated in compliance with the provisions of Article
I of these rules and regulations or requirements of the Board now
in effect or hereafter adopted. The license shall at all times be kept
posted prominently in the ice vending vehicle or on the equipment.
(3) Revocation. Licenses may be suspended or revoked for violations
by the holder thereof of these rules and regulations. No license
shall be suspended or revoked without a licensee being given a
hearing before the Board of Health.
B. Standards. Ice plants and ice shall meet the following standards:
(1) All ice plants shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition
and shall be subject to inspection and approved by the Director of
Health and/or the Health Officer.
(2) The water from which ice is produced shall be obtained from an
approved water supply meeting the requirements set forth in
Article IV of these rules and regulations.
(3) The ice at the time of delivery to a customer shall meet the
standards of water quality set forth in Article IV of these Health
Code rules and regulations and shall be free of all foreign
substances.
(4) All equipment used for manufacture, cutting, grinding, chipping,
crushing, storage, transportation or delivery of ice which may come
in direct or indirect contact with the ice or the water used while
manufacturing ice shall be of a sanitary design proved by the
Board. Ice shall be so handled while in storage and delivery as to be
protected from dust, dirt, filth and contamination.
(5) All cans, buckets, tubs, pails or other containers used in the
manufacture, storage, transportation or distribution of ice shall be
kept thoroughly clean by methods acceptable to the Director of
Health and/or the Health Officer.
(6) Paper containers shall be discarded after one use.
(7) When dispensing individual servings of ice, a scoop must be used.
A. Any person owning or managing an ice plant shall maintain and submit
to the Director of Health and/or the Health Officer, on demand, such
records concerning the source, processing, transportation and
distribution of ice as the Director of Health and/or the Health Officer
requires for determining compliance with all applicable standards and
requirements set forth in Article IV of these rules and regulations.
B. Records required under this section shall include a statement
containing but not limited to:
§ 155-50 RIDLEY CODE § 155-51
151:312
(1) Records of any changes in structure of equipment.
(2) Records of the result obtained from analyses or tests of the water
used in manufacture of ice or of the ice.
(3) Tons of ice manufactured or delivered.
(4) The name and address of owners of vehicles used for the
transportation of ice.
(5) List of all establishments, private homes excluded, receiving
service.
(6) Location of coin-operated vending machines.
§ 155-51 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-51
151:313

ARTICLE VI
Hazardous Substances
§ 155-52. Manufacture and use.
A. Use and storage.
(1) Any substance classified or defined as a hazardous substance by
the Board of Health or within the definitions listed in Public Law
86-613, titled "Federal Hazardous Substance Labeling Act," or any
other substance or mixture of substances Which the Secretary of
the Department of Health, Education and Welfare designates as a
hazardous substance shall be subject to the regulations regarding
the preparation, storage, distribution and labeling procedures
pursuant to the Federal Hazardous Substance Labeling Act.
(2) All hazardous substances shall be used and stored in such a manner
so that there is no possibility of contamination of any food product,
food ingredients or kitchen utensils and equipment.
(3) Any official representative of the Board, in the performance of any
duty imposed by this Health Code, shall have full access to any
place, container, conveyance and records used in the production,
preparation, manufacture, packing, storage, transportation,
handling, distribution or sale of any hazardous substance. He shall
be entitled to make an examination and open any package or
container and take therefrom a sample for analysis of any
hazardous substance manufactured, sold, exposed for sale or found
to be in possession of the proprietor in violation of any provisions of
these rules and regulations.
B. Toxic vapors or fumes.
(1) No person shall breathe, inhale or drink any compound, liquid or
chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethane, isopropanol,
methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellulose acetate, cyclohexanone,
trichloroethylene, acetone, ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl ketone,
ethylene dichloride, methyl alcohol, butyl alcohol, benzene,
pentachlorophenol, petroleum ether or any other substance for the
purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication, stupefaction,
depression, giddiness, paralysis or irrational behavior or in any
manner changing, distorting or disturbing the auditory, visual or
mental processes. For the purpose of the article, any such condition
shall be deemed to be an intoxication condition. Nothing in this
article shall be interpreted as applying to the inhalation of any
anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.
(2) No person, for the purpose of violating Subsection B(1), shall use or
possess for the purpose of so using any compound, liquid, chemical
or any other substance containing a solvent having the property of
releasing toxic vapors or fumes.
§ 155-52 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-52
151:315
(3) No person shall sell or offer to sell to any other person any tube or
other container of a compound, liquid, chemical or any other
substance containing a solvent having the property of releasing
toxic vapors or fumes, if he has reasonable cause to suspect that
the product sold or offered for sale will be used for the purpose set
forth in Subsection B(1) of this section.
§ 155-52 RIDLEY CODE § 155-52
151:316
ARTICLE VII
Public Bathing Places
§ 155-53. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated
CLEAN WATER — New, clean water used to refill the pool, new, clean water
used to replace loss by splashing or during cleaning of the pool or water
taken from the pool and returned after filtration or any combination of such
waters.
NATURAL BATHING PLACE — Any natural pond, river or lake without
bathing place improvements and any lake or body of water created by
excavation or impoundment which is without bathing place improvements
and which has not been created or altered from the natural state for the
purpose of providing a public bathing place.
OPERATOR — The person responsible for the operation of a public bathing
place.
PUBLIC BATHING PLACE — Any body of water used collectively by
numbers of persons, other than the family and guests of the operator, for
swimming and recreational bathing, together with the shores, buildings,
equipment and appurtenances pertaining to such "public bathing place."
This term does not include baths where the main object is the cleansing of
the body or the practice of healing under medical supervision, unless such
baths contain pools or tanks used collectively by a number of individuals.
STANDARD METHODS OF WATER ANALYSIS — All applicable procedures
and methods recorded in the latest issue of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage published by the American Public Health
Association and the American Water Works Association.
§ 155-54. Approval of plans.
A. Every person who constructs or installs or intends to construct or
install or who desires to extend, alter or modify a public bathing place
shall have plans and specifications for such construction, installation,
alteration, extension or modification approved in writing by the
Pennsylvania Department of Health and the Health Officer before
beginning the work or before permitting the work to be started by a
contractor or any employee.
B. The application for approval of plans required by the Health Officer
shall contain complete plans and specifications fully describing the
public bathing place or extension, alteration or change contemplated in
the application and shall be made on forms provided by the Health
Officer.
§ 155-53 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-54
151:317
§ 155-55. Application, permit and inspection.
§ 155-56. Protection, supervision and maintenance.
C. The approval issued in response to the application shall contain such
terms and conditions as may be required by the Health Officer to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this Health Code.
A. Every person owning, managing or maintaining a public bathing place
shall obtain a permit from the Board. Applications for permits to
operate a public bathing place shall be on forms provided by the Board,
which application shall set forth the name, residence, business address
and telephone number of the applicant, the location of the public
bathing place, the name and address of the operator of the public
bathing place and any additional information which the Board may
require to enable it to determine whether the provisions of the Health
Code are being complied with. The application is also to be
accompanied by plans showing details of the pool and facilities.
B. Each applicant at the time of applying for a permit to operate a public
bathing place shall pay an annual inspection fee as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 10-25-2000
by Ord. No. 1808]
C. Such person shall post the permit in a place accessible to patrons in the
principal office of the public bathing place or in the entryway or in any
other conspicuous place approved by the Health Officer.
D. The holder of a permit to operate a public bathing place shall be held
responsible for compliance with all the provisions of this Health Code
on and within the premises operated under such a permit.
E. If it is found that the provisions of this Health Code are not being
complied with or that any condition exists which in the opinion of the
Board endangers the life, safety or health of the users of any public
bathing place, the Board may revoke the operator's permit.
A. All public bathing places shall be in the charge of a capable manager or
caretaker who shall be responsible for the proper maintenance and use
of the public bathing place as provided in Article VII of this Health
Code. He shall be responsible for maintaining the public bathing place
continually in a clean, sanitary and healthful manner so that it will not
constitute or be a menace to public health, promote immorality or be a
public nuisance. A copy of the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Health as well as the certificate of public bathing place
issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Health shall be posted
conspicuously at the public bathing place for the information of the
public.
B. One or more competent lifeguards in adequate number shall be on duty
at the waterside at all times during which the public bathing place is
§ 155-54 RIDLEY CODE § 155-56
151:318
§ 155-57. Investigation and inspection.
§ 155-58. Reports.
§ 155-59. Standards.
open to use by bathers and shall not be assigned other tasks that will
divert their attention from the safety of the bathers. These lifeguards
shall be capable swimmers, skilled in lifesaving methods and in
methods of artificial resuscitation, as evidenced by their possession
of a currently valid certificate or other proof of proficiency from a
recognized agency offering instructions in these fields.
C. Every public bathing place shall be provided with buoys, poles,
flutterboards or other lifesaving equipment which shall be kept in good
repair and readily accessible.
A. The Health Officer shall collect or cause to be collected and shall
analyze or have analyzed, in an approved laboratory, such samples of
water, pool water or any other material or substance found on the
public bathing place premises as may be necessary to determine
compliance with the standards and requirements of Article VII of this
Health Code.
B. Public bathing places shall be open at all reasonable times to inspection
by the Health Officer.
A. It shall be the duty of every permit holder and of every employee of a
person holding a permit to operate a public bathing place to furnish
such records and information as are required by the Health Officer for
ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this Health Code.
B. Such records shall include but are not limited to periodic reports and
records of the operation, including records of chemicals added, filter
operation, cleaning, bathing load, equipment, operation, free chlorine
residual and attendance.
A. Water. Water supply shall be furnished from a public water system and
shall comply with the provisions established under Article IV of this
Health Code.
B. Plumbing. Plumbing systems, both house and pool, shall conform to the
standards established under Chapter 216, Plumbing, of the Code of the
Township of Ridley.
C. Waste. All sewage and liquid waste, including pools wastewater, shall
be discharged into a sanitary sewer of the Township. Permission for
discharge of the pool wastewater must be obtained from the Township
prior to its discharge. If a sanitary sewer is not available, all sewage
must be discharged in accordance with applicable law. All pool
wastewater may be discharged to a natural drainage course or storm
drain if the wastes are afforded quiescent settling for at least one hour.
§ 155-56 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-59
151:319
§ 155-60. Toilets.
§ 155-61. Lavatories.
Lavatories shall be located adjacent to the toilet facilities and shall be
provided in the number of one lavatory to each 60 persons using the pool at
the time of maximum load.
[Amended 12-19-1990 by Ord. No. 1666; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
D. Location. No public bathing place shall be so located as to be within
prejudicial influence of the discharge of sewage or of injurious or
objectionable industrial wastes. The location shall be such that by its
use it will not prejudicially affect a public water supply.
E. Public bathing places shall have separate dressing rooms for each sex
and facilities for checking clothes and other property which are
adequate for the maximum number of persons who can be
accommodated at any one time.
A. Adequate and separate toilet facilities for each sex shall be provided at
all bathhouses. The minimum shall be one toilet and one urinal for each
60 men and one toilet for each 40 women. Flush toilets and urinals shall
be provided and shall be properly maintained. The toilets shall be
located between the dressing rooms and showers.
B. The toilet shall be kept clean, in good repair, well-lighted and properly
ventilated by exterior windows or other mechanical means. The floors
shall be constructed of material impervious to water and shall be
provided with a sanitary base and with adequate and sufficient drains to
permit cleaning. The use of linoleum or similar floor coverings is
prohibited. The walls and ceilings shall be of a smooth, washable
surface and. shall be finished in a light color. Doors to entrances of
toilet rooms shall be self-closing. All openings to the outside shall be
effectively screened or otherwise protected during periods when flies
are prevalent.
A. The common use of drinking cups, towels, hairbrushes or other toilet
articles is prohibited.
B. Towels, bathing suits, combs, brushes and all other such articles
furnished by the management shall be clean at the time of issue to a
patron and shall have been cleansed and sterilized in a manner
acceptable to the Health Officer prior to such issuance.
C. All parts of the premises shall be adequately clean, safe and maintained
in a sanitary manner at all times of use and while the public bathing
place is open for use.
D. Persons known to be typhoid fever carriers or known to be or suspected
of being afflicted with communicable diseases or eye, ear, nose or
§ 155-59 RIDLEY CODE § 155-61
151:320
§ 155-62. Lighting.
§ 155-63. Quality of pool water.
The chemical and physical quality of the water shall be as prescribed in
the recommendations of the American Public Health Association's current
edition of Recommended Practice for Design, Equipment and Operation
of Swimming Pools and Other Bathing Places. Permits shall be suspended
automatically if the following minimum requirements are not complied with:
throat infections or skin diseases shall be excluded from public bathing
places.
A. A complete system of artificial lighting shall be provided for all pools,
bathing beaches, bathhouses and dressing rooms that are to be used at
night. Lighting fixtures shall be of such number and design as to light
all parts of the swimming pool and the water therein.
B. The electrical installations at all public bathing places and any future
additions or modifications to such installations, prior to being placed in
service and every five years thereafter, shall be inspected and approved
by a reputable electrical inspection agency and evidence, in duplicate,
of such approval by this agency forwarded to the Board.
A. The water used at all public bathing places, including natural public
bathing places, shall at all times have a chemical content and quality
acceptable to the Board. The Board will determine what purification
processes, if any, are needed to accomplish this end. When filtration
equipment is provided or required, such equipment shall operate at a
rate of filtration not to exceed three gallons per square foot per minute
with an eight-hour turnover and a wash rate of 12 to 15 gallons per
square foot per minute provided.
B. Approved and effective disinfection is required of the water in all public
bathing places. Whenever liquid chlorine, sodium or calcium
hypochlorite or other approved chlorine compounds are used for
swimming pool disinfection, the amount of available free chlorine
residual in the water at all times when the pool is in use shall not be less
than 0.4 part per million.
C. Where gas chlorination equipment is installed at either outdoor or
indoor pools, such equipment shall be housed in a separate room
equipped with an exhaust fan to reduce to a practical minimum the
opportunity of gas leakage into other rooms or areas where persons
gather.
D. The water at all times when the pool is in use shall show an alkaline
reaction that has a pH value of 7.0 or more.
E. At all times when the pool is in use, the water shall be sufficiently clear
to permit a black disc six inches in diameter in a white field, when
placed on the bottom of the pool at the deepest point, to be clearly
§ 155-61 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-63
151:321
§ 155-64. Construction and equipment.
The construction and equipment of the pool shall meet the standards set
forth by the Pennsylvania Department of Health and the operation and
maintenance at all public bathing places and shall be such as to reduce to
a practical minimum the danger or injury to persons from drowning, falls,
collisions, fires, nuisances or a hazard of any kind.
§ 155-65. Wading pools.
Wading pools shall be operated as a public bathing place and shall be
subject to all of the standards and requirements for public bathing places
as public bathing places in Article VII of this Health Code.
§ 155-66. Food service.
Where food is prepared, stored or served at any public bathing place, the
provisions of Article I of this Health Code will apply.
visible from the sidewalk of the pool at all distances up to 10 yards
measured from a line drawn across the pool through said disc.
F. The water in any indoor pool shall be heated to a temperature of 68° to
72° F. The temperature of the air surrounding an artificially heated
swimming pool shall not be permitted to become more than 8° F.
warmer nor more than 2° F. cooler than the water in the pool at any
time when the pool is in use.
G. Not more than 10% of consecutive representative samples taken on
different days over a period of time shall contain more than 100
bacteria per cubic centimeter of water according to a bacteria count on
standard nutrient agar made after 24 hours' incubation at 37° C. No
single sample shall contain more than 200 bacteria per cubic
centimeter of water.
H. No more than two out of five samples collected on the same day nor
more than three out of 10 consecutive samples collected on different
days shall show a positive presumptive test for B. coli in ten-cubiccentimeter
portions.
I. Samples collected from public bathing places shall be examined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods of Water
Analysis of the American Public Health Association by a laboratory,
approved by the Board, equipped for carrying out the techniques
specified.
J. The management of any public bathing place shall make or cause to be
made such physical, chemical and bacteriological examinations of the
water at no less than weekly intervals as may be prescribed by the
Board and shall keep records of the operation and use thereof on forms
satisfactory to the Board. Copies of such records shall be filed in the
office of the Board in accordance with the conditions of the permit.
§ 155-63 RIDLEY CODE § 155-66
151:322
ARTICLE VIII
Housing
§ 155-67. Definitions.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended
to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room occupied by one or more persons for
living, eating or sleeping; includes kitchens serving multiple or
individual dwellings, but does not include serving and storage pantries,
corridors, cellars and spaces that are not used frequently or during
extended periods.
HOTEL — A dwelling, not a single-family or a two-family dwelling,
providing lodging with or without meals and having lodging
accommodations for more than 10 guests.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a building
or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling, not a single-family or a two-family
dwelling, providing lodging with or without meals and having lodging
accommodations for less than 10 guests.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group or rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but
not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin, cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.
B. Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling
unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit" or "premises" are used in this
Health Code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by
the words "or part thereof."
§ 155-67 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-68
151:323
§ 155-68. Inspection of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises.
The Health Officer is hereby authorized to make inspections to determine
the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises
located within the Township in order that he may perform his duty of
safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of
the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the Health
Officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey, at all reasonable
times, all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner
or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit or person in
charge thereof shall give the Health Officer free access to such dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises, at all reasonable times, for
the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant
of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof or his agent
or employee access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or its
premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of making such repairs
or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of
this Health Code or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful
order issued pursuant to the provisions of this Health Code.
§ 155-69. Enforcement; service of notices and orders; hearings.
A. Whenever the Health Officer determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this Health Code or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto,
he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided.
(1) Such notice shall:
(a) Be in writing.
(b) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
(c) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires.
(d) Be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as the
case may require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to
be properly served upon such owner or agent or upon such
occupant if a copy thereof is served upon him personally or if a
copy thereof is sent by registered mail to his last known
address or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in
or about the dwelling affected by the notice or if he is served
with such notice by any other method authorized or required
under the provisions of this Health Code.
(2) Such notice may contain any outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this Health
Code and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 155-68 RIDLEY CODE § 155-69
151:324
(3) Such notice pertaining to § 155-70D violations of supplying hot and
cold running water to a dwelling unit shall serve as constructive
notice as to all future violations for a period of one year from the
date of issue. Said notice shall also state that if at any time within
one year after notice is issued other violations of this section occur,
then the Township can proceed with citations without additional
prior notice. [Added 9-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1977]
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this Health Code, or of any
rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Board, provided that such
person shall file in the office of the Health Officer a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served.
Upon receipt of such petition, the Board shall set a time and place for
such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At
such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard
and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The
hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on
which the petition was filed, provided that, upon application of the
petitioner, the Health Officer may postpone the date of the hearing for a
reasonable time beyond the ten-day period if in his judgment the
petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement.
C. After such hearing the Board shall sustain, modify or withdraw the
notice, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this
Health Code and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto
have been complied with. If the Board sustains or modifies such notice,
it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to
§ 155-69 of this Health Code shall automatically become an order if a
written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Health
Officer within 10 days after such notice is served.
D. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of
the Board, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a
matter of public record in the office of the Health Officer. Such record
shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection
with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board may
seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction.
E. Whenever the Health Officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency.
F. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Health Code, such order
shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately but, upon petition to the
§ 155-69 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-69
151:325
§ 155-70. Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities.
Board, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such
hearing, depending upon its finding as to whether the provisions of this
Health Code and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto
have been complied with, the Health Officer shall continue such order
in effect or modify it or revoke it.
A. All dwellings and dwelling units located on or adjacent to a street in
which a public water main is laid shall use a public water supply which
meets the requirements of Article IV of this Health Code, and water
shall be distributed through the building as to furnish adequate
quantities of wholesome water, with reasonable facilities for drinking
and washing purposes, for the occupants thereof.
B. All dwellings and dwelling units so located that a public water supply is
not accessible shall be furnished with a water supply which shall meet
the requirements of Article IV of the Health Code. Such water supply
shall also be so distributed through the building as to furnish adequate
quantity of wholesome water, with reasonable facilities for drinking and
washing purposes, for the occupants thereof.
C. A dwelling so located as to be accessible to a Township sanitary sewer
shall have the drainage system of the building connected thereto. A
dwelling so located as to be inaccessible to a Township sanitary sewer
shall have the drainage system of the building connected to a private
sewage system which meets the requirements of Chapter 216,
Plumbing, of the Code of the Township of Ridley.
D. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink, a water closet, a hand
lavatory and a bathtub or shower, all of which shall be in good repair
and working condition. Every kitchen sink, hand lavatory and bathtub
or shower shall be properly connected and supplied with both hot and
cold running water. All plumbing pipes and fixtures shall be installed
and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 216,
Plumbing, of the Code of the Township of Ridley. In all dwellings and
dwelling units, the bathroom or water closet compartment floor surface
shall be constructed of a material impervious to water and shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition. A finished wood floor is not
acceptable.
E. All garbage and rubbish must be kept in a clean and sanitary manner
and stored in approved watertight containers with tight-fitting lids of
not more than 30 gallons' capacity. The operator of a multiple dwelling
shall provide proper containers and shall provide for the removal of
garbage and rubbish from the premises so as to maintain satisfactory
sanitary conditions.
F. Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition,
are properly connected with the hot water lines required under the
§ 155-69 RIDLEY CODE § 155-70
151:326
§ 155-71. Minimum standards for light, ventilation and heating.
provisions of Chapter 216, Plumbing, of the Code of the Township of
Ridley and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to
permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required
kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of
not less than 120° F. Such supplied water-heating facilities shall be
capable of meeting the requirements of this section when the dwelling
or dwelling unit heating facilities required under the provisions of
Chapter 216, Plumbing, are not in operation.
G. Every dwelling unit shall have two safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level.
A. Every habitable room shall have one or more windows opening directly
on a street or on a court or yard or shall be provided with an approved
means of mechanical ventilation as prescribed in this article.
B. Windows shall have an area between stop beads of not less than 10% of
the floor area of the room served by them and, in addition, shall not be
less than 12 square feet in area for habitable rooms and public halls and
eight square feet for bathrooms and similar rooms, provided that where
a water closet occupies a separate compartment 40 square feet or less
in area, the minimum requirement shall be four square feet. At least
50% of the required window area shall be arranged to open for
ventilation. Where 100% of the window area is arranged to open for
ventilation, the window area required for separate water closet
compartments 40 square feet or less in area may be reduced to not less
than three square feet. In lieu of windows in habitable rooms, the glass
areas in exterior doors may be accepted for 100% of the light
requirements but not more than 50% of the ventilation requirements.
C. The area of skylights permitted by this article shall be not less than
required for windows which they replace. At least 50% of the required
area shall be made available as clear ventilating area by means of
movable sash, louvers or similar devices.
D. When mechanical ventilation is required, or is permitted as an
alternative, the system shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with generally accepted good practice to provide the
necessary changes in air, but not less than one cubic foot of air per
minute shall be provided for each square foot of floor area in any case.
Such system shall be kept in continuous operation at all times during
the normal occupancy of the building.
E. All dwellings and dwelling units shall be supplied with electric service
of at least two separate and remote floor or wall-type electrical
convenience outlets in every habitable room. Every public hall, water
closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room and furnace room shall
contain at least one electric light fixture. The electric service in all
multiple dwellings must be installed with the approval of underwriters
§ 155-70 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-71
151:327
§ 155-72. General requirements.
insuring properties in the Township. When artificial lighting is required,
all habitable rooms shall have sufficient light to produce an intensity of
not less than 15 footcandles at 30 inches from the floor.
F. All dwellings and dwelling units shall have heating facilities which shall
be properly installed, safely maintained and in good working condition.
All habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be heated to a
temperature of at least 68° F. at a distance four feet above the floor
level and not closer than three feet to an outside wall, window or door
at all times. Portable heating equipment employing a flame and using
gasoline or kerosene does not meet the standards of this Health Code
and is prohibited.
G. Every public hall and public stairway in a multiple dwelling shall be
lighted by means of electrically lighted fixtures. Such lighting fixtures
shall provide two footcandles of light in every part of the public hall and
public stairway at all times; provided, however, that such electrical
lighting may be omitted from sunrise to sunset where there are
windows or skylights opening directly to the outside and where the total
window or skylight area provides two footcandles of natural light to all
parts of each such public hall or stairway.
H. All dwellings and dwelling units shall be furnished with screens for
every door and window opening directly to outdoor space. In multiple
dwellings it shall be the responsibility of the operator to furnish and
hang the screens. Screens shall have a mesh of not less than No. 14 and
shall be hung not later than June 1 and not removed before November 1
of each year. Screens shall not be required during such period in rooms
deemed by the Health Officer to be located high enough in the upper
stories of buildings as to be free from insects and in rooms located in
areas which are deemed by the Health Officer to have so few insects as
to render screens unnecessary.
A. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof; shall be capable of affording
privacy; and shall be kept in good repair.
B. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be
reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodentproof and shall be kept
in sound working condition and good repair.
C. Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon
and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
D. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this Health Code shall be so constructed or installed that it will
function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory
§ 155-71 RIDLEY CODE § 155-72
151:328
§ 155-73. Minimum space, use and location requirements.
working condition. All dwellings and dwelling units shall be supplied
with cooking equipment which meet the following minimum standards:
(1) Every piece of cooking equipment shall be constructed and
installed so that it will function safely and effectively and shall be
maintained in sound working order.
(2) Portable cooking equipment employing flame and cooking
equipment using gasoline or kerosene as fuel for cooking are
prohibited.
E. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility,
equipment or utility which is required under this Health Code to be
removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied
dwelling let or occupied by him, except for such temporary interruption
as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process
or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is
approved by the Health Officer.
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
B. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet
of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more
than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for
each occupant. Such rooms shall have a minimum width of six feet in
any part and a minimum clear ceiling height of seven feet six inches for
the minimum area.
C. Emergency shelters, if erected, shall conform to all federal and state
regulations heretofore or hereafter enacted.
D. No space below ground shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling
unit unless:
(1) The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness.
(2) The total window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area sizes as required in § 155-71B of this Health
Code.
(3) Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area.
(4) The total openable window area in each room is equal to at least
the minimum as required under § 155-71B of this Health Code.
§ 155-72 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-73
151:329
§ 155-74. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
§ 155-75. Rooming houses and hotels.
(5) The mechanical ventilation and the artificial lighting meet the
minimum standards required under § 155-71D and G of this Health
Code.
A. Every owner of a multiple dwelling shall be responsible for maintaining
in a clean and sanitary condition the halls, stairs and public area of the
building and premises thereof.
B. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof which he occupies and controls.
C. No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling
unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy.
D. The owner of any multiple dwelling shall, whenever the same becomes
vacant, remove therefrom all papers or other combustible waste
materials accumulated therein or upon any part of the premises. All
doors, windows or other openings into such building shall be kept
closed while the same remains unoccupied.
E. The owner of a multiple dwelling, and the occupant of a dwelling or
dwelling unit, shall be responsible for the extermination of insects,
rodents, vermin or other pests therein or on the premises.
A. Every rooming house shall have at least one water closet, hand lavatory
and bathtub or shower, in good working condition, properly, connected
to a water and sewer system, for each eight persons or fraction thereof,
including members of the operator's family where they share the use of
such facilities. All such facilities shall be so located within the rooming
house as to be accessible to the occupants of each rooming unit sharing
such facilities without going outside the rooming house and without
going through a dwelling unit or through a rooming unit of another
occupant. Every hand lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied
with hot and cold running water at all times in accordance with the
provisions of § 155-70D of this Health Code. No plumbing facilities
required under this section of this Health Code shall be located in a
cellar nor more than one floor distant from the rooming unit for which
the same are provided.
B. The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen
and towels therein at least once each week and prior to the letting of
any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
C. Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level.
§ 155-73 RIDLEY CODE § 155-75
151:330
§ 155-76. Unfit dwellings; legal procedure of condemnation.
D. The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings and for
maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming
house, and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance
of the entire premises where the entire structure or building is leased
or occupied by the operator.
E. Every provision of this Health Code which applies to rooming houses
shall also apply to hotels.
F. Every hotel and rooming house shall require from any guest, at the time
of registration, a photo ID to be presented and kept on file. [Added
2-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2017]
A. Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the
following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and
shall be so designated and placarded by the Health Officer:
(1) One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, insanitary, unsafe
or vermin-infested, or has been abandoned, that it creates a serious
hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
(2) One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public.
(3) One which, because of its general condition or location, is
insanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the
occupants or of the public.
B. Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation
and so designated and placarded by the Health Officer shall be vacated
within a reasonable time as ordered by the Health Officer.
C. No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded
as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation
until written approval is secured from and such placard is removed by
the Health Officer. The Health Officer shall remove such placard
whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and
placarding action were based have been eliminated.
D. No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or
dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation
and. placarded as such, except as provided in Subsection C.
E. Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning
and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human
habitation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter
before the Board, under the procedure set forth in Subsection C of this
section.
§ 155-75 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-76
151:331

ARTICLE IX
Rodent and Insect Control
§ 155-77. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ERADICATION — The elimination of rodents or insects and other pest
life from any building, lot or premises through the use of traps, baiting,
fumigation or any other method of extermination approved by the Board and
subject to applicable laws relating to poisonous substances and fumigants.
HARBORAGE — Any condition which provides shelter or protection for
rodents, insects or other pest life.
PERSON IN CONTROL — The owner or part owner of a building, lot or
premises, whether an individual, partnership or corporation, the agent or
occupant of a building, lot or premises or any other person who has the
use or custody of the same or any part thereof whether an individual,
partnership or corporation.
RODENTPROOFING — The treatment or shielding, with material
impervious to rodent-gnawing, of all actual or potential openings in the
exterior and interior walls, ground or first floors, roofs, foundations,
basements, sidewalk gratings and other places that may be reached by
rodents from the ground or by climbing or burrowing.
§ 155-78. Elimination of harborages.
All buildings, lots or premises in the Township shall be kept free from
any condition conducive to rodents, insects and other pest life. The person
in control shall not allow the accumulation of water, garbage, building
material, brush, woodpiles or any other material which may afford
harborage or provide food for rodents, insects or other pest life.
§ 155-79. Prohibition of conditions conducive to pests.
A. No person in control shall feed wild birds other than in suitable
properly shielded containers for the food, installed in such a manner as
to be inaccessible to rodents and to prevent the scattering of the food
upon the ground.
B. No person shall place food in the open for the feeding of any
domesticated fowl or animal except in a container which will prevent
the scattering of the food upon the ground. Unconsumed food shall not
be allowed to remain where it is accessible to rodents, insects or other
pest life.
C. All garbage shall be wrapped. Garbage and water material shall be
placed in approved watertight containers with tight-fitting lids and
stored in such a manner as not to create an attraction or harborage for
rodents, insects or other pest life.
§ 155-77 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-80
151:333
§ 155-80. Eradication measures.
§ 155-81. Rodentproofing.
A. When any building, lot or premises is subject to infestation by rodents,
insects or other pest life, the person in control shall apply continuous or
repeated eradication measures as required by the Board until there is
no evidence of an infestation remaining.
B. No building shall be demolished until the Board certifies to the Building
Regulations Department of the Township that the building and premises
are free from the infestation of rodents, insects or other pest life.
C. The Board may in its discretion order the person in control of any inland
swamp, pond, creek, lake, pool, sunken lot, quarry, abandoned
excavation or any other place where stagnant water may collect to fill in
or drain the same or to employ other methods to prevent the breeding
of insects and other pest life.
A. Whenever conditions inside, outside or under any building or buildings
or on any lot or premises provide harborage for rats, the Board may
require all buildings or premises to be rodentproofed and harborages
removed.
B. The person in control of a building or premises required to be
rodentproofed shall maintain the rodentproofing in good repair. No
person shall injure the rodentproofing. When the rodentproofing is
injured in the course of making alterations, installations, additions or
repairs to the building, the person in control shall restore the
rodentproofing to a good condition.
C. Foundation walls for frame construction shall extend at least 12 inches
above the finished grade in accordance with Chapter 92, Building
Construction and Floodplain Management, or any amendments thereto.
D. No person shall undertake to remodel or alter any existing building or
portion thereof for the purpose of rodentproofing without first
submitting plans for approval to the Board.
§ 155-80 RIDLEY CODE § 155-81
151:334
ARTICLE X
Rabies Control
§ 155-82. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Applies to dogs and other mammals susceptible to rabies.
OWNER — Includes any person having a right of property in any animal and
any person who keeps or harbors an animal or has it in his care or allows it
to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
VETERINARIAN — A graduate of a recognized school of veterinary
medicine licensed to practice in the State of Pennsylvania.
§ 155-83. Dogs running at large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow such dog to run at
large upon the public streets of this municipality or upon the property of
others unless accompanied by the owner.
§ 155-84. Reports of animal bites.
§ 155-85. Confinement and examination of animal.
A. Persons bitten by animals. It shall be the duty of any person who has
knowledge that an animal has bitten or injured any person in this
municipality to immediately report the facts and the whereabouts of
such animal to the Board, and it shall be the duty of the owner of every
such animal to immediately confine it in such manner as will prevent it
from escaping or running at large. Upon receipt of such report, the
Board shall advise the owner as to the procedure to be followed with
respect to the further confinement and examination of the animal.
B. Animal bitten by an animal suspected of rabies. It shall be the duty of
any person who has knowledge that an animal in this municipality has
been bitten or otherwise injured by or been exposed to or been in
contact with an animal infected with or suspected of being infected with
rabies to immediately report the facts and the whereabouts of such
animal to the Board.
C. Animals infected with rabies. It shall be the duty of any person who has
knowledge that an animal in this municipality is infected with or
suspected of being infected with rabies to immediately report the facts
and the whereabouts of such animal to the Board. Any animal suspected
of being infected with rabies shall immediately be removed to and
confined in a veterinary hospital acceptable to the Board, and such
animal shall not be released therefrom without permission of the Board.
Any animal infected with rabies shall be disposed of in such manner as
the Board may direct.
§ 155-82 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-85
151:335
A. If the records of the Board do not disclose any occurrence of rabies in
this municipality within a period of 100 days prior to the receipt of such
report, it shall be the duty of the owner of any animal which has bitten
or injured any person in this municipality to follow the procedure set
forth below.
(1) The animal shall be confined by the owner for an observation
period of 10 days from the date the bite occurred, at the home of
the owner or at some other location selected by him, under the
supervision of a veterinarian, in such manner as will prevent it from
escaping or running at large.
(2) Immediately upon being placed in confinement, the animal shall be
examined by a veterinarian employed by the owner. A written
report of the results of such examination shall be submitted to the
Board by the owner or the veterinarian within 24 hours.
(3) If at any time during the said ten-day observation period the animal
develops symptoms indicative of rabies, such fact shall be
communicated at once to the Board, and the animal shall
immediately be removed to a veterinary hospital acceptable to the
Board.
(4) If at any time during the said ten-day observation period the animal
should die, the owner shall immediately submit to the Board the
head of the animal for examination.
(5) At the end of the said ten-day observation period, the animal shall
again be examined by a veterinarian employed by the owner, and a
written report of the results of such examination shall be submitted
to the Board by the owner or the veterinarian within 24 hours. If
the second report reveals no symptoms indicative of rabies, the
animal may then be released from confinement.
(6) If at any time after the animal is placed in confinement it develops
rabies, it shall be disposed of in such manner as the Board shall
direct.
B. If the records of the Board disclose any occurrence of rabies in this
municipality within 100 days prior to the receipt of the report above
referred to, it shall be the duty of the owner of the animal which has
bitten or injured any person in this municipality to follow the procedure
set forth below.
(1) The animal shall be removed to and confined by the owner in a
veterinary hospital acceptable to the Board for an observation
period of 10 days from the date the bite occurred. The owner or the
hospital shall submit the receipt for the animal to the Board upon
the same day that it is placed in the hospital.
(2) Immediately upon being placed in the hospital, the animal shall be
examined by a veterinarian employed by the owner. A written
§ 155-85 RIDLEY CODE § 155-85
151:336
report of the results of such examination shall be submitted to the
Board by the owner or the veterinarian within 24 hours.
(3) If at any time during the said ten-day observation period the animal
develops symptoms indicative of rabies, such fact shall be
communicated at once to the Board.
(4) If any time during the said ten-day observation period the animal
should die, the veterinarian shall immediately submit to the Board
the head of the animal for examination.
(5) At the end of the said ten-day observation period, the animal shall
again be examined by a veterinarian employed by the owner, and a
written report of the results of such examination shall be submitted
to the Board by the owner or the veterinarian within 24 hours. If
the second report reveals no symptoms indicative of rabies, the
owner may obtain from the Board the hospital receipt for the
animal, and it may then be released from confinement.
(6) If at any time after the animal is placed in the hospital it develops
rabies, it shall be disposed of in such manner as the Board shall
direct.
§ 155-85 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-85
151:337

ARTICLE XI
Tattoo Establishments
[Added 1-24-1996 by Ord. No. 1747]
§ 155-86. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
OPERATOR — Any individual firm, company, corporation or association that
owns or operates an establishment where tattooing is performed and any
individual who performs or practices the art of tattooing on the person of
another.
TATTOOING LICENSE — Written approval from the Health Officer or his
authorized representative that said tattooing establishment has been
inspected and meets all of the terms of this article relating to physical
facilities, equipment and layout for operation of such business.
TATTOO or TATTOOING — Any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls,
figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin with ink or any
other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid of needles
or any other instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin.
§ 155-87. License required; fee.
§ 155-88. Requirements of tattooing establishments.
Each person who operates a tattooing establishment shall comply with the
following requirements:
A. Application procedure. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
the business of operating a tattoo establishment without first obtaining
a tattooing license to engage in such business in accordance with the
provisions hereof. Applications for a tattooing license shall be provided
by the Township Health Officer. Upon receiving a completed application
for a tattooing license, the Township Health Officer shall conduct an
inspection of the premises and shall issue a tattooing license only upon
the operator's full compliance with the provisions of this article. The
tattooing license shall be valid for one year, and an inspection of the
premises shall be required for each renewal term.
B. Application fee. A fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners shall be required of each applicant for a tattooing
license, as well as to renew said tattooing license. [Amended
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
A. The room in which tattooing is done shall have an area of not less than
100 square feet. The walls, floors and ceilings shall have an impervious,
smooth and washable surface. Walls and ceilings are to be painted a
light color. Walls, ceilings and floors shall be kept clean and free from
dust and debris. The floor shall be swept and wet mopped daily. Floors,
§ 155-86 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-88
151:339
§ 155-89. Minimum operating standards.
The following minimum standards shall be observed at all times.
walls or ceilings shall not be swept or cleaned while tattooing is in
operation.
B. The establishment shall be maintained in a sanitary condition at all
times. Adequate light and ventilation must be provided.
C. Each tattooing establishment shall contain a sink for the exclusive use
of the tattoo artist to wash their hands and prepare the customers for
tattooing. The sink shall be provided with adequate hot and cold
running water. There shall also be available at the sink clean individual
towels and refuse containers.
D. Adequate toilet, urinal and hand washing facilities shall be available on
the establishment premises for the use of customers and tattoo artists.
Toilets, urinals and hand washing facilities shall be maintained in a
sanitary condition at all times.
E. An adequate number of work tables shall be provided for each tattoo
artist. The surface of all work tables shall be constructed of metal or
other material which is smooth, light colored, nonabsorbent, corrosiveresistant
and easily sanitized.
F. The shop shall be arranged so that work tables will be located at least
10 feet from observers or waiting customers or such work tables shall
be separated from observers or waiting customers by a panel or other
barrier at least six feet high. The panel may be constructed of glass,
solid plastic or similar material.
G. Proper closed cabinets for the exclusive storage of instruments, dyes,
pigments, carbon stencils and other paraphernalia used in the shop
shall be provided for each tattoo artist.
H. The tattoo shop shall have proper facilities for the disposition of waste
materials.
I. Each tattoo artist shall be provided with individual hand brushes and
fingernail files.
J. No commercial activity other than tattooing shall be permitted in the
tattoo shop.
A. The tattoo artist will use standards of aseptic technique in tattooing,
dressing and other operations. All instruments, needles, stencils, dyes,
pigments, dressing materials, razors, hand brushes, fingernail files and
other equipment used by the tattoo artist while tattooing shall be
sterile.
B. Each tattoo artist shall have an individual fingernail file and individual
hand brush which shall be cleaned and which shall be sterilized before
§ 155-88 RIDLEY CODE § 155-89
151:340
each use by boiling for 15 minutes or by immersion in an approved
germicidal solution for not less than 20 minutes. Germicidal solutions
used to sterilize shall be changed daily and the container thoroughly
cleansed.
C. Before working on each patron, each tattoo artist shall clean his or her
fingernails with his or her individual fingernail file and shall thoroughly
wash and scrub his or her hands with hot running water, soap and his or
her individual hand brush. Hands shall be dried with individual single
use towels. The operator shall wear a clean, new pair of latex gloves,
designed for use in surgery, for each customer.
D. That portion of the patron's skin to be tattooed shall be prepared by
washing with hot water and soap; by shaving with a sterile safety razor
and a single service blade; and shaving shall be followed by a thorough
cleansing with hot water and soap applied with a clean disposable
cotton or gauze. A sterile hand brush shall be used, if necessary, to
produce a clean skin area.
E. No tattooing shall be done on any skin that has a rash, pimples, boils,
infections or manifests any evidence of unhealthy conditions.
F. Following the cleansing of the patron's skin, the tattoo artist shall again
wash and scrub his or her hands in the manner prescribed above. He
shall allow his or her hands to dry with the use of sanitary or
mechanical means. Before placing the design on the patron's skin, the
tattoo artist shall treat the skin area with 70% alcohol or other
approved germicidal solution which shall be applied with sterile cotton
or sterile gauze.
G. Only petroleum jelly, United States Pharmacopoeia or National
Formulary shall be applied to the area to be tattooed, and it shall be in a
collapsible metal or plastic tube. The application may be spread by the
use of sterile gauze but not directly with the fingers. The stencil for
transferring the design to the skin shall be thoroughly cleansed and
rinsed in an approved germicidal solution for at least 20 minutes, and
shall be dried with sterile gauze or in the air before each use.
H. In preparing nontoxic dyes or pigments, only nontoxic or sterile
materials shall be used. Single service or individual portions of dyes or
pigments in clean, sterilized individual containers or single service
containers must be used for each patron. After tattooing, the remaining
unused dye or pigment in the single service or individual containers
must be discarded. The individual container must be resterilized or
discarded.
I. A set of individual single service sterilized needles shall be used for
each new patron. Following sterilization, needles shall be shaken dry
and if not immediately used, stored in petroleum jelly, United States
Pharmacopoeia or National Formulary and placed in a sterile, dust-tight
container. The open end of the needle tube of the tattooing machine
shall be cleaned and sterilized in an approved manner before each use.
§ 155-89 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-89
151:341
§ 155-90. Inspections.
The Health Officer may conduct periodic inspections of any tattooing
establishment for the purpose of determining whether or not said
No fewer than 24 sets of sterilized needles and tubes or tips must be on
hand for the entire day or night operation.
(1) Sterilization shall be done by one of the following methods:
(a) By holding in an approved autoclave for 15 minutes at 15
pounds of pressure;
(b) By boiling for 15 minutes; or
(c) By immersing in an approved germicidal solution for an
approved period of time.
(2) No rusty, dull or faulty needle shall be used for tattooing.
J. As the tattoo operation progresses, any excess dye or pigment applied
to the skin shall be removed with sterile gauze or sterile cotton.
K. The completed tattoo shall have the excess or pigment removed with
sterile gauze. It shall then be washed with a piece of sterile gauze or
sterile cotton saturated with approved germicidal solution. It shall be
allowed to dry. After drying, petroleum jelly, United States
Pharmacopoeia or National Formulary shall be applied from a
collapsible metal or plastic tube and the entire area covered with a
piece of sterile gauze which may in turn be covered with a piece of
tissue and fastened to the site with an approved type of adhesive.
L. Storage cabinets shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and all
instruments, dyes, pigments, stencils and other paraphernalia shall be
kept in an orderly arrangement when not being used.
M. Work tables shall be kept clean and orderly.
N. No person except a duly licensed physician shall engage in the practice
of removing any tattoo.
O. Permanent records for each patron or customer shall be maintained by
the operator of the establishment. Before the tattooing operation shall
begin, the patron or customer shall be required to personally enter on a
record form provided for such establishments, the date, his or her
name, address, age and his or her signature. Prior to tattooing, each
patron or customer shall be required to provide two forms of
identification, one of which shall contain both a picture and date of
birth of the customer. Such records shall be maintained in the tattoo
establishment and shall be available for examination by the Health
Officer. Records shall be retained by the operator for a period of not less
than two years. In the event of a change of ownership or closing of the
business, all such records shall be made available to the Health Officer.
§ 155-89 RIDLEY CODE § 155-90
151:342
establishment and the persons performing tattooing therein are in
compliance with all applicable health provisions contained within this
article and other pertinent ordinances. It shall be unlawful for any person
or operator of a tattooing establishment to willfully prevent or restrain the
Health Officer from entering a certified establishment where tattooing is
being performed for the purpose of inspecting said premises, after proper
identification is presented to the operator.
§ 155-91. Illegal practices.
It shall be unlawful for any operator or tattoo artist to engage in any of the
following:
A. No person, except a duly licensed physician, shall practice tattooing in
any place other than a tattooing shop for which a certificate of
sanitation has been issued.
B. It shall be unlawful to perform any tattooing on any individual who is
under the influence of drugs or alcohol or who appears to be under the
influence of drugs or alcohol.
C. It shall be unlawful to perform any tattooing on an individual under the
age of 18 years without the presence of a parent or legal guardian. Said
parent or legal guardian shall sign a permission form. These forms shall
be generated by the establishment and approved by the Health Officer.
Such written consent shall be kept on file for a period of two years.
[Amended 11-26-1997 by Ord. No. 1774]
D. No person with any disease in a communicable form or suspected of
having such disease shall engage in tattooing. Such diseases may
include, but shall not be limited to, influenza, tuberculosis, HIV virus,
scabies, impetigo, syphilis, chicken pox, measles (rubella), German
measles (rubella), mumps, whooping cough, hepatitis, infection on
hands or arms, jaundice of the skin or sclera. The Health Officer may
require a certificate signed by a duly licensed physician stating that
said person is free from communicable diseases before permission to
resume operation is granted.
E. A medical history shall be taken of every customer. It shall be unlawful
to tattoo any person revealing a recent history of influenza,
tuberculosis, HIV virus, scabies, impetigo, syphilis, chicken pox,
measles (rubella), German measles (rubella), mumps, whooping cough,
hepatitis, infection on hands or arms, jaundice of the skin or sclera.
F. Animals and insects. [Added 7-22-1998 by Ord. No. 1788]
(1) Domestic or wild animals shall not be present in any part of the
establishment at any time. The term "domestic or wild animals"
includes, but is not limited to, dogs, cats, birds and reptiles.
(2) Insects and rodents shall not be present in any part of the
establishment at any time. The operator shall take effective
§ 155-90 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-91
151:343
measures against insects' and rodents' entrance into, breeding
on, or presence in the premises. Evidence of insect or rodent
infestation shall be cause for immediate closure of the
establishment by the Health Officer.
§ 155-91 RIDLEY CODE § 155-91
151:344
ARTICLE XII
Body Piercing Establishments
[Added 9-24-1997 by Ord. No. 1773]
§ 155-92. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
BODY PIERCING — The technique whereby various body parts are pierced
for the express intention of the insertion of any object, including but not
limited to jewelry.
BODY PIERCING LICENSE — Written approval from the Health Officer
or his authorized representative that said body piercing establishment has
been inspected and meets all the terms of this article relating to physical
facilities, equipment and layout for operation of such business.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who renders any service in connection with the
operation of a body piercing establishment and receives compensation from
the operator of the business or its patrons.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, corporation or association that owns or
operates an establishment where body piercing is performed.
PATRON — Any person receiving a piercing on his or her body as a personal
service in return for compensation.
PHYSICIAN — Any person authorized to practice medicine pursuant to the
laws of the State of Pennsylvania.
§ 155-93. License required; application; fee.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating a
body piercing establishment without first obtaining a body piercing license
to engage in such business in accordance with the provisions hereof.
A. Application procedure. Applications for a body piercing license shall be
provided by the Township Health Officer. Upon receiving a completed
application for a body piercing license, the Township Health Officer
shall conduct an inspection of the premises and shall issue a license
only upon the operator's full compliance with the provisions of this
article. The body piercing license shall be valid for one year and an
inspection of the premises shall be required for each renewal term.
Body piercing is permitted at the same location as tattooing, provided
that a separate license for each activity has been obtained from the
Township of Ridley.
B. Application fee. A fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners shall be required of each applicant for a body
piercing license, as well as to renew said body piercing license.
[Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
§ 155-92 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-93
151:345
§ 155-94. Exemptions.
§ 155-95. Requirements of body piercing operating room facilities.
§ 155-96. Body piercing procedure.
C. Contents of application. Applications for body piercing licenses shall
include the following:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
establishment.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the establishment, if it
is different from that of the owner.
(3) The hours of operation of the establishment.
(4) The number of booths, stalls or tables devoted to body piercing.
(5) Any other commercial activities that will occur on the premises.
A. The regulations contained in this article shall not apply to physicians
licensed to practice medicine in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and those they directly supervise as part of their practice.
B. The regulations in this article shall not apply to those novelty or jewelry
stores in the business of ear piercing with the use of a piercing gun.
These establishments shall use proper procedures and sanitization
practices as required by all federal and state laws applicable to the
practice of piercing. These establishments shall be prohibited from
performing body piercings on parts of the body other than ears without
satisfying all of the requirements of this article.
A. Any person engaged in the process of body piercing, as described and
restricted in this article, shall meet the operating standards of tattoo
establishments in § 155-88 as they apply to body piercing.
B. All piercing needles, stainless steel expanders, jewelry and other
equipment used in the piercing process shall be sterilized as described
in § 155-89 of this chapter.
C. The jewelry inserted in a piercing should be composed of gold, surgical
stainless steel or niobium, a composite metal formed from oxides of the
stainless steel production process.
A. When it is necessary to shave the area to be pierced, a new disposable
razor for each patron shall be used. The common use of shaving mugs
and shaving brushes is prohibited.
B. After shaving the area to be pierced, or if the area does not need to be
shaved, the site of the piercing shall be washed with soap and water,
rinsed with clean water and a germicidal solution applied in a sanitary
§ 155-93 RIDLEY CODE § 155-96
151:346
§ 155-97. Infection control.
§ 155-98. Body piercing restrictions.
manner. Only sterile individual towels and applicators shall be used to
prepare and cleanse the site of the piercing.
C. Only instruments and equipment that have been properly cleaned and
sterilized prior to use shall be used during the piercing process.
D. The person doing the piercing shall wear clean clothes or a lab coat.
Surgical gloves shall be worn during the piercing and shall be changed
for each patron.
E. There shall be no smoking, eating or drinking in the operating room
during the piercing process.
A. Written instructions approved by the Health Officer shall be given to
each patron on the care of the piercing site to prevent infection after
the piercing. A copy of these instructions shall also be posted in a
conspicuous place in the piercing establishment, clearly visible to
persons being pierced.
B. All infections resulting from the practice of body piercing which
become known to the operator, and/or employee of a body piercing
establishment shall be reported to the Health Officer by the operator
immediately.
A. No person, except a duly licensed physician, shall practice body
piercing in any place other than in a body piercing establishment for
which a license under this article has been issued, except as exempted
under § 155-94B.
B. It shall be unlawful to perform any body piercing on any individual who
is under the influence of drugs or alcohol or appears to be under the
influence of drugs or alcohol.
C. No body piercing except ears shall be done on any person under the age
of 18 without the presence of a parent or guardian. Said parent or
guardian shall sign a permission form, These forms shall be generated
by the establishment and approved by the Health Officer. Such written
consent shall be kept on file for a period of two years.
D. No body piercing shall be done by any person under the age of 18.
E. No person with any disease in a communicable form or suspected of
having such disease shall engage in body piercing. Such diseases may
include, but shall not be limited to, influenza, tuberculosis, HIV, scabies,
impetigo, syphilis, chicken pox, measles (rubella), German measles
(rubella), mumps, whooping cough, hepatitis, infection on hands or
arms, jaundice of the skin or sclera. The Health Officer may require a
certificate signed by a duly licensed physician stating that said person
§ 155-96 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-98
151:347
is free from communicable diseases before permission to resume
operation is granted.
F. A medical history shall be taken of every customer. It shall be unlawful
to body pierce any person revealing a recent history of influenza,
tuberculosis, HIV, scabies, impetigo, syphilis, chicken pox, measles
(rubella), German measles (rubella), mumps, whooping cough,
hepatitis, infection on hands or arms, jaundice of the skin or sclera.
§ 155-98 RIDLEY CODE § 155-98
151:348
ARTICLE XIII
Penalties for Offenses
§ 155-99. Prohibited acts; cessation upon notice required.
Failure to secure a permit or license when required, or operating after
suspension or revocation of a permit or license by the Board of Health of
Ridley Township, shall constitute a violation of this chapter. When written
notice of a violation of any of the provisions of these rules and regulations
has been served upon any person, such violation shall be discontinued
immediately.
§ 155-100. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-18-1981 by Ord.
No. 1512; 11-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1639; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provisions of these rules
and regulations shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a fine or penalty
not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, for each offense. In default
of payment of such fine and costs, said violator shall be imprisoned for
not more than 30 days. Whenever such person shall have been officially
notified by the Director of Health and/or the Health Officer or by the service
of summons in a prosecution or in any other official manner that he is
committing a violation of these rules and regulations, each day that he shall
continue such violation after such notification shall constitute a separate
offense punishable by a like fine or penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be
collected as like fines or penalties are now by law collected.
§ 155-101. Suspension of tattoo or body piercing license. [Added
9-24-1997 by Ord. No. 1773]
Any tattoo establishment and/or body piercing establishment licensed to
operate in the Township of Ridley and found to be in noncompliance with
any requirements of this chapter may have his or her license suspended
by the Health Officer or his or her duly appointed agent at the time of
inspection.
A. A first offense suspension shall be for a period of 48 hours or until such
time as the issues of noncompliance are brought into compliance,
whichever is longer. A reinspection fee as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners shall be charged in the event
of noncompliance. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
B. Any licensed tattoo or body piercing establishment found to be in
noncompliance with this chapter for a second offense shall, in addition
to the penalties listed in § 155-100, be subject to a suspension of the
license for 48 hours or until such time as the issues of noncompliance
are brought into compliance, whichever is longer. A reinspection fee as
set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners shall
be charged in the event of noncompliance. [Amended 10-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 1808]
§ 155-99 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 155-101
151:349
C. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the Health Officer to
suspend a license within 10 days of the suspension in writing to the
Board of Commissioners with a request for a public hearing.
§ 155-101 RIDLEY CODE § 155-101
151:350
Chapter 160
IMPROVEMENTS, ASSESSMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 264. Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
268.
§ 160-1. Assessments authorized.
Whenever the Township of Ridley, by ordinance, shall authorize the grading,
subgrading or the permanent paving and improvement of any streets or
alleys or parts thereof, or the construction of curbs, sidewalks or sewers, an
assessment shall be made of the cost thereof against the properties abutting
on such improvements according to the front-foot rule.
§ 160-2. Calculation of cost.
It shall be the duty of the Township Engineer, immediately after completion
of such improvements, to compute the cost thereof and apportion the cost
thereof against the properties abutting thereon according to the frontfoot
rule. In such computation, the said Engineer shall be required to
calculate the actual cost of labor and materials or the contract price thereof,
engineering fees, advertisement costs and such other costs as are necessary
to the prosecution and completion of the said municipal improvement. He
shall estimate the exemptions or reductions, if any, as required or permitted
by law, where such abutting owner is, in his opinion, entitled to such,
and shall thereupon submit his computation to the Board of Township
Commissioners. Upon approval of the said Engineer's computation by the
said Board, the said Engineer shall certify, in writing, the amount of the
assessment made against each property.
§ 160-3. Notice of assessment.
After such certification is made, it shall be the duty of the Township
Secretary to notify, within 30 days, every property owner of the assessment
which has been made, in accordance with the Acts of Assembly in such case
made and provided.
§ 160-4. Interest on unpaid assessments.
Said assessments shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum beginning
30 days after the assessment has been made, until paid.
§ 160-5. Filing of lien.
In the event that an assessment remains unpaid for a period of five months
after the date of the completion of the said municipal improvement, the
§ 155-101 IMPROVEMENTS, ASSESSMENT OF § 160-5
160:351
Township Secretary shall immediately forward the same to the Township
Solicitor, who shall file a municipal lien against the property benefited, in
accordance with the Acts of Assembly in such case made and provided.
§ 160-6. Penalty for nonpayment.
After such municipal lien has been duly filed in the office of the
Prothonotary, in addition to the payment of the principal and interest as
aforesaid, a penalty of 5% of the principal amount, together with all costs,
shall be paid before the said municipal lien shall be marked "satisfied" of
record.
Chapter 163
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal claims — See Ch. 103. Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
§ 160-5 RIDLEY CODE § 160-6
160:352
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 3-23-2011 by Ord. No. 197289]
§ 163-1. Authority of Manager.
The Township Manager is hereby appointed as the designated official who
is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and duties stated herein.
§ 163-2. Use of fire insurance proceeds.
A. No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter "insurer")
doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim
of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
Township of Ridley where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the
structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insurer is
furnished by the Ridley Township Treasurer with a certificate pursuant
to Section 508(b) of the Insurance Company Law of 1921, as amended
by Act 98 of 1992 and Act 93 of 1994 (collectively, the "Act"), and unless
there is compliance with the procedures set forth in Section 508(c) and
(d) of the Act.90
B. Issuance of bill and certificate for municipal claims and expenses.
(1) Where there are delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against the property ("municipal claims"), or there are
expenses which Ridley Township has incurred as a cost for the
removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the
property (collectively "municipal expenses"), the Ridley Township
Treasurer shall immediately render a bill for such work, if she has
not already done so. Upon written request of the named insurer
and the date of receipt by the insurer of a loss report of the claim,
the Treasurer shall furnish a certificate within 14 working days
after the request, to the insurer, a certificate (or at her discretion
an oral notice confirmed in writing) either:
(a) Stating that there are no unpaid municipal claims or municipal
expenses against the property; or
(b) Specifying the nature and amount of such claims or expenses,
accompanied by a bill for such amounts.
(2) Taxes, assessments, penalties and user charges shall be deemed
delinquent for this purpose if a lien could have been filed for such
claims under applicable law. Upon receipt of a certificate and bill
pursuant to Subsection B(1)(a) of this section, the insurer shall
transfer to the Treasurer an amount from the insurance proceeds
89.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Fire Insurance Claims, adopted
11-18-1992 by Ord. No. 1696, as amended.
90.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 163-1 IMPROVEMENTS, ASSESSMENT OF § 163-2
160:353
sufficient to pay such sums prior to making payment to the named
insured, subject to the provisions of Subsection C hereof.
C. When all municipal claims and municipal expenses have been paid
pursuant to Subsection B of this section, or where the Treasurer has
issued a certificate described in Subsection B(1)(a) indicating that
there are no municipal claims or municipal expenses however, that if
the loss agreed upon by the insured and the insurer equals or exceeds
60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the
building or structure, the following procedures must be followed:
(1) The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Treasurer, in the aggregate, $2,000 for each $15,000 of such claim
or fraction thereof.
(2) If at the time a loss report is submitted by the insured, such insured
has submitted to the insurer, with a copy to the Township of Ridley,
a contractor's signed estimate of the cost of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the
insurer shall transfer to the Treasurer from the insurance proceeds
the amount specified in the estimate. If there is more than one
insurer, the transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all
insurers insuring the building or other structure.
(3) Upon receipt of the above-described portion of the insurance
proceeds, the Treasurer shall do the following:
(a) Place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as
security against the total municipal expenses anticipated by
the Township of Ridley to be required in removing, repairing or
securing the building or structure as required by this article.
Such costs shall include, without limitation, any engineering,
legal or administrative costs incurred by the Township of
Ridley in connection with such removal, repair or securing or
any proceedings related thereto; and
(b) Mail to the named insured, at the address received from the
insurer, a notice that the proceeds have been received by the
Township of Ridley and that the procedures under this
subsection shall be followed.
(c) After the transfer, the named insured may submit to the
Township of Ridley a contractor's signed estimate of the cost of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other
structure, in which event the Treasurer shall, if such estimate
is deemed by the Treasurer to be reasonable, return to the
insured the amount of the funds transferred to the Township of
Ridley in excess of that required to pay the municipal
expenses; provided the Township of Ridley has not commenced
to remove or secure the building or other structure, in which
case the Township of Ridley will complete the work.
§ 163-2 RIDLEY CODE § 163-2
160:354
§ 163-3. Limits of liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to make an insurance company,
association or exchange liable for any amount in excess of proceeds payable
under its insurance policy or for any other act performed pursuant to this
article or to make the Township of Ridley, any Township of Ridley official,
a municipality or public official an insured under a policy of insurance or
to create an obligation to pay delinquent property taxes or unpaid removal
liens or expenses other than as provided in this article.
§ 163-4. Insurance company rights reserved.
An insurance company, association or exchange making payment of policy
proceeds under this article for delinquent taxes or structure removal of
liens or removal expenses incurred by the Township of Ridley shall have
the full benefit of such payment including all rights of subrogation and of
assignment.
§ 163-5. Construal of provisions.
This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to deter
the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage the
abandonment of property and to prevent urban blight and deterioration.
§ 163-6. Notification of Pennsylvania Department of Community
Affairs.
The Manager of Ridley Township shall transmit a certified copy of this
article promptly to the Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs.
(d) Pay to the Township of Ridley Treasurer, for reimbursement to
the Township of Ridley General Fund, the amount of the
municipal expenses paid by the Township of Ridley.
(e) Pay the remaining balance in the fund (without interest) to the
named insured upon receipt of a certificate issued by the
Ridley Township Treasurer that the repair, removal or securing
of the building or other structure has been completed in
accordance with all applicable codes and regulations of the
Township of Ridley.
(f) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of
the Township of Ridley to recover any deficiency in the amount
of municipal claims or municipal expenses recovered pursuant
to this article, or to insurance proceeds, by an action at law or
in equity to enforce the codes of the Township of Ridley or to
enter into an agreement with the named insured with regard to
such other disposition of the proceeds as the Township of
Ridley may deem responsible.
§ 163-2 IMPROVEMENTS, ASSESSMENT OF § 163-7
160:355
§ 163-7. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or insurer who violates the
provisions of this article or who shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements hereof shall be sentenced, upon conviction thereof, to a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day on
which an offense shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 163-7 RIDLEY CODE § 163-7
160:356
Chapter 168
LANDSCAPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hedges, shrubbery and vines — See Ch. 88,
Art. II.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
268.
Trees, flowers and shrubs — See Ch. 290.
§ 168-1. Compliance with landscaping plan required.
Any part or portion of the site which has been designated as a landscaping
planting area under the original site development plan in all commercial
and residential sites, including apartments and townhouses but excluding
single and multifamily dwelling units, shall be planted, maintained, kept
free of all debris, rubbish, weeds and tall grass in order to perpetuate the
landscaping as required by the original development plan.
§ 168-2. Replacement program.
A replacement program for nonsurviving plant material should be included
in any development plan.
§ 168-3. Violations and penalties.91
Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to
$1,000 per violation, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment
of such fine and costs shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 173
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 120.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 181.
Licensing of peddlers and solicitors — See Ch.
209.
Plumbing — See Ch. 216.
Licensing of secondhand dealers and
pawnbrokers — See Ch. 232.
Commercial trash collectors — See Ch. 253,
Art. II.
Business and occupational taxes — See Ch.
275.
91.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 163-7 LANDSCAPING § 168-3
168:357

ARTICLE I
Contractors
[Adopted 3-21-1984 by Ord. No. 1563]
§ 173-1. Purpose.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Ridley finds it to be in
the best interest of the residents of Ridley Township, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, that persons or firms who engage in construction, repairs,
remodeling, rehabilitation or demolition; and operating as general
contractors, subcontractors, specialty contractors or home improvement
contractors are required to obtain a license from the Township of Ridley for
such purpose, to the end that only responsible and qualified persons shall
be permitted to engage in such business in said Township of Ridley.
§ 173-2. Compliance required.
No person or firm may engage in or transact any construction, building
repairs, remodeling, rehabilitation or demolition business or hold
themselves out to the public as doing such business or solicit such business
in the Township of Ridley, Pennsylvania, except in compliance with the
applicable provision of this article. No person or firm may engage in this
Township in any trade or practice or other act prohibited by any provision of
this article, and any person or firm who willfully participates in a prohibited
act or violation is subject to the criminal penalty therefor. The provisions of
this article may not be waived by agreement.
§ 173-3. Construal of license.
§ 173-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACT — An agreement, whether oral or written or contained in one or
more documents, between a contractor and an owner for the performance
A. A license issued pursuant to this article may not be construed to
authorize the licensee to perform any particular type of work or kind of
business which is reserved to qualified licensees under other provisions
of state or local law; nor shall any licensee or authority other than as
issued to the permittee pursuant to this article authorize engaging in
construction, building repairs, remodeling, rehabilitation, demolition or
home improvement business in the Township of Ridley.
B. This chapter shall not apply to the official transactions of an authorized
representative of the United States of America, or an instrumentality
thereof, or any state, District of Columbia or territory of the United
States, any city or county thereof, or any instrumentality of a state or
political subdivision thereof.
§ 173-1 LANDSCAPING § 173-4
168:359
of work and includes all labor, services and materials to be furnished and
performed thereunder.
CONTRACTOR — Any person, other than a bona fide employee of the owner,
who undertakes or offers to work, whether or not such person is licensed or
subject to the licensing requirements of this article and whether or not such
person is a prime contractor or subcontractor with respect to the owner.
OWNER — Any property owner, tenant or other person who orders,
contracts for or purchases the services of a contractor, subcontractor,
specialty contractor or home improvement contractor; or the person
entitled to the work of such pursuant to a contract.
PERSON — Includes an individual, partnership, corporation, trust,
association, owner, contractor, salesman or other legal entity.
§ 173-5. License application.
§ 173-6. License fee. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
No license shall be issued or become effective until the applicant pays
the required fees payable to the Township of Ridley as follows: builders,
developers and contractors, swimming pool and sign contractors,
subcontractors, special contractors, home remodeling contractors, paving
contractors, decorators and all others listed in § 173-1 of this article: as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 173-7. License required.
Except as otherwise specifically exempted by the provisions of this article,
no person shall act in the capacity of general contractor, subcontractor,
specialty contractor or home improvement contractor unless authorized to
do so by a subsisting license issued in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
A. It is the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to administer and provide
for the enforcement of all the provisions of this article and specifically
to issue licenses to all applicants who shall be duly qualified under and
who comply with the provisions of this article, and to refuse licenses to
or suspend or revoke licenses issued to persons who do not so qualify or
so comply. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue licenses
upon the proper application, the furnishing of a certificate of insurance
as required by § 173-9B and the license fee having been paid.
B. A certificate of insurance acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be filed with the Township prior to the issuance of a license. These
certificates shall contain a provision that coverages afforded under the
policy will not be canceled until at least 15 days' prior written notice
has been given the Township of Ridley.
§ 173-4 RIDLEY CODE § 173-8
168:360
§ 173-8. Exceptions.
No contractor's license shall be required of any person when acting in the
particular capacity or particular type of transaction set forth in this section:
§ 173-9. License issuance, refusal and renewal.
A. An individual who performs labor or services for a contractor for wages
or salary.
B. Any person who is required by state or local law to attain standards of
competency or experience as a prerequisite to engaging in such craft or
profession, and who is acting exclusively within the scope of the craft or
profession for which he is currently licensed pursuant to such other law.
C. Any person who does any work in a single- or two-family dwelling used
exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings
and quarters in connection with such dwelling, if the same will be
occupied by said owner and that said owner shall personally purchase
all materials and perform or supervise all labor in connection therewith.
A. When an application has been filed with the Department of Code
Enforcement in proper form, the Code Enforcement Officer must,
within 30 days from the date the application is received, issue or refuse
the appropriate contractor's licenses to the applicant. If an application
for a license is refused, the applicant shall be sent a written statement
setting forth the reason for the refusal to grant the license.
B. An applicant for any license required by provisions of this article shall
file a written application, which shall be signed and under oath. The
application shall require the names of owners, partners, directors and
officers of any applicant and the business addresses and trade names of
the applicant, together with a certificate of insurance written for not
less than any limits or coverage specified under this article. The
contractor shall take out and maintain at his expense during the life of
this license such public liability insurance, property damage, products
liability and completed operations (single limits as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners) and workmen's
compensation insurance. Blasting and demolition insurance limits shall
be determined at the time of any application for a permit. [Amended
7-22-1992 by Ord. No. 1691; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
C. Every contractor licensee shall, within 10 days after a change in control
of ownership or of management or of change of address or trade name,
notify the Code Enforcement Officer of such changes.
D. Licenses of all contractors shall expire on December 31 of each year
following the date of issue unless prior thereto the license is revoked or
suspended. Upon payment of the annual license fee, as prescribed by
§ 173-6, prior to the expiration date, a license shall be renewed for
another year, and the authority to do business shall continue in effect
§ 173-8 LANDSCAPING § 173-9
168:361
§ 173-10. License restrictions.
For the protection of the people of this Township, no license shall be issued
or continued if already issued, where:
§ 173-11. Grounds for refusal and revocation.
§ 173-12. Prohibited acts.
until such time within the year as the Commissioners revoked or
suspended the license.
A. The person or the management personnel are untrustworthy or not of
good character; or
B. The business transactions of the person have been marked by a practice
of failure to perform contracts or the manipulation of assets or accounts
or by fraud or bad faith.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power to refuse, suspend
or revoke any licenses issued under the provisions of this article where
the Code Enforcement Officer finds:
(1) That the licensee has violated any provisions of this article or is
performing or attempting to perform any act prohibited by this
article or violates the Township of Ridley Building, Mechanical,
Plumbing, Electrical or Fire Code.92
(2) Any condition of a permit is violated.
B. Any violation of any of the provisions of this subsection upon the part of
any director, manager, partner, officer, salesman, agent or employer of a
contractor shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license of
the contractor unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer that the individuals engaged in the management of
the contractor:
(1) Had no knowledge of the wrongful conduct; or
(2) Were unable to prevent the violation.
A. The following acts are prohibited:
(1) Abandonment or willful failure to perform, without justification,
any contract or project engaged in or under taken by a contractor
or willful deviation from or disregard of plans or specifications in
any material respect without obtaining the consent of the owner in
writing, and provided that the Code Enforcement Officer has
received notification of such changes.
92.Editor's Note: See the following chapters, respectively: Ch. 92, Building Construction and
Floodplain Management; Ch. 181, Mechanical Standards; Ch. 216, Plumbing; Ch. 120,
Electrical Standards; and Ch. 135, Fire Prevention.
§ 173-9 RIDLEY CODE § 173-12
168:362
(2) Making any substantial misrepresentation in the procurement of a
contractor or making any false promise of character likely to
influence, persuade or induce.
(3) Any fraud in the execution of, or in the material alteration of, any
contract, mortgage, promissory note or other document incident to
a contractual transaction.
(4) Preparing or accepting any mortgage, promissory note or other
evidence of indebtedness upon the obligation of a contractual
transaction with knowledge that it recited a greater monetary
obligation than the consideration for the work to be performed,
which consideration may be a time sale price.
(5) Directly or indirectly publishing any advertisement relating to work
or services which contain an assertion, representation, is a
statement of fact which is false, deceptive or misleading, provided
that any advertisement which is subject to and complies with the
then existing rules, regulations or guides of the Federal Trade
Commission shall not be deemed false, deceptive or misleading, or
by any means advertising or purporting to offer the general public
any work or service with the intent not to accept contracts for the
particular work or at the price which is advertised or offered to the
public.
(6) Willful or deliberate disregard and violation of the building laws of
this state or of this Township or of the safety or labor or workmen's
compensation insurance laws of this state.
(7) Doing any business with or through any person who is subject to
the licensing requirements of this subsection with the knowledge
that such person is not licensed as required.
(8) Misrepresentation of a material fact by an applicant in obtaining a
license.
(9) Willful failure to notify the Code Enforcement Officer of any change
of control in ownership, management or business name or
locations.
(10) Conducting a business in any name other than the one in which the
contractor or salesman is licensed.
(11)Willful failure to comply with any order, demand or requirements
lawfully made by the Code Enforcement Officer under and within
the authority of this article.
B. Violations of any of the prohibitions of this section:
(1) Shall subject any violator to whom the licensing provisions of this
subsection apply to the administrative sanctions of this article; and
§ 173-12 LANDSCAPING § 173-12
168:363
§ 173-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1639; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
(2) Shall subject any violator, whether or not required to be licensed by
this article, to criminal prosecution.
A. Any person who shall knowingly and willfully engage in building
construction, repairs, remodeling, rehabilitation or demolition without
obtaining a license as required by this article and who is not otherwise
exempted from said licensing requirements and any person who
continues in business as a contractor after revocation or during
suspension shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution, for each separate violation, and in default of
payment thereof, be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who knowingly and willfully violates any provision of this
article, in addition to any administrative penalty otherwise applicable
thereto, upon conviction thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction of
this state, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, for each separate violation, and in default of payment
thereof, be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 173-12 RIDLEY CODE § 173-13
168:364
ARTICLE II
Plumbers
[Adopted 12-21-1983 by Ord. No. 1558]
§ 173-14. Purpose.
In order to protect the public health, the Ridley Township Commissioners
find it to be in the best interest of the residents of the municipality that
persons who engage in plumbing and operating as plumbers are required
to obtain a license from the municipality for such purpose, to the end that
only responsible and qualified persons shall be permitted to engage in such
business in said municipality.
§ 173-15. Definitions.
For application of these rules and regulations, terms shall be defined and
used herein as follows:
APPRENTICE PLUMBER — A person registered as a beginner to learn
plumbing.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Municipal Board of Health or Health Officer.
JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER — A person who has qualified for and obtained a
journeyman plumber's license.
MASTER PLUMBER — A person who has qualified for and obtained a
master plumber's license.
PLUMBER — A person who is registered and licensed to install plumbing or
to make minor repairs to an existing plumbing system.
PLUMBING — The work or business of installing systems of piping for
water supply or removal of liquid and waterborne wastes or making minor
repairs to existing plumbing systems. "Plumbing" is also used to describe
the installed fixtures and piping of a building.
PLUMBING OFFICIAL — The official representative of the Board of Health
who appoints and delegates responsibility to him for enforcing provisions of
the Municipal Plumbing Code.
§ 173-16. License to be exclusive.
No person, firm or corporation carrying on the business of plumbing shall
allow his or their name to be used by any person, directly or indirectly,
either to obtain a permit or permits or to do any work under his or their
license.
§ 173-17. Performance bond; liability insurance. [Amended
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
A performance bond in the amount as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners shall be filed by a registered master plumber
before obtaining a permit to do plumbing under provisions of this article.
§ 173-14 LANDSCAPING § 173-17
168:365
Said performance bond shall relieve the municipality of liability for any
damage to persons or property and guarantee that work will be performed
according to agreement, together with the performance bond. The
registered master plumber shall file a certificate providing liability
insurance in the amounts as set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners, plus property damage in the amount as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 173-18. Plumbing Official.
§ 173-19. Board of Examiners.
A. To qualify to become a Plumbing Official for the Board of Health, an
applicant shall have been, among other prerequisites, certified as a
Plumbing Inspector by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Department of Labor and Industry, under its Uniform Construction
Code. [Amended 2-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2015]
B. While serving in his official capacity, a Plumbing Official shall not
engage in or be connected, directly or indirectly, with the plumbing
business, except upon approval of the Board of Health.
C. The Plumbing Official shall serve at the will and desire of the elected
officials.
A. Appointment. A Board of Examiners may be appointed by the Board of
Health to consist of the Plumbing Official and three master plumbers
with at least 10 years' experience who are not employed by the
municipality. The master plumbers shall serve for a period of two years
unless removed prior thereto by the Board of Health. Appointments
shall be made so that each term of one master plumber shall end on
December 31 of each year.
B. Compensation. The master plumber shall receive a fee as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for each session at
which examinations are held, but shall not receive for such services
more than the amount set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners in any calendar month. [Amended 10-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 1808]
C. Duties. The Board of Examiners, if appointed, shall adopt reasonable
rules and regulations governing examinations, which shall be approved
by the Board of Health, conduct examinations of applicants for master
and journeyman plumbers' licenses within one month of receipt of
applications therefor and, by majority vote, approve or reject each
applicant. The Board of Examiners shall keep an accurate record of all
of its official transactions and shall render such reports and statistics as
the Board of Health may require. The Board of Examiners shall adopt
necessary rules for the discharge of its duties, which shall be approved
by the Board of Health.
§ 173-17 RIDLEY CODE § 173-20
168:366
§ 173-20. Master plumbers.
A. License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of plumbing as a master plumber without having first obtained
a license from the Board of Health. Application shall be made on a form
furnished by the Board and shall set forth the name of the applicant; the
names of the members of the firm, if a partnership; or the officers of the
corporation, if incorporated; and the location or locations where the
business of the applicant is to be conducted, together with any other
information the Board of Health may require.
B. To qualify to take the examination to become a master plumber, an
applicant shall have worked a minimum of two years as a journeyman
plumber.
C. The applicant shall submit to an examination by the Board of
Examiners; provided, however, that a master plumber holding a license
issued by any municipality approved by the Plumbing Official shall not
be required to submit to such examination. If, after proper examination,
the applicant shall be found to be competent, this fact shall be certified
to the Board of Health, which shall thereupon issue a license to him. A
license shall entitle an applicant to engage in the business of plumbing
for the period of one calendar year, or fractional part thereof, following
the date of such examination, unless revoked by the Board of Health.
Permission, if granted by the Plumbing Official, shall entitle a
nonresident applicant to execute the work or contract for which
application was made.
D. The examination and approval of one member of a partnership or
officer, superintendent or foreman of a corporation shall be deemed
sufficient for the issuance of a master plumber's license to such
partnership or corporation.
E. License fees.
(1) For conducting an examination and issuing a license to a master
plumber, a fee as listed on the plumbing permit fee schedule made
a part of this article shall be paid, which shall cover the license fee
for the remainder of the calendar year in which the license is
issued. Retake of the master plumber's examination shall not be
permitted until 90 days have elapsed since the previous
examination and upon payment of a fee as listed on the plumbing
permit fee schedule made a part of this article. Additional retakes
shall not be permitted, except on approval of the Board of Health. A
master plumber holding a license from another municipality
approved by the Plumbing Official need not take the examination
but shall pay a minimum registration fee as listed on the plumbing
permit fee schedule made a part of this article.
(2) Annually thereafter every holder of a master plumber's license
shall, between the first and 31st day of December, surrender his
license for the current year and pay a renewal fee as listed on the
§ 173-20 LANDSCAPING § 173-20
168:367
§ 173-21. Journeyman plumbers.
plumbing permit fee schedule made a part of this article, and he
shall thereupon receive a license for the next calendar year. Failure
of any resident master plumber to surrender his old license and pay
his annual license fee within the time herein specified shall result
in the termination of his license, and no permission for plumbing
work hereunder shall be granted to him until after he has obtained
a new license. In addition, he shall not be allowed to complete any
work authorized under permission therefor.
F. Revocation of license.
(1) Any master plumber's license granted hereunder may be revoked
by the Board of Health for violation of any part of this article, for
refusing or neglecting to make the necessary corrections to work
not approved by the Plumbing Official or for any other sufficient
cause, after hearing before the Board of Health at a time and place
of which at least five days' notice shall be given to the licensee. The
Board of Health may, after hearing, upon reasonable cause, revoke
the license or suspend the same for a specified period.
(2) No master plumber whose license has been revoked for cause may
obtain another license for a period of one year from the date of
revocation of his license.
G. Misrepresentation. It shall be unlawful for any person who does not
have a master plumber's license issued by the Board of Health to
engage in or to represent himself as engaged in the business of
plumbing in this municipality or to use the words "master
plumber,"plumber" or "plumbing" in any form of advertising or to
display a sign containing these words, or any of them, in the
municipality.
H. Change of place of business. Immediate notice (within 30 days) shall be
given by any licensee hereunder to the Board of Health of any change of
his place of business. Upon retirement from business, a licensee shall
forthwith surrender his certificate of license.
I. Employment of unlicensed journeyman plumbers. No master plumber
shall employ a journeyman plumber who has not obtained a license as a
journeyman plumber.
J. License for institutions. A person certified as competent by the Board of
Examiners may be licensed as a master plumber for the care, alteration
or addition of the plumbing system of a designated manufacturing or
mercantile building, institution, hotel, apartment or similar building
where the continuous services of a master plumber are required and
receive a certificate of license, but in such case the person so licensed
shall not be permitted to do any plumbing work in any building or
buildings other than those for which he is specifically licensed.
§ 173-20 RIDLEY CODE § 173-21
168:368
A. License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
trade of plumbing as an employee, either as a journeyman plumber or
master plumber, without first having obtained a license from the Board
of Health. Application shall be made on a form furnished by the Board
of Health and shall set forth the name and address of the applicant
together with any other information the Board of Health may require.
B. To qualify to take the examination to become a journeyman plumber, an
applicant shall have worked a minimum of four years as an apprentice
plumber.
C. Examination. Before any journeyman plumber's license is issued, the
applicant shall submit to an examination by a Board of Examiners;
provided, however, that a journeyman plumber holding a license issued
by any municipality approved by the Plumbing Official shall not be
required to submit to such examination. If, after a proper examination,
the applicant shall be found to be competent, this fact shall be certified
to the Board of Health, which shall thereupon issue a license to him.
The license shall entitle him to engage in plumbing as a journeyman
plumber for the period of one calendar year, or fractional part thereof,
following the date of such examination, unless revoked by the Board of
Health.
D. License fee.
(1) For conducting an examination and issuing a license to a
journeyman plumber, a fee as listed on the plumbing permit fee
schedule made a part of this article shall be paid which shall cover
the license fee for the remainder of the calendar year in which the
license is issued. Retake of the journeyman plumber's examination
shall not be permitted until 90 days have elapsed since the previous
examination and upon payment of a fee as listed on the permit fee
schedule made a part of this article. Additional retakes shall not be
permitted, except on approval of the Board of Health. A
journeyman plumber holding a license from another municipality
approved by the Plumbing Official need not take the examination
but shall pay a minimum fee as listed on the plumbing permit fee
schedule made a part of this article for one calendar year or
fractional part thereof.
(2) Annually thereafter every holder of a journeyman plumber's license
shall, between the first and 31st day of December, surrender his
license for the current year and pay a minimum fee as listed on the
plumbing permit fee schedule made a part of this article, and he
shall thereupon receive a license for the next calendar year. Failure
of any journeyman plumber to surrender his old license and pay his
annual fee within the time herein specified shall result in the
termination of his license. The license may be renewed upon
written application to the Board of Health, together with
satisfactory reasons for failure to renew the license within the time
specified.
§ 173-21 LANDSCAPING § 173-22
168:369
§ 173-22. Apprentice plumbers.
To qualify to work as an apprentice plumber, an applicant shall register with
the Board of Health and pay a registration fee as listed on the plumbing
permit fee schedule made a part of this article.
§ 173-23. Marking of trucks.
Every master plumber doing work in the municipality shall have his truck
clearly marked with his name and business address.
§ 173-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1639; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
Any person who knowingly and willfully violates any provisions of this
article, in addition to any administrative penalty otherwise applicable
thereto, upon conviction thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction of
this state, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000, plus costs of
prosecution, for each separate violation, and in default of payment thereof,
be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 173-25. Fee schedule. [Amended 4-22-1992 by Ord. No. 1684;
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
The fee schedule for plumbing permits shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 173-22 RIDLEY CODE § 173-25
168:370
ARTICLE III
State or Federal License Requirements
[Adopted 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 1971]
§ 173-26. Requirement to comply with state or federal license
requirements.
Any business that requires a certificate of occupancy, license or permit
to operate within the Township must first produce to the Township any
applicable licensing requirements from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or United States government, as part of the Township procedure to obtain
authorization to operate within the Township of Ridley.
§ 173-26 LANDSCAPING § 173-26
168:371
Chapter 176
LOITERING AND CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 113.
Loitering in parks after hours — See Ch. 205,
Art. I.
Picketing — See Ch. 213.
Police services — See Ch. 220.
Shows and special events — See Ch. 245.
§ 173-26 RIDLEY CODE § 173-26
168:372
ARTICLE I
Curfew93
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 77 of the 1975 Code]
§ 176-1. Curfew established; penalty for violation. [Amended
1-4-1978 by Ord. No. 1454; 9-23-2009 by Ord. No. 1953]
No person under the age of 18 years not accompanied by a parent, as
hereinabove defined, or not on the lawful and necessary business of such
parent, may be on the streets, parks or other public places in the Township
of Ridley between 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., prevailing time, seven days
a week, and upon conviction thereof before a District Justice having
jurisdiction within the Township of Ridley, such person shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $10 and costs of prosecution, and in default
of the payment of the fine and costs, shall be certified to the Juvenile Court
of the County of Delaware.
§ 176-2. Exception to curfew.
The provisions of this article shall not be enforced within 1/2 hour of
the termination of an athletic contest or social event sponsored by school
authorities, a religious institution or a recognized civic association.
§ 176-3. Parental violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 1808]
Any parent, as herein defined, who knowingly permits such minor to violate
§ 176-1 of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice,
be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a
term not exceeding 30 days.
93.Editor's Note: The following sections, regarding loitering, of former Ch. 77 were deleted at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I): § 176-1, Definitions;
§ 176-2, Violation by adults; and § 176-3, Violation by minors.
§ 176-1 LANDSCAPING § 176-3
168:373

ARTICLE II
Ticket Lines for Special Events
[Adopted 10-26-1994 by Ord. No. 1725]
§ 176-4. Time limit on line formation prior to sale.
It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to stand in line for
the purchase of tickets to special events for a period in excess of two hours
prior to the commencement of ticket sales for that event.
§ 176-5. Reimbursement for crowd control.94
If the Township of Ridley is required to provide constant crowd control
measures, including but not limited to the stationing of a Township police
officer at the location, it shall be the obligation of the establishment
responsible for the crowd formation to reimburse the Township for such
services at a reasonable rate of compensation.
§ 176-6. Reimbursement for cleanup.
If the Township of Ridley deems it necessary to provide property cleanup
services by the Department of Public Works as a result of such crowd
formation, it shall be the obligation of the establishment responsible for
the crowd formation to reimburse the Township for such services at a
reasonable rate of compensation.
§ 176-7. Behavior of persons standing in line.
It shall be unlawful for any group of persons standing in line for the
purchase of tickets for special events to:
§ 176-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine and
costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days. Such penalties
may be imposed on individuals forming said lines, the establishments
causing said lines to form, or both.
A. Interfere or impede the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
B. Interfere, obstruct, harass, curse, threaten or to do physical harm to
another member of the public or their property; and
C. Create a reasonable likelihood of a breach of the peace, disorderly
conduct, or cause annoyance, inconvenience or alarm or to create a risk
thereof.
94.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 220, Police Services.
§ 176-4 LANDSCAPING § 176-8
168:375

ARTICLE III
Teen Entertainment Clubs
[Adopted 5-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1763]
§ 176-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
CAPTAIN OF POLICE — The head of the Police Department of the Township
of Ridley, regardless of whether said position is entitled "Captain," "Chief,"
"Superintendent" or other similar title.
CLUB PREMISES — Any place where a teen entertainment club is operated
or maintained, including all hallways, bathrooms, parking areas, and other
adjacent portions of the premises which are accessible to the public during
operating hours.
PERSON — One or more natural persons, corporations, partnerships,
associations, or other entity capable of having an action of law brought
against such entity.
TEEN ENTERTAINMENT CLUB —
§ 176-10. License required.
On or after August 1, 1997, it will be unlawful for any person to own, lease,
operate, manage, or maintain a teen entertainment club in the Township
of Ridley without first obtaining a teen entertainment club license from the
Commercial premises which are open to the public, the primary
function of which is to offer patrons between the ages of 14 and
20 an opportunity to engage in social activities such as dancing, or
the enjoyment of live or prerecorded music, or the enjoyment of
entertainment or other performances. As an incidental function, an
entertainment club may sell and serve food and beverages to its
patrons.
A.
The term "teen entertainment club" does not include the following:
(1) Premises which serve alcoholic beverages as defined by state law.
(2) Theaters where the patrons sit in parallel rows of fixed seats.
Full-service restaurants where the only entertainment consists of
background music which is incidental to the primary function of
serving food.
(3)
(4) A banquet, party or celebration which is not open to the public.
Dances or events sponsored and operated by a governmental entity,
educational institution or nonprofit religious, charitable,
benevolent, fraternal or social organization.
(5)
B.
§ 176-9 LANDSCAPING § 176-10
168:377
Township. For multiuse facilities which include a teen entertainment club,
a separate and additional license must be issued for the teen entertainment
club operation. Said license must be renewed annually.
§ 176-11. License application procedures. [Amended 10-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 1808]
An application for a teen entertainment club license shall be submitted to
the Township Manager with a nonrefundable payment as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners no later than 60 days
prior to the scheduled beginning of operation or, in the case of a renewal, 60
days prior to the expiration of the license. The following information shall
be provided:
§ 176-12. Procedures for issuance or denial of license.
A. Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the teen
entertainment club premises.
B. Name, address, and telephone number of the person responsible for the
operation of the teen entertainment club, if different than the owner of
the premises.
C. The proposed days of the week and hours of operation for the teen
entertainment club.
D. The nature of the activities which will be engaged in on the premises.
E. The maximum number of individuals expected to patronize the teen
entertainment club on any given evening.
F. A written statement setting forth all measures proposed to insure that
adequate traffic control, crowd protection and security, both inside and
outside the premises, will be maintained and that the ages of patrons
admitted to the teen entertainment club will be monitored.
G. A statement setting forth whether the teen entertainment club will be
operated either exclusively as a teen club or whether other uses will
occur on the premises, and the nature of those other uses.
H. A statement of whether the applicant, or the applicant's officers,
directors, partners, or any other person involved in the operation or
management of the teen entertainment club, has been convicted within
the preceding five years of any crimes, and if so, the nature of the crime
and the status of the charges.
A. The Captain of Police shall review a completed application for a teen
entertainment club license and shall recommend approval or denial of
the license within 15 working days after the date on which a completed
application was filed. The Captain of Police, in conjunction with any
other appropriate Township official, shall determine the minimum
number of security personnel which shall be necessary in order to
§ 176-10 RIDLEY CODE § 176-12
168:378
§ 176-13. Operating rules and regulations.
The following operating rules and regulations shall apply to all teen
entertainment clubs in the Township of Ridley:
protect the public health, safety and welfare in terms of traffic control,
crowd protection and security both inside and outside the premises,
as well as the monitoring of the ages of patrons admitted to the teen
entertainment club.
B. All applications for a teen entertainment club license or renewal thereof
shall be presented to the Township Board of Commissioners at a regular
meeting thereof. No application shall be acted upon until a
recommendation for or against the application is received from the
Captain of Police, provided that the Board of Commissioners shall not
be bound by the Captain's recommendation.
C. A teen entertainment club license shall be denied for any one or more of
the following grounds:
(1) If the business premises do not comply with all applicable Township
ordinances and state laws.
(2) If the application is incomplete or if it contains any material
misrepresentation.
(3) If the application does not show adequate measures for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the
community.
D. If the Board of Commissioners denies a license, written notice of the
denial stating the reasons why shall be sent to the applicant within
three working days after the denial. The applicant shall have a period of
10 working days after the date of license denial to resubmit a revised
application.
A. Persons of the following ages shall not be permitted to enter or remain
on the premises of a teen club:
(1) Under the age of 14 years;
(2) Twenty-one years of age or older except for bona fide employees or
entertainers hired by the licensee to work in the club.
B. Teen clubs shall close by 10:00 p.m. It shall be the obligation of the
licensee to employ an adequate number of qualified security personnel
who will be present on club premises during all operating hours to
maintain peace and order and to insure compliance with all applicable
laws of the state and of the Township of Ridley.
C. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to insure that no alcoholic
beverages or controlled substances are offered for safe or consumed on
the teen entertainment club premises.
§ 176-12 LANDSCAPING § 176-13
168:379
§ 176-14. Suspension or revocation of license.
D. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to remove from the club
premises any person who is or appears to be under the influence of or
affected by the use of alcohol or drugs, or whose conduct poses a
physical danger to the safety of others present.
E. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to provide proper and adequate
illumination of all portions of the club premises which are available for
public use.
F. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to prevent loitering, the
creation of public nuisances, or disturbances of the peace by any
patrons of the entertainment club on club premises or in the immediate
vicinity. Loitering shall not include walking between the club building
and a patron's vehicle, nor shall it include the act of waiting in line to
gain admission to the club.
G. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to clean up all litter resulting
from club operations. The cleanup shall be completed within eight
hours after the end of each day's operation and shall extend for a twoblock
radius around the club.
H. All police officers of the Township of Ridley shall have free access to all
teen entertainment clubs for the purpose of inspection and to enforce
compliance with the provisions of this article at all times that the
premises are open to the patrons.
I. It is the responsibility of the licensee to require picture identification or
a reasonable equivalent showing the age of each person admitted to a
teen entertainment club. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or
recklessly allow a person to enter or remain on the premises of a teen
entertainment club in violation of the age restrictions of this article.
J. It is unlawful for any person to misrepresent his or her age for the
purpose of obtaining admission to or remaining at a teen entertainment
club in violation of the provisions of this article.
A. Suspension.
(1) The Board of Commissioners at any time may suspend a teen
entertainment club license whenever the licensee, or any manager,
officer, director, agent, or employee of the licensee, has caused,
permitted or knowingly done any of the following:
(a) Failed to keep the building structure or equipment of the
licensed premises in compliance with the applicable health,
building, fire or safety laws, regulations or ordinances in a way
which relates to or affects public health or safety on the teen
entertainment club premises.
§ 176-13 RIDLEY CODE § 176-14
168:380
§ 176-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 1808]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
(b) Failed to comply with the operating rules and regulations of
teen entertainment clubs specified in § 176-13 of this article.
(2) Such suspension shall remain in effect until the conditions causing
the suspension are cured and reasonable measures are taken to
insure that the same will not recur as determined by the Township
Captain of Police.
B. Revocation. The Board of Commissioners, at any time, may revoke a
teen entertainment club license on any one or more of the following
grounds:
(1) Whenever the Township learns that the licensee made a material
false statement or misrepresentation, or failed to disclose any
material information to the Township in connection with any
application for the teen entertainment club license, or any license
renewal.
(2) Whenever the licensee, or any manager, officer, director, agent, or
employee of the licensee, fails within a reasonable time to cure a
condition which caused a license suspension.
(3) Whenever the licensee, or any manager, officer, director, agent, or
employee of the licensee, knowingly permits conduct on the
licensed premises which violates any federal, state, or Township
criminal or penal statute, law or ordinance.
(4) Whenever operation of the teen entertainment club becomes the
proximate cause of a significant increase in criminal activity on the
premises or in the immediate vicinity in such a way as to endanger
persons or property.
§ 176-14 LANDSCAPING § 176-15
168:381
Chapter 180
MASSAGE AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult uses — See Ch. 62.
§ 180-1. Purpose.
The Board of Commissioners of Ridley Township, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, finds that massage establishments used for the purposes
of prostitution are detrimental to the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of Ridley Township.
§ 180-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ACCREDITED SCHOOL — Any school wherein the method, profession,
and work of massage is taught, which furnishes a statement of courses
offered, including anatomy and physiology, is accredited by a state unit
of educational accreditation, or by the American Massage and Therapy
Association, and furnishes a certificate or diploma of successful completion
of such course of study or learning.
APPLICANT — Any person applying for a license to render massage service,
or to operate massage establishment, and in addition thereto shall include
and mean all partners in a partnership and all stockholders or members of
a corporation or limited liability company where the controlling interest of
the entity is held by five or fewer persons or legal entities.
EMPLOYEE — Any person over 18 years of age, other than a massagist,
who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage
establishment and receives compensation from the operator of the massage
establishment or patrons.
MASSAGE — The manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing,
stroking, kneading, or tapping, by hand, mechanical device, or other means.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS — Any business establishment which
provides the services of massage, unless such business establishment is
operated by a licensed medical practitioner, chiropractor or professional
physical therapist licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in
connection with a professional practice.
MASSAGIST — Any person trained at an accredited school, who, for any
consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as defined
herein (also a "masseur" and "masseuse").
§ 176-15 RIDLEY CODE § 180-2
180:382
PATRON — Any person over 18 years of age who receives a massage under
such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay
money or give other consideration therefor.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint-stock
company, corporation, limited liability company, or combination of
individuals of whatever form or character.
PROSTITUTION — Engaging in sexual activity for consideration, including:
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA — Genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or
perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
§ 180-3. License required.
No person shall engage in, carry out or provide or perform the business
of massage except in a massage establishment duly licensed under the
provisions of this subchapter. Existing massage establishments shall submit
applications for a massage license hereunder within 60 days of enactment
of this chapter.
§ 180-4. Exemption.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breast.
A.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; or
C. Homosexual and other deviate sexual relations.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following
individuals while engaged in the personal performance of the duties of
their respective professions:
(1) Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical
therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective
professions in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Nurses who are registered under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(3) Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania except that this exemption
shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp and hair
of the customer or client for cosmetic or beautifying purposes.
(4) Athletic trainers.
B. In any prosecution for violation of this chapter, the foregoing
exemptions shall constitute affirmative defenses and it shall be
incumbent upon the defendant to show that he or she and any
establishments involved are not subject to the provisions of this
subchapter. Nothing herein shall be deemed to shift the burden of proof
of the violation to the defendant.
§ 180-2 MASSAGE AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS § 180-5
180:383
§ 180-5. Application to establish or maintain massage
establishment.
A. Every applicant for a license to establish, maintain, operate or conduct
a massage establishment shall file an application, under oath, with the
Township and pay a nonrefundable annual license fee, which shall be
determined by the Board of Commissioners from time to time by
resolution. The application shall at a minimum provide the Township
with the following information:
(1) A detailed description of the services to be provided.
(2) The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the
massage establishment is to be conducted.
(3) The name and residence address of each applicant.
(a) If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company,
the name and residence address of each of the officers,
directors and members/shareholders, together with the
address of the corporation if different from the address of the
massage establishment.
(b) If the applicant is a partnership (limited or general), the names
and residence address of each of the partners and the address
of the partnership itself if different from the address of the
massage establishment.
(4) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the address of the
proposed massage establishment.
(5) Proof that the applicant, if an individual, is a least 18 years of age.
(6) The height, weight, hair and eye color and gender of any individual
applicant.
(7) Copy of written identification, such as a driver's license or social
security card.
(8) One front-face (portrait) two-inch by two-inch photograph of the
applicant, including a photograph of all officers, directors,
partners, members, managing agents of any business entity
applicant.
(9) Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application.
(10) The massage or similar business license history of the applicant;
whether such person, in previously operating in this or another
township or state, has had a business license revoked or
suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or
occupation subsequent to such action or suspension or revocation.
§ 180-5 RIDLEY CODE § 180-5
180:384
§ 180-6. Issuance of license.
The Township Health Officer shall issue a license for a massage
establishment after approval by the Board of Commissioners, but only after
all requirements for a massage establishment have been met.
§ 180-7. Time of approval or denial of application.
The Township shall act to approve or deny an application for a license
hereunder within a reasonable period of time and in no event shall the
Township act to approve or deny the license later than 90 days from the date
said application is accepted by the Township. Every license issued under
this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner
suspended or revoked.
(11) All criminal convictions for sexual offenses, including the date of
conviction, nature of the crimes and place convicted.
(12) The name and address and one front-face (portrait) two-inch by
two-inch photograph of each massagist who is or will be employed
in the proposed massage establishment.
(13) The diploma, certificate or other documentation evidencing that
each massagist has successfully completed the curricula of an
accredited school.
(14) The name and address of any massage establishment or other
business owned or operated by any person whose name is required
hereunder wherein the business or profession of massage is carried
on.
(15) A description of any other business proposed to be operated on the
same premises or adjoining premises owned or controlled by the
applicant.
(16) Authorization for the Township, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct investigations into the truth of the
statements and qualification of the applicant contained in the
application.
(17) Such other identification and information as may reasonably be
required by the Township.
B. The application shall not be accepted by the Township until all required
information has been provided to the Township and all required fees
have been paid. Any change in any of the information provided
hereunder must be submitted to the Township within 10 days of said
change.
§ 180-5 MASSAGE AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS § 180-8
180:385
§ 180-8. Posting of license.
Every license granted hereunder shall be conspicuously posted at or near
the interior entrance to the massage establishment.
§ 180-9. Registration of employees.
The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage
establishment shall maintain a written register of all persons employed at
any time at the massage establishment, including but not limited to all
massagists. Such register shall be available for Inspection at the massage
establishment during regular business hours.
§ 180-10. Revocation or suspension of license.
Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Board of Commissioners after notice and a hearing, for
good cause, or in any case where any of the provisions of this chapter are
violated or where any employee of the licensee, including any massagist, is
engaged in any conduct which violates any state or local laws or ordinances.
§ 180-11. Clothing and name tag requirements.
All employees, including massagists, shall wear clean nontransparent outer
garments, covering all sexual or genital areas. Name tags for employees
and all massagists shall be worn and visible at all times.
§ 180-12. Persons under age of 18 prohibited.
No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted in or on the premises of a
massage establishment, unless on lawful business.
§ 180-13. Hours of operation.
No massage establishments shall operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
§ 180-14. Inspection.
The Township or its authorized representative may from time to time make
inspection of each massage establishment for the purpose of determining
compliance with this chapter.
§ 180-15. Unlawful acts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person not a massagist to perform, provide
or engage in a massage with any person in a massage establishment.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to
engage in prostitution.
§ 180-8 RIDLEY CODE § 180-15
180:386
§ 180-16. Sale or transfer or change of location.
Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license
therefor shall be null and void, except as approved as provided in § 180-5.
No license granted under this chapter shall be transferable.
§ 180-17. Notice.
C. It shall be unlawful for any massagist or other person in a massage
establishment to place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any
part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner or to massage a sexual
or genital area of any other person.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to
expose his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any
other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person in a massage
establishment to expose the sexual or genital area, or any portion
thereof, of any other person.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other
person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal with a fully
opaque covering the sexual or genital area of his or her body.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a
massage establishment knowingly to cause, allow, or permit, in or about
such massage establishment, any agent, employee, or any other person
under his control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited by this
section.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly allow any massage
establishment to be used in violation of this chapter.
A. The holder of a license to operate a massage establishment shall post at
every entrance available to massage patrons the following notice:
NOTICE
IT SHALL BE UNLAWFUL FOR ANY PERSON TO PATRONIZE THIS
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT IF THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT
IS KNOWN BY SUCH PATRON TO BE IN VIOLATION OF CHAPTER
180 OF THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF RIDLEY, DELAWARE
COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA; A COPY OF SAID CHAPTER IS POSTED
HEREIN AND WILL BE MADE AVAILABLE TO ANY PATRON UPON
REQUEST.
B. This notice shall be capitalized and in not less than 72 point type and
shall be posted by the holder of a license to operate a massage
establishment in a conspicuous place at or near every entrance to said
establishment. Copies of Chapter 180 shall be kept on the premises and
shall be made available to any massage patron upon request
§ 180-15 MASSAGE AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS § 180-18
180:387
§ 180-18. Violation and enforcement.
For each and every violation of this chapter, the violator, upon conviction by
the District Justice, shall be guilty of a summary offense and subject to a
fine of not more than $1,000; and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed
90 days.
Chapter 181
MECHANICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of appeals — See Ch. 9, Art. IX.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 120.
Plumbing — See Ch. 216.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
268.
Zoning — See Ch. 325.
§ 181-1. Adoption of code by reference. [Amended 12-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 1917; 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1961]
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of
Code Enforcement of Ridley Township, being marked and designated as the
International Mechanical Code, 2009 edition, including Appendix Chapter
A, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Mechanical Code of Ridley Township, in the State of Pennsylvania,
regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said Mechanical Code on file in the Office of Code Enforcement are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 181-2 of this chapter.
§ 181-2. Revisions. [Amended 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1961]
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Ridley Township
Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule, shall read: "A schedule adopted
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners."
Section 106.5.3 Fee Refunds, is amended to provide that a
request to refund fees be made to the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 180-18 RIDLEY CODE § 181-2
180:388
Section 108.4 Violation Penalties, is completed by inserting
the words "summary offense" in the space
entitled "specify offense," inserting words
"$1,000" in the space entitled "amount," and
inserting the words "30 days" in the space
entitled "number of days."
Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders, is completed by inserting
the words "250" in the first space entitled
"amount" and inserting the words "$1,000" in
the second space entitled "amount."
Section 109 Means of Appeal, is deleted. A substitute
procedure is adopted by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.
§ 181-3. Effect on pending action.
That nothing in this chapter or in the Mechanical Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 181-2 of this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 190
NOISE AND NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms and alarm systems — See Ch. 66.
Animals — See Ch. 77.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 113.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 151.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 209.
Picketing — See Ch. 213.
Zoning — See Ch. 325.
§ 190-1. Unnecessary noise prohibited.
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or business entity to make or cause, or suffer or permit to be
made or caused, upon premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or
it or upon any public land, street, alley or thoroughfare in the Township
of Ridley any unnecessary noises or sounds, by means of the human voice
or by any other means or methods, including but not limited to any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, sound amplifier, bell, siren,
whistle, alarm, audio signaling device, loudspeaker, exhaust or other
machine or device that generates or reproduces sounds which are so harsh,
prolonged, unnatural or unusual in their use, time and place as to occasion
§ 181-2 NOISE AND NUISANCES § 190-1
190:389
physical discomfort or which are otherwise injurious to the lives, health,
peace and comfort of the inhabitants of said Township or any number of
residents thereof.
§ 190-2. Performance standards on noise.
A. Terminology. All technical terminology used in this chapter not defined
below shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI), its latest approved
revisions thereof, or its successor body.
CONTINUOUS SOUND — Any sound which is steady state, fluctuating
or intermittent with a recurrence greater than one time in any fifteensecond
interval.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Any sound of short duration, with an abrupt
onset and rapid decay and an occurrence of not more than one time in
any fifteen-second interval.
PURE TONE — A sound sensation characterized by its singleness of
tone.
B. Standards. For the purpose of measuring sound in accordance with the
applicable provisions of these regulations, test equipment methods and
procedures shall conform to the latest approved standards as published
by ANSI or its approved equivalent.
(1) Residential and special zoning districts. At no point on the property
line of the receiving land use or at any point within the receiving
land use in a residential district or apartment or multiple type
housing or municipal use district shall the sound-pressure level of
any continuous sound resulting from any operation exceed the
maximum permitted sound levels set forth below (except as may be
expressly modified or waived herein):
(a) Ten decibels (dBA) greater than the background noise level; or
(b) Sixty decibels (dBA) during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.,
or 55 decibels (dBA) during the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
Whichever standard is more restrictive shall be applicable.
(2) Commercial standards. At no point on the property line of the
receiving land use or at any point within the receiving land use
within any commercial district shall the sound-pressure level of any
continuous sound resulting from any operation exceed the
maximum permitted sound level set forth below (except as may be
expressly modified or waived herein).
(a) Ten decibels (dBA) greater than the background noise level, or
(b) Sixty-five decibels (dBA) during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. or 60 decibels (dBA) during the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
§ 190-1 RIDLEY CODE § 190-2
190:390
Whichever standard is more restrictive shall be applicable.
(3) Industrial standards. At no point on or beyond the boundary of any
receiving land use in the industrial district shall the sound-pressure
level of any continuous sound resulting from any operation exceed
the commercial standards cited above except as expressly modified
or waived herein.
(a) Hours of operation restricted. Between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. seven days a week and before 2:00 p.m. on
Sunday, no person shall operate or cause or permit to be
operated any business use in any industrial district, within 200
feet of any school, institution of learning, church, or other
public buildings or residential buildings, which produces noise
and odors which unreasonably interfere with the working of
said institutions or residential uses or which disturbs or unduly
annoys the persons inside such buildings.
(4) Correction of character of sound. For any source of sound which
emits a pure tone, the maximum sound level limits set forth in
Subsection B(1)(b) and B(2)(b) shall be reduced by five dBA. For
any source of sound which emits an impulsive sound, the
excursions of sound-pressure level shall not exceed 20 dBA over
the ambient sound pressure level, regardless of time of day or night
or receiving land use.
C. No person, firm or business entity shall possess, harbor or keep an
animal or bird which makes any noise continuously and/or persistently
for a period of 15 minutes or more, in such a manner as to disturb or
annoy any person at any time of the day or night, regardless of whether
the animal is situated upon private property.
D. The following are exempt from the prohibitions set forth in this section:
(1) The playing of a band or orchestra in any public park or in any
enclosed concert hall or auditorium or a parade that complies in
other respects with Township ordinances.
(2) Emergency activities of municipal, county, state or federal
government agencies and public utilities when they are seeking to
repair or demolish roads or buildings or to provide water,
electricity or other public utility services, and the public health,
safety and welfare are implicated.
(3) Warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles and vehicles
used for traffic safety purposes.
(4) Outdoor loudspeakers, public address systems and customary onsite
noise connected with commencement exercises of educational
institutions and with the actual performance of sporting events or
recreational activities authorized by educational institutions,
municipalities or nonprofit organizations.
§ 190-2 NOISE AND NUISANCES § 190-2
190:391
§ 190-3. Sound trucks and loudspeakers.
(5) Power lawn mowers and equipment and snowblowers, when
operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. (9:00 a.m. on Sundays and
government holidays) and 9:00 p.m.
(6) Devices used by government entities in the furtherance of
governmental duties.
(7) Farm animals on properties where agricultural uses are permitted
by zoning ordinances enacted by the Township.
(8) Noises made by animals or birds when a person is trespassing or
attempting to trespass upon private property where the animal or
bird is situated.
(9) Transportation noises emanating from the operation of trains,
airplanes and automobiles, except that automobile sound systems
and unmuffled vehicles shall not be exempt.
(10) Backup alarms on commercial vehicles when used between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
A. No person shall operate a sound truck or loudspeaker on the streets or
public places of the Township of Ridley without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the Township Zoning Officer. Such permit shall be for a
period of one day only, shall not be transferable, shall be limited to one
sound truck, and may not be extended as to the date it shall be used. No
permit shall be issued for the operation of a sound truck earlier than
8:00 a.m. or later than 8:00 p.m. of the prevailing local time.
B. Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee of
$100. The application for such permit shall be filed in duplicate with the
Zoning Officer and shall set forth the following information:
(1) Name and residential address of the applicant.
(2) Business address of the applicant.
(3) Name and address of the owner of the sound truck.
(4) Make and license number of the sound truck.
(5) Name and residential address of the person operating the sound
truck.
(6) Name and residential address of the person operating the sound
equipment on the sound truck.
(7) The purpose for which the sound truck will be used.
(8) The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck.
§ 190-2 RIDLEY CODE § 190-3
190:392
§ 190-4. Horns.
It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity to sound any horn or
warning device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except
when required by law or to give timely warning of impending danger to
persons driving other vehicles or to persons upon the street. No person
shall sound any horn or warning device which shall emit an unreasonably
loud or harsh sound or for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
§ 190-5. Construction, loading and unloading of vehicles and
landscaping and yard work.
It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity, or their agents or
employees owning or occupying any building or premises in the Township of
Ridley, to operate or permit to be operated any type of vehicle, machinery,
appliance, equipment or hand tool which emits noise beyond the boundary
of the property upon which said machinery, appliance, equipment or hand
tool is being operated or used between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
(9:00 a.m. on Sundays and national holidays) local time. When the vehicle,
machinery, appliance, equipment or hand tool is being used in conjunction
with agricultural activities, an emergency, snow removal, or repair of a
public utility such as a gas main, water main or electrical power line, this
section shall not apply.
§ 190-6. Nuisances to neighbors.
It shall be unlawful within the Township of Ridley for any person or business
entity to engage in any use of or activity upon property that, by reason of
odors, fumes, noise or dust, unreasonably interferes with the use, comfort
and enjoyment of a neighbor's property or endangers the health or safety of
the occupants of a neighboring property.
(9) The applicant shall attach a certification from an engineer that
amplifying equipment on the sound truck is regulated by decibels
in such a manner that sound emanating from the equipment will
not equal or exceed a level that is 15 decibels greater than the
(ambient) background noise level at a distance of 100 feet from the
sound truck.
(10) The applicant shall attach documents demonstrating that the sound
truck is covered by a policy of liability insurance in the amount of at
least $200,000 per occurrence, and demonstrating that the sound
truck has a current inspection sticker affixed by a facility
authorized by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to conduct
vehicle inspections.
C. After issuance of the permit, the Zoning Officer shall furnish one copy of
the permit to the permittee. The permit must be in possession of the
operator of the sound truck during such time that the sound-amplifying
equipment is in operation. The permit shall be promptly exhibited upon
request of any police officer of the Township of Ridley.
§ 190-3 NOISE AND NUISANCES § 190-7
190:393
§ 190-7. Enforcement, violations and penalties.
§ 190-8. Special relief.
A. Any Township law or code enforcement officer may issue an order
requiring the immediate abatement of any source of sound or other
nuisance in violation of this chapter. The owner or operator of the
subject property or equipment shall be notified of the violation upon
hand or certified mail delivery of the order, which shall specify the
nature, date and time of Code violation and shall set forth the date and
time by which the violation must be abated, which date and time shall
not be more than 72 hours from the time of notification. If a person or
entity does not comply with the abatement order upon its issuance
within the time specified in the order, a summary citation may be issued
for such violation.
B. Any person or business entity who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon summary conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution and, in default of
such fine and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 30 days. Each violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense, and each
day that a violation continues beyond the time limit set forth in the
abatement order shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
A. Any person or entity may request relief from the prohibitions of this
chapter by filing a written request with the Township Manager,
together with such information as the Township may reasonably require
to determine whether such relief is appropriate. The Manager shall
grant such relief only if the Manager concludes that the hardship to the
applicant if relief is not granted is substantially greater than the
prospective adverse impact upon the public health, safety and welfare if
relief is granted.
B. If the Manager determines that relief shall be granted under
Subsection A above, the Manager shall issue a permit specifying the
noise permitted, the hours and days authorized, and the duration of the
permit. The Manager may attach such other conditions as are
reasonably necessary in order to effectuate the purposes of this
chapter. The permit shall not be effective until the applicant agrees to
all conditions.
C. Noncompliance by the applicant with any condition of the permit shall
terminate the permit without further notice, and the applicant will
henceforth be subject to all provisions of this chapter.
§ 190-7 RIDLEY CODE § 190-8
190:394
Chapter 195
OUTDOOR CAFES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 325.
§ 195-1. Purpose and intent.
The outdoor cafe regulations as set forth in this chapter are designed to
permit those cafes in areas that they are appropriate and promote and
protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Specific purposes of
this legislation are:
§ 195-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OUTDOOR CAFE — Those exterior facilities adjacent to and part of the
establishments selling food and/or drink, entirely located on private
property, open to the elements except for a roof or awning and a wall, railing
or fence not exceeding 48 inches in height, such as commercial decks and
patios. Included in this definition is a seasonal conversion of an enclosed
structure by means of removal of walls and/or windows so as to render the
facility open to the elements in excess of 50% of the square foot area of all
vertical sides of the enclosed structure not abutting the main building of the
establishment.[Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 1847]
§ 195-3. Permit required; restrictions.
§ 195-4. Application for permit.
A. To preserve and enhance the character of neighborhoods through the
Township and to protect the adjacent residential areas.
B. To simplify administrative and strengthen enforcement procedures for
outdoor cafes that are effective, efficient and enforceable.
A. No outdoor cafe shall be allowed to operate at any outdoor area unless
a permit has been obtained from the Zoning Officer.
B. Any request for the use of such an area for such purposes shall be made
in writing to the Zoning Office in the form of a permit application.
A. Any request or application for a permit to operate an outdoor cafe shall
be made in the Zoning Office, in writing, on the application form
provided by the Zoning Officer.
§ 190-8 NOISE AND NUISANCES § 195-4
190:395
§ 195-5. Issuance of permit.
If the application complies with this chapter, the Zoning Officer shall issue
a permit strictly subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 195-6. Change in ownership.
The permit is personal to the applicant and any change or transfer of
ownership of the outdoor cafe shall terminate the permit and shall require
a new application and new permit in conformance with all the requirements
of this chapter.
§ 195-7. Inspections.
Acceptance of the permit by the applicant shall operate as a consent to
the health, fire, police and building officials of the Township to inspect the
outdoor cafe for continued compliance with the terms and conditions of this
chapter and any federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or regulation
affecting the same.
B. The request/application may, in the Zoning Officer's discretion, contain
the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
(2) Name, address and telephone number of the restaurant to be the
subject of the application;
(3) The days and hours for which the permit is requested;
(4) If alcoholic beverages are to be served, proof that the applicant has
received permission from the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board
for an extension of the retail license to cover additional premises;
(5) Three sets of a proposed layout plan prepared by a registered
engineer containing scale drawings clearly illustrating the number,
types of material, color and location of all tables, chairs, umbrellas
and other furnishings or fixtures intended to be located in the
outdoor cafe. Scale drawings shall also illustrate the following;
(a) The location of any doors leading from the eating
establishment to the outdoor cafe. Such doors may not be
obstructed in any manner.
(b) The location of the place where any food or drink is intended to
be prepared.
(c) Type and location of any proposed outdoor lighting fixtures.
(d) No outdoor cooking of any type is permitted.
§ 195-4 RIDLEY CODE § 195-8
190:396
§ 195-8. Revocation or suspension of permit.
Any permit issued hereunder is issued solely as a revocable permit which
shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the Zoning Officer for failure
of any permittee to comply with this chapter or for violation of any other
applicable federal, state, county or municipal law, regulation or ordinance.
Any permit issued hereunder is issued upon the express understanding that
the permittee obtains no property right hereunder, nor any interest in the
continuation of said permit.
§ 195-9. Appeal from denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
Appeals from the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit may be taken
to the Zoning Hearing Board by any aggrieved person within 30 days. Each
appeal shall refer to the specific relevant provision of this chapter, explain
the aggrieved person's position with respect to the determination being
appealed, and state the relief requested.
§ 195-10. Unlawful operation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor cafe after the
suspension or termination of the applicable permit.
§ 195-11. Maintenance of outdoor areas.
Each permittee is responsible for keeping the area of the outdoor cafe
free and clear of any debris or litter occasioned by the cafe. Areas must
be cleaned as needed and at the time the business is closed and at the
beginning of each business day but not later than 9:00 a.m. each day.
§ 195-12. Time of permit, renewal and fees.
All outdoor cafe permits shall be issued for the six-month period
commencing May 1 and ending October 31 of a particular year. Permits may
be renewed annually by the filing of an application in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The annual permit fee shall be $100.
§ 195-13. Rules, regulations and specifications.
An outdoor cafe authorized and operating pursuant to this chapter shall
comply with all the following rules and regulations and such other as may
be adopted from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners
of the Township of Ridley:
A. The outdoor cafe shall be operated and maintained in accordance with
the layout plan as finally approved.
B. No food served at such outdoor cafe shall be prepared or stored other
than in the interior of the eating establishment. [Amended
12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 1847]
C. No music may be played on the outdoor premises.
§ 195-8 NOISE AND NUISANCES § 195-13
190:397
§ 195-14. Violation and enforcement.
For each and every violation of this chapter, the violator, upon conviction by
the District Justice, shall be guilty of a summary offense and subject to a
fine of not more than $1,000; and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed
90 days.
Chapter 199
PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Picketing — See Ch. 213.
Police services — See Ch. 220.
Shows and special events — See Ch. 245.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 264.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 299.
§ 199-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAPTAIN OF POLICE — The Captain or Superintendent of Police of the
Township of Ridley.
PARADE — Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or
procession or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public
place in the Township.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 199-2. Permit required; exceptions.
D. The outdoor cafe can be open for business between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m. All patrons must vacate the outdoor cafe no later
than 11:30 p.m.
E. Noise shall be kept at such a level as to comply in all respects with the
provisions of the general Code of the Township.
A. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade
unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Captain of
Police.
B. Exceptions. This Chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Funeral processions.
(2) Wedding processions.
§ 195-13 RIDLEY CODE § 199-2
199:398
§ 199-3. Permit applications.
(3) Students going to and from school, classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities.
(4) A government agency acting within the scope of its functions.
(5) A nonprofit, Township-based youth organization.
A. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application
with the Captain of Police on forms provided by such officer.
B. Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the
Captain of Police not fewer than 30 days before the date on which it is
proposed to conduct the parade.
C. Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade.
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized or
responsible persons.
(3) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
(4) The route to be traveled or the area within the Township to be used
for the event, including the starting point and termination point.
(5) The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute such parade, the type of animals and a
description of the vehicles.
(6) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(7) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traveled.
(8) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
(9) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas.
(10) The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade.
(11) If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any
person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall
file with the Captain of Police a communication in writing from the
§ 199-2 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 199-3
199:399
§ 199-4. Standards for permit issuance.
person proposing to hold the parade authorizing the applicant to
apply for the permit on his/her behalf.
(12) Any additional information which the Captain of Police shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should be issued.
D. No license application will be considered or reviewed unless the
application has been completed in its entirety and is accompanied by
the requisite fee.
A. The Captain of Police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder
when, from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
(1) The conduct of the parade will not so substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of traffic within the Township of Ridley
on and contiguous to the proposed route so as to create a real and
present danger to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the Township of Ridley.
(2) The conduct of the parade will not create a real and present danger
to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township of
Ridley by preventing fire-fighting equipment, ambulance services,
rescue vehicles and/or police vehicles from being able to reach any
property in the Township of Ridley.
(3) The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances, police or fire services as to prevent
normal service to portions of the Township other than that to be
occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous
thereto.
(4) The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create an
unreasonable disturbance.
(5) The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en
route.
(6) The parade is not designed to be held purely for profit.
(7) The parade will not otherwise substantially interfere with or be a
substantial detriment to the general health, safety, and welfare of
the Township residents.
(8) No other parade is scheduled on the day of the requested parade.
(9) The applicant is in compliance with all state requirements
regarding parades on state highways.
§ 199-3 RIDLEY CODE § 199-4
199:400
§ 199-5. Application fee.95
The application for a license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee
as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 199-6. Time limit for decision; notice of disapproval.
The Captain of Police shall act upon the application for a parade permit
within 10 days after the filing thereof. If the Captain of Police disapproves
the application, he shall mail to the applicant, within 10 days after the filing
date, a notice of his action stating with specificity the reasons for his denial
of the permit. Said notice shall also advise the applicant of his/her right to
file an appeal and the procedure for doing so by providing a copy of § 199-7,
Appeals.
§ 199-7. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the Township Board of Commissioners. The appeal shall be taken
by sending a letter to the Township Manager requesting that the Board hear
an appeal of the decision to deny a parade permit. This letter must be sent
by certified mail or delivered to the Municipal Building of the Township
of Ridley at MacDade Boulevard and Morton Avenue, Folsom, PA 19033.
Any letter of appeal must be received within 10 days from the date on
which the applicant received notice of the denial of the application for a
parade permit. The Township Board of Commissioners shall then schedule a
hearing on or before the date of the next Township Board of Commissioners
meeting. The Board must render a decision within 10 days following the
date of the hearing.
§ 199-8. Alternate permits.
Where the Captain of Police, after applying the standards set forth in
§ 199-4 above, shall find that the application for issuance of a permit for
a parade on the date, at the time and over the route requested by the
application must be denied, he may, in addition to advising the applicant
of the denial of the application and right to appeal, also issue an alternate
permit which authorizes the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or
over a route different from that named by the application. The alternate
permit shall be sent to the applicant by regular mail, together with the letter
required by § 199-6 above. Whenever the Captain of Police shall issue an
alternate permit, the letter sent to the applicant, in addition to conforming
B. In the case of the approval of a permit, the Captain of Police may attach
such conditions regulating time, place and the manner in which the
event is conducted and such other conditions as will assure the general
health, safety and welfare of the Township residents and the
participants in the parade.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 199-4 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 199-8
199:401
to the requirements of § 199-6 above, shall also advise the applicant that, if
the applicant wishes to accept the alternate permit, the applicant must mail
or deliver a letter of acceptance to the Township Manager of the Township
of Ridley at MacDade Boulevard and Morton Avenue, Folsom, PA 19033,
and the Captain of Police. This letter must be received within 10 days after
receipt by the applicant of the letter sent to the applicant pursuant to
§ 199-6 above. The applicant shall also be advised that, unless the applicant
accepts the alternate permit within 10 days, the alternate permit will be
void and of no effect. Finally, the applicant shall also be advised that the
applicant may either accept the alternate permit or pursue an appeal of
the denial of a parade permit for the date, time and route requested by the
applicant by following the procedure set forth in § 199-7 above. An alternate
parade permit issued pursuant to this section shall be issued pursuant to
the standards set forth in § 199-4 above and, if accepted by the applicant in
the manner provided above, shall have the effect of a parade permit under
this chapter.
§ 199-9. Notice to officials.
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the Captain of Police
shall send a copy thereof to the following:
§ 199-10. Contents of permit.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
§ 199-11. Duties of permittee.
A. The Township Manager.
B. The Board of Commissioners.
C. The Township Solicitor.
D. The Fire Marshal.
E. The Superintendent of Public Works.
A. The starting and termination times.
B. The portions of the streets to be traveled that may be occupied by the
parade.
C. The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof.
D. Such other information as the Captain of Police shall find necessary to
the enforcement of this chapter.
E. The minimum and maximum speeds.
F. The maximum interval of space between the units of the parade.
§ 199-8 RIDLEY CODE § 199-11
199:402
§ 199-12. Suspension or revocation of license
The Captain of Police or his duly appointed agent shall have the right to
suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter for violations of one
or more of the regulations contained herein.
§ 199-13. Interference; parking on route.
§ 199-14. Violations and penalties.96
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default
of payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
A. A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws of the Township of Ridley and
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity
shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the
parade.
A. Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede
or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade issued a license
under this chapter.
B. Driving through parade. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the
vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons
are in motion and are conspicuously designed as a parade.
C. Parking on parade route. The Captain of Police shall have the authority,
when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of a route of
a parade. The Captain of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle
in violation thereof.
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 199-11 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 199-14
199:403
Chapter 202
PARKING, OFF-STREET
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance Y— See Ch. 224.
On-street parking and vehicles and traffic
generally — See Ch. 299.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 303.
Number of off-street parking spaces required
by use and zoning district — See Ch. 325.
§ 199-14 RIDLEY CODE § 199-14
199:404
ARTICLE I
Parking of Commercial Vehicles
[Adopted 8-18-1982 by Ord. No. 1533]
§ 202-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Includes trucks, tractors, trailers or tractortrailer
combinations or any other vehicle usable for commercial purposes
having the weight classification of Class 6 or higher as determined by its
registered gross weight or combination weight in pounds as set forth in
the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code 1976, as amended, 75 P.S. § 1916.
Commercial vehicles shall not include leisure or recreational vehicles.
DIRECT CONTROL — Either residency or occupancy of said real
estate.[Added 12-17-1986 by Ord. No. 1608]
PARKING — The leaving of such commercial vehicle unattended for a period
in excess of two hours or allowing another party to park such a vehicle
on private property for a period in excess of two hours. Where a party
has direct control over such private property, he shall be presumed to
have control over any vehicle so parked and shall be in violation of this
article whether or not he actually parked the vehicle himself.[Amended
12-17-1986 by Ord. No. 1608]
§ 202-2. Parking on private property prohibited; exceptions.
Except while loading or unloading or rendering requested services to
residents, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any commercial vehicle
upon private property whether in a driveway or other off-street area in any
residential zoning district to the Township. This prohibition shall not apply
to any vehicles serving Township or school or public utility purposes or to
contractors erecting or repairing buildings in the Township.
§ 202-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord. No.
1639; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment
of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which
a noncompliance or violation occurs or continues.
§ 202-1 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 202-3
199:405

ARTICLE II
Parking of Tractor Trailers
[Adopted 4-18-1984 by Ord. No. 1568]
§ 202-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRACTOR-TRAILER VEHICLE — Includes a truck, truck-tractor, trailer or
a tractor-trailer combination having the weight classification of Class 6 or
higher as determined by its registered gross weight or combination weight
in pounds as set forth in the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code of 1976, as
amended, 75 P.S. § 1916.
§ 202-5. Parking on private property prohibited; exceptions.
Except while loading or unloading or rendering requested services to
residents or commercial establishments, it shall be unlawful for any person
to park or allow to be parked any truck, truck-tractor, trailer or tractortrailer
combination upon private property or other off-street area in any
residential or commercial zoning district of the Township after 9:00 p.m.
and before 7:00 a.m. This prohibition shall not apply to any vehicles serving
Township, school or public utility purposes or where the contractors are
erecting or repairing buildings within the Township.
§ 202-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-26-1997 by Ord. No.
1775; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment
of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30
days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a noncompliance or violation occurs or continues. Second offenses,
in addition to the penalties listed above, shall be subject to the towing and
impoundment penalties listed in this article.
§ 202-7. Citation. [Added 11-26-1997 by Ord. No. 1775]
In the event a violation of § 202-5 is found to exist, a citation or other notice
of violation shall be issued. That citation or notice shall contain a notice
that if the same tractor-trailer operator or registered owner is found to be
in violation of § 202-5 a second time within a one-year period, the Township
shall have the authority to remove and impound, or to order the removal
and impounding of the vehicle without further notice.
§ 202-4 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 202-8
199:407
§ 202-8. Designation of approved storage garages. [Added
11-26-1997 by Ord. No. 1775]
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only by
"approved storage garages" that shall be designated from time to time by
the Township of Ridley.
§ 202-9. Payment of charges. [Added 11-26-1997 by Ord. No. 1775]
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle, or any other responsible party from liability for any
fine or penalty for the violation of the provision of this article for which the
vehicle was removed or impounded.
A. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the Township that it is
bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to
the Township as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles
against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the
garage keeper for the purpose of the towing or storage.
B. The approved storage garage shall submit to the Township its schedule
of fees under this article, and when the schedule is approved by the
Township, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage
garage; no different schedule of charges shall be charged or collected
from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under this
article by any approved storage garage. The Township of Ridley shall
delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage that makes
any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed or
impounded under this article.
C. Within 24 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under the
authority granted in this article, notice of the fact that such vehicle has
been impounded shall be sent by the Chief of Police to the owner of
record of such vehicle. Such notice shall designate the place from which
such vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding
and the location in which it is being impounded.
§ 202-8 RIDLEY CODE § 202-9
199:408
ARTICLE III
Common Parking Areas
[Adopted 8-17-1988 by Ord. No. 1631; amended 11-26-1997 by Ord.
No. 1775]
§ 202-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOUNDARY MARKINGS — The permanent affixing of lines through a
common parking area done in such a manner as to indicate which property
any corresponding parking area is a part thereof. To facilitate such
identification, the corresponding address or building number shall be
placed upon the section of the common parking area which is part of the
corresponding property.
COMMON PARKING AREAS — Any off-street parking area which
transcends property lines of more than two private properties.
§ 202-11. Required boundary markings.
Where common parking areas transcend property lines, each property
owner shall provide boundary markings to mark off the boundaries of their
property within the common parking area so as to indicate which parking
area is part of their property.
§ 202-12. Service of notice.
The Code Enforcement Officer or the designated official is hereby
authorized and directed to serve notice on any such owner that such
boundaries must be marked within a period of 30 days from the receipt
of such notice. Said notice shall also state that if the property owner fails
to comply with § 202-11 of this article, the Township will cause boundary
marking pursuant to § 202-11 of this article. Service of such notice may
be effected by personal service, by certified mail or, in any case that such
notice can not be served in either of said manners, by posting the same at a
conspicuous place on the premises.
§ 202-13. Marking by Township; collection of costs.
In default of the marking of such boundaries within the time set forth in
said notice, the Township may cause the same to be done and collect the
cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of such costs, in the manner
provided by law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 202-10 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 202-13
199:409

ARTICLE IV
Parking and Storage of Trailers97
[Adopted 10-26-1994 by Ord. No. 1724]
§ 202-14. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKED or STORED — The standing of a trailer on public or private
property for a period in excess of two hours, by any party who has direct
control over such trailer.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any property located in a district zoned residential
in the Township of Ridley.
RECREATIONAL TRAILER — A single- or multiple-axle vehicle mounted
on wheels or otherwise capable of being made mobile when attached to
a motor vehicle for the purpose of storing or transporting recreational
vehicles, including but not limited to boats, motorcycles, campers and
special purpose automobiles.
UTILITY TRAILER — A detachable trailer for hauling freight, household
and yard materials, or other personal property, having its forward end
supported by the rear of a truck or other motor vehicle.
§ 202-15. Parking and storage regulations.
A. No recreational or utility trailer shall be parked or stored on any street
or roadway within the Township.
B. Recreational or utility trailers may be parked or stored on private
property of the owner of such trailer in either a garage, rear yard or
driveway, provided that the trailer is set back a minimum of 10 feet
from the curb or paved edge of the street, if no curb exists.
C. No recreational or utility trailer shall be parked or stored in the front
yard of private property within the Township.
D. No recreational trailer over 30 feet or utility trailer over 20 feet in
length shall be stored on private property located within the Township.
E. All trailers and recreational vehicles shall be currently registered and,
where necessary, currently inspected. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 1808]
F. No more than one recreational trailer or boat may be parked or stored
outside on private property. [Added 7-27-2005 by Ord. No. 1885]
97.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 303, Vehicles, Storage of.
§ 202-14 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 202-16
199:411
§ 202-16. Removal of noncompliant trailers by owner or Township.
Any recreational or utility trailer parked or stored in violation of any
provision of this article shall be removed by the owner of the trailer or
occupier of said property after notice to do so, and in default thereof the
Township may cause the same to be done and collect the costs thereof,
together with a penalty of 10% of such costs, in the manner provided by law
for the collection of municipal claims or by action of assumpsit, or may seek
relief by bill in equity.
§ 202-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$1,000, together with the costs of prosecution, and, upon default in the
payment thereof, be sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
§ 202-16 RIDLEY CODE § 202-17
199:412
ARTICLE V
Front Yard Parking
[Adopted 2-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1748]
§ 202-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings indicated:
FRONT YARD — For any property zoned residential in the Township of
Ridley, that portion of the lot extending from the front of the structure to the
street line, excluding any driveways specifically intended for the parking of
motor vehicles. In the case of a corner lot, the yards extending along any
streets are front yards.
MOTOR VEHICLES — One or more automobiles, including vans, trucks and
motorcycles.
§ 202-19. Prohibited acts.
Parking in the front yard of any lot zoned residential in the Township of
Ridley is prohibited.
§ 202-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall park a motor vehicle in violation of this article shall,
upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution, and upon default
in the payment thereof be sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a period
not exceeding 30 days.
§ 202-18 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 202-20
199:413

ARTICLE VI
Portable Home Storage Units
[Added 7-27-2005 by Ord. No. 1885]
§ 202-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PORTABLE HOME STORAGE UNITS — Portable sheds (hereinafter referred
to as mobile storage containers) that are loaded with materials and placed
on a residential property for the purpose of storing materials.[Amended
5-25-2011 by Ord. No. 1973]
§ 202-22. Application/fee. [Amended 5-25-2011 by Ord. No. 1973]
Before placing a mobile storage container unit on his property, a person
must submit an application and receive a permit from the Township. An
insurance certificate providing liability insurance in the amount of $100,000
provided by the company supplying the mobile storage container must
accompany the application. There is a twenty-five-dollar fee for a thirty-day
permit. Applications can be requested from the Code Office.
§ 202-23. Duration.
Permits will be granted for a period of 30 days. At the expiration of the
thirty-day period, applicants may seek to extend their permits for an
additional 30 days by seeking an extension for cause from the Township
Manager. Extension of a permit will cost $25 for each 30 days granted.
§ 202-24. Location. [Amended 5-25-2011 by Ord. No. 1973]
Mobile storage container units are prohibited from being placed in streets
or the front yard of a property. Mobile storage container units must be
kept in the driveway of the property at the furthest accessible point from
the street. All locations must be paved off-street surfaces. The applicant
must obtain preapproval of the location by the Township Code Enforcement
Officer in the following situations:
§ 202-25. Number. [Amended 5-25-2011 by Ord. No. 1973]
Only one mobile storage container unit may be placed at any residential
property at one time.
A. If the property does not have a driveway;
B. If the location of the unit in the driveway is in the front yard of the
property;
C. If the property is a corner lot.
§ 202-21 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 202-26
199:415
§ 202-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-25-2011 by Ord. No.
1973]
Any person who shall place a mobile storage container unit in violation of
this article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 together with the costs of prosecution and,
upon default in the payment thereof. be sentenced to undergo imprisonment
for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 202-26 RIDLEY CODE § 202-26
199:416
Chapter 205
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Board — See Ch. 9, Art. VI.
Consumption of alcoholic beverages in
public — See Ch. 69.
Animals — See Ch. 77.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 113.
Loitering and curfew — Sea Ch. 176.
Noise and nuisances — See Ch. 190.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 271.
Tents — See Ch. 285.
§ 202-26 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 202-26
199:417

ARTICLE I
Hours for Public Parks and Playgrounds
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 95, Art. I, of the 1975 Code]
§ 205-1. Use during certain hours prohibited. [Amended 5-22-2002
by Ord. No. 1827]
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, visit or
play in or upon any public park or playground in the Township of Ridley
after dark until 7:00 a.m. of the following day. "After dark" is defined as
commencing 30 minutes after sunset or 30 minutes after any permitted
event on any given day.
§ 205-2. Violations and penalties.
§ 205-3. Exception.
The above time restrictions shall not be deemed to be operative during any
period of time that there is in actual progress on any such public park or
playground a properly supervised bazaar or block party.
A. Any minor violating the provisions of this article shall be dealt with in
accordance with the Juvenile Act.98
B. Any person who is not a juvenile and who violates the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a
period not to exceed 30 days. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
98.Editor's Note: See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 6301 et seq.
§ 205-1 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 205-3
199:419

ARTICLE II
Use of Municipal Playground
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 95, Art. II, of the 1975 Code]
§ 205-4. Use restrictions.
In order to provide a play area for the younger children of the Township of
Ridley without interference from older persons, no person over the age of
12 years may use the municipal playground located between Whitney Road
and Howard Road in the Township of Ridley.
§ 205-5. Posting of regulations.
The Superintendent of Highways is hereby directed to post the above
municipal playground with the limitation of use of said playground provided
by this article.
§ 205-6. Violations and penalties.
A. Any minor violating the provisions of this article shall be dealt with in
accordance with the Juvenile Act.99
B. Any person who is not a juvenile and who violates the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a
period not to exceed 30 days. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
99.Editor's Note: See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 6301 et seq.
§ 205-4 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 205-6
199:421

ARTICLE III
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 1674]
§ 205-7. Purpose.
All Township parks are primarily athletic fields, and the use of such fields
for athletics shall have priority over any other uses.
§ 205-8. Application for use of facilities. [Amended 5-28-2014 by
Ord. No. 2003100]
Written application for the use shall be made to the Parks and Recreation
Department and shall be signed by the applicant or the responsible officer
of an applying organization.
§ 205-9. Restrictions on use. [Amended 5-28-2014 by Ord. No.
2003]
In no case shall any property or facility be used by profit-making
organizations.
§ 205-10. Indemnification of Township; reimbursement of expenses.
The applicant for the use of any portion of Township buildings, including
but not limited to facilities, equipment or grounds of the Ridley Township
Department of Parks and Recreation, hereby agrees to indemnify and
forever save harmless the Ridley Township Department of Parks and
Recreation for all loss, liability, costs, expenses, claims, damages and
demands of every kind or nature whatsoever, both at law and in equity,
including personal injuries, death and property damages, and such
applicant agrees upon demand of the Ridley Township Department of Parks
and Recreation to pay for or reimburse the Department for any expenses of
any kind arising from damage to the Department or other property caused
by the applicant or any person or persons attending any function conducted
on Department premises by the applicant pursuant to the application.
§ 205-11. Fee schedule. [Amended 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2003]
The Schedule of Fees for facility use will be provided at the time of
application. Said fees will be adopted by resolution from time to time by the
Board of Commissioners.
§ 205-12. Use restricted to purpose applied for.
The use of any part or parts of facilities, equipment or grounds shall
be restricted to the purpose for which its use was permitted, and the
Department reserves the right to restrict and so supervise the use of the
100. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 205-7 as §
205-8 and for the repeal of former § 205-8, Cancellation policy.
§ 205-7 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 205-12
199:423
building and/or grounds as to carry into effect the provisions and intent of
these rules and regulations.
§ 205-13. Public safety controls. [Amended 5-28-2014 by Ord. No.
2003]
The applicant's proposed arrangements to ensure the safety of the public
and the persons covered under the permit and the prevention of damage
to public and private property shall be provided to the satisfaction of the
Director of Parks and Recreation.
§ 205-14. Use of tobacco and alcohol prohibited.
The use of tobacco in any form and the possession or use of intoxicating
beverages or liquor anywhere in or on the premises of any Department
property are prohibited.
§ 205-15. Use restricted to assigned facilities.
Persons attending meetings must confine themselves to the rooms and
corridors or grounds assigned to their use.
§ 205-16. Disorderly conduct prohibited. [Amended 5-28-2014 by
Ord. No. 2003]
Disorderly conduct pursuant to Pennsylvania law, 18 Pa. C.S.A. § 5503, is
prohibited and is punishable by ejection from the building or grounds.
§ 205-17. Hours of use.
The premises must be vacated on or before 12:00 midnight or dusk when no
lighting is provided.
§ 205-18. Recreation fields.
All rules and regulations relating to any facility use shall apply to the use of
recreation fields with the following additions:
A. Adequate supervision must be provided by the organization using the
facilities during its activity.
B. Cleanup of the area must be done at the conclusion of the day's activity.
C. The Department will not be responsible for the layout, lining or
maintenance of fields other than its normal maintenance programs.
D. Organizations using these facilities shall not erect thereon any
equipment unless approved by the Department.
§ 205-12 RIDLEY CODE § 205-19
199:424
§ 205-19. Insurance. [Amended 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2003]
Unless waived for good cause, the Department shall require the applicant
to furnish and shall receive from the applicant a certificate of liability
insurance with the following minimum requirements at the time of filing the
application:
§ 205-20. Approval by Board required. [Amended 5-28-2014 by Ord.
No. 2003]
All applications must be filed at least 14 days before the intended date
of use and are subject to the prior approval of the Director of Parks and
Recreation; and said Recreation Director further reserves the right at any
time to cancel any application, approval of which may have been given. If
the Director fails to approve or disapprove the application no later than
seven business days after the receipt of the application, then the application
shall be deemed to be approved; however, the Recreation Director may
request an extension of no more than 10 days to process the application if
he is unable to respond in the initial seven-day period. If the application is
disapproved and the permit is denied, the Recreation Director shall provide
written notice of the permit denial, together with the reasons for the denial
and notice of the appeal procedure indicated in this article.
§ 205-21. Appeals. [Amended 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2003]
An applicant may appeal to the Board of Commissioners from the denial of
a permit by filing a written notice within five days of denial of the permit.
The Board shall forthwith consider the appeal at a hearing at which the
applicant may be present. The Board may affirm or reverse the Recreation
Director's decision and may attach such conditions to the permit as will, in
its best judgment, protect the public safety and persons covered under the
permit, in the prevention from damage to public and/or private property.
§ 205-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 1808; 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2003]
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine and costs
shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each and every day
on which a person, firm or corporation shall be in violation of this article
shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Personal injury: per occurrence, $1,000,000; in the aggregate,
$3,000,000.
B. Damages to rental property: $300,000.
C. Medical expense (one person): $5,000.
§ 205-19 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 205-22
199:425

ARTICLE IV
Tobacco-Free Parks and Playgrounds
[Adopted 3-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2029]
§ 205-23. Purpose.
The Township's parks and recreational facilities will serve to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township of Ridley.
§ 205-24. Designated tobacco-free areas.
The areas of parks and playgrounds where children are present, picnic
areas, sports and athletic fields and playgrounds in the Township of Ridley
are designated tobacco-free, and the use of any tobacco product in any form
shall be prohibited hereafter.
§ 205-25. "Young Lungs at Play" signs; notification.
§ 205-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine and costs,
shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each and every day
on which a person, firm or corporation shall be in violation of this article
shall constitute a separate offense.
A. The Township of Ridley acknowledges that secondhand tobacco smoke
poses a threat to the health, safety and welfare of adults and minor
children; and
B. The United States Surgeon General has determined that there is no safe
level of exposure to tobacco smoke pollution; and
C. Secondhand tobacco smoke is responsible for over 50,000 deaths
among nonsmokers each year; and
D. Tobacco kills more Americans each year than alcohol, heroin, homicide,
and suicide, accidents, fire and AIDS combined; and
E. Eighty percent of smokers started smoking before the age of 18, and
the average initiation age is 12 years old; and
F. The Township of Ridley Board of Commissioners desires to discourage
tobacco use and promote health by making Township owned parks,
playgrounds and recreational fields tobacco-free zones.
A. Such signs will be posted delineating the tobacco free areas.
B. The community shall be notified of this article.
§ 205-23 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 205-26
199:427
Chapter 209
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions — See Ch. 81.
Handbills — See Ch. 147.
Loitering — See Ch. 176.
Noise — See Ch. 190.
Seasonal sales — See Ch. 228.
Secondhand materials — See Ch. 232.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 299.
§ 209-1. License required to sell.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to sell
or offer for sale within the Township of Ridley, as hawker, peddler, transient
merchant or agent, any fruits, groceries, beverages, garden or farm or dairy
products, ice cream or ice cream products or any other form of domestic
goods, wares or merchandise without having first obtained a license from
the Secretary of the Township of Ridley to do so, upon an application form
to be filed by such person, firm or corporation and the paying of a license
fee as hereinafter provided.
§ 209-2. License required to use vehicle or public places.
§ 209-3. License required to sell or solicit orders for printed matter;
exceptions.
No person, firm or corporation shall sell or offer for sale upon the streets
any printed material, nor solicit orders therefor from door to door, within
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation,
whether as an owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident
of the Township of Ridley or not, who engages in the business or selling
and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the Township of
Ridley, to, in furtherance of such purpose, hire, lease, use or occupy any
vehicle, tractor, trailer, tent, railroad boxcar or boat or any street, road
or alley within the Township of Ridley for the exhibition, display, lease
or sale of such goods, wares or merchandise, either privately, publicly
or by auction, without having first obtained a license from the Secretary
of the Township of Ridley to do so, upon an application form to be filed
by such person, firm or corporation and the paying of a license fee as
hereinafter provided.
B. The person, firm or corporation who engages in such business shall not
be relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter by
reason of said vehicle, tractor, trailer, tent, railroad boxcar or boat
being an adjunct to or part of any established business.
§ 205-26 RIDLEY CODE § 209-3
199:428
the Township of Ridley, without having first obtained a license from the
Secretary of the Township of Ridley to do so, upon an application form to be
filed by such person, firm or corporation and the paying of a license fee as
hereinafter provided. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply
to any religious sect whose members sell books or magazines on the subject
of religion, nor to the sale of newspapers on the streets.
§ 209-4. Fees; expiration. [Amended 8-20-1980 by Ord. No. 1495;
8-26-1998 by Ord. No. 1790; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
§ 209-5. Noise prohibited.101
It shall be unlawful for any such hawker, peddler, transient merchant or
agent, consignee or employee to sound any bell, siren, horn, music-playing
machine or noisemaking device whatsoever, provided that nothing herein
contained shall prevent such person from sounding the horn on any truck or
automobile for the sole purpose of providing for traffic safety.
§ 209-6. Application information; license card; hours. [Amended
6-17-1981 by Ord. No. 1522; 11-17-2004 by Ord. No. 1872]
A. The license fee for the license required under the terms of this chapter
is hereby fixed at a sum for a thirty-day period as set forth from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. The thirty-day
license period can be extended in the discretion of the Township
Manager for cause shown. Such licenses shall not be transferable from
person to person nor from one type of vehicle or structure to another.
[Amended 12-29-2004 by Ord. No. 1874]
B. In the event that any such licensee has more than one vehicle, tractor,
trailer, tent, railroad boxcar or boat, upon the payment of the license
fee as herein above set forth, an additional fee per year as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners shall be charged
for each additional vehicle, tractor, trailer, tent, railroad boxcar or boat.
C. In the event that any such licensee has more than one individual
engaging in peddling and soliciting as defined under this chapter, an
additional fee per individual as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners shall be charged for each additional individual
operating under the primary license.
A. The applicant for such license shall give his name, age, occupation,
address, accurate personal description, the length of time the applicant
plans to engage in such activity, and shall submit a clearance result
from a completed Pennsylvania State Police Request for Criminal
Record Check. The applicant must also include a sample or full
description of the article to be sold which must be submitted for
inspection. If such license shall be granted, the Township Secretary
shall issue to the licensee a card setting forth the name, age,
101. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 190, Noise and Nuisances.
§ 209-3 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS § 209-6
199:429
§ 209-7. Inspection of products. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
The products offered for sale by any such licensee shall be subject to
inspection by any peace officer or other official of the Township of Ridley. In
the event that such peace officer or other official of the Township of Ridley
determines that in his or their judgment the sale of such products would be
injurious to the health, safety or morals of the residents of the Township of
Ridley or is contrary to the provisions of any ordinance or health regulation
of the Township of Ridley, then the said licensee shall be prohibited from
occupation, address, and description of the licensee and the products
for sale, and the following statement shall be prominently listed on the
license: “The Township of Ridley is not responsible for the products
sold nor is this solicitor affiliated in any way with the Township of
Ridley,” and such card must be carried by such licensee when offering
goods, wares, merchandise or printed material and must be shown
upon request to any police officer or any other official of the Township
of Ridley. Such license shall be limited to the solicitation for sale and the
sale of goods, wares, merchandise or printed material during daylight
hours only. Therefore, as to the herein described license, solicitation for
sale and the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or printed material will
only take place between the period of time as follows: 9:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m. [Amended 7-23-2008 by Ord. No. 1941; 6-22-2011 by Ord.
No. 1975]
B. Upon receiving an application for a license, the Police Department shall
review the application and investigate the applicant. If the investigation
indicates that the granting of such license would or might be injurious
to the public interest or to the public health, safety or morals of the
citizenry, the Township Manager shall have the authority to refuse to
issue the license. An application for a license may also be denied or
revoked for the following reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application or previous applications.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of
the activities conducted under the license.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conducting door-to-door activities in an unlawful manner or in such
a manner that constitutes a breach of the peace.
C. A certificate of insurance acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be filed with the Township of Ridley prior to the issuance of a
license. These certificates shall provide a provision that coverages
afforded under the policy will not be canceled until at least 15 days'
prior written notice has been given to the Township of Ridley. [Added
7-23-2008 by Ord. No. 1941]
§ 209-6 RIDLEY CODE § 209-7
199:430
selling such prohibited goods, wares, merchandise or printed material, and
if such goods, wares, merchandise or printed material is continued to be
sold thereafter, then in such event any such sale shall be deemed to have
been made as though no license had been issued to the said licensee and
shall subject the said licensee to the penalty prescribed in § 209-10.
§ 209-8. Exemption. [Amended 11-17-2004 by Ord. No. 1872]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following persons:
§ 209-9. Retail sales from vehicles on private property prohibited.
[Added 3-27-1991 by Ord. No. 1672]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation, whether
as an owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of Ridley
Township or not, to engage in the business or selling and delivery of retail
goods, wares and merchandise within the Township of Ridley from a vehicle
on private property.
§ 209-10. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable for a fine not exceeding $300 in accordance with
53 P.S. § 57901. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Chapter 213
PICKETING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 113.
Handbills — See Ch. 147.
Loitering — See Ch. 176.
Noise — See Ch. 190.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 199.
Police services — See Ch. 220.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 264.
A. Any charitable, religious or philanthropic organization whose proceeds
are applied to its cause.
B. Any school, political or civic organization or service club whose
principal office is located in the Township.
§ 209-7 PICKETING § 213-1
213:431
§ 213-1. Legislative intent and purpose.
It is hereby determined that picketing, as defined by this chapter, can
potentially be an unwarranted nuisance to the citizens of the Township,
particularly where there is the possibility of danger to public health and
safety. While such activity is a necessary and a protected form of expression,
it is incumbent upon the Township to protect the citizens and their private
property against overzealous and potentially dangerous activity. With these
goals in mind, the Township is adopting this chapter to require a permit
prior to any picketing in industrial and commercial areas and to prohibit
picketing in residential areas.
§ 213-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL AREA — Any district within the Township of Ridley which is
zoned Commercial C-1 or Commercial C-2.
INDUSTRIAL AREA — Any district within the Township of Ridley which is
zoned Industrial.
PERMIT — A license granted upon adherence to the procedures and
standards contained in this chapter, which specifically authorizes picketing
with minimal time and place restrictions as shall be stated therein.
PICKETING — Standing, walking or marching on any public street, sidewalk
or any other public place where persons may lawfully congregate by one or
more persons for the purpose of:
RESIDENTIAL AREA — Any region within the Township of Ridley which is
zoned A, B or C Residential.
§ 213-3. Picketing in industrial and commercial areas.
Persuading other persons to cease patronizing, contracting with,
employing or conducting business in any person or group; or
A.
Publicizing or communicating information regarding the existence,
facts or merits of a labor dispute or other controversy.
B.
A. In industrial and commercial areas, picketing is permissible only if a
permit has been obtained from the Captain of Police.
B. Permit process.
(1) A person seeking issuance of a picketing permit shall file an
application with the Captain of Police on forms provided by such
officer.
(2) Filing period. An application for a picketing permit shall be filed
with the Captain of Police not fewer than three days before the date
on which it is proposed to picket.
§ 213-1 RIDLEY CODE § 213-3
213:432
§ 213-4. Standards for permit issuance.
C. Contents. The application for a picketing permit shall set forth the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the picketing.
(2) If the picketing is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by,
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized or
responsible persons.
(3) The date when the picketing is to be conducted.
(4) The area within the Township to be used for the picketing.
(5) The approximate number of persons who will constitute such
picketing.
(6) The hours when such picketing will start and terminate.
(7) Any additional information which the Captain of Police shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should be issued.
D. No license application will be considered or reviewed unless the
application has been completed in it entirety and is accompanied by the
requisite fee.
A. The Captain of Police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder
when, from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
(1) The conduct of the picketing will not so substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of traffic within the Township of Ridley
on and contiguous to the proposed area of picketing so as to create
a real and present danger to the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Township of Ridley.
(2) The conduct of the picketing will not create a real and present
danger to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Township of Ridley by preventing fire-fighting equipment,
ambulance services, rescue vehicles and/or police vehicles from
being able to reach any property in the Township of Ridley.
(3) The conduct of the picketing is not reasonably likely to cause injury
to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create
an unreasonable disturbance.
(4) No other picketing is scheduled on the same day and at the same
site as the requested picketing.
§ 213-3 PICKETING § 213-4
213:433
§ 213-5. Application fee.102
The application for said permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 213-6. Time limit for decision; notice of disapproval.
The Captain of Police shall act upon the application for a picketing permit
within 48 hours after the filing thereof. If the Captain of Police disapproves
the application, he shall notify the applicant, within 48 hours after the filing
date of his action. A written explanation stating with specificity the reasons
for his denial of the permit will follow shortly thereafter. Said notice shall
also advise the applicant of his/her right to file an appeal and the procedure
for doing so by providing a copy of § 213-7, Appeals.
§ 213-7. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a picketing
permit to the Township Board of Commissioners. The appeal shall be taken
by sending a letter to the Township Manager requesting that the Board
hear an appeal of the decision to deny a picketing permit. This letter must
be sent by certified mail or delivered to the Municipal Building of the
Township of Ridley at MacDade Boulevard and Morton Avenue, Folsom,
PA 19033. Any letter of appeal must be received within 10 days from the
date on which the applicant received notice of the denial of the application
for a picketing permit. The Township Board of Commissioners shall then
schedule a hearing on or before the date of the next Township Board of
Commissioners meeting. The Board must render a decision within 48 hours
following the date of the hearing.
§ 213-8. Alternate permits.
Where the Captain of Police, after applying the standards set forth in
§ 213-4 above, shall find that the application for issuance of a permit for
picketing on the date, at the time and at the site requested by the
application must be denied, he may, in addition to advising the applicant
of the denial of the application and right to appeal, also issue an alternate
permit which authorizes the conduct of the picketing on a date, at a time
or in an area different from that named by the application. The alternate
permit shall be sent to the applicant by regular mail, together with the letter
required by § 213-6 above. Whenever the Captain of Police shall issue an
alternate permit, the letter sent to the applicant, in addition to conforming
B. In the case of the approval of a permit, the Captain of Police may attach
such conditions regulating time, place, and the manner in which the
event is conducted and such other conditions as will assure the general
health, safety and welfare of the Township residents and the
participants in the picketing.
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 213-4 RIDLEY CODE § 213-8
213:434
to the requirements of § 213-6 above, shall also advise the applicant that,
if the applicant wishes to accept the alternate permit, the applicant must
contact the Township Manager within 24 hours and communicate the
acceptance. The applicant shall also be advised that, unless the applicant
accepts the alternate permit within 24 hours, the alternate permit will be
void and of no effect. Finally, the applicant shall also be advised that the
applicant may either accept the alternate permit or pursue an appeal of the
denial of a picketing permit for the date, time and route requested by the
applicant by following the procedure set forth in § 213-7 above. An alternate
picketing permit issued pursuant to this section shall be issued pursuant to
the standards set forth in § 213-4 above and, if accepted by the applicant
in the manner provided above, shall have the effect of a picketing permit
under this chapter.
§ 213-9. Notice to officials.
Immediately upon the issuance of a picketing permit, the Captain of Police
shall send a copy thereof to the following:
§ 213-10. Contents of permit.
Each picketing permit shall state the following information:
§ 213-11. Duties of permittee.
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws of the Township of Ridley and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 213-12. Suspension or revocation of license.
The Captain of Police or his duly appointed agent shall have the right to
suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter for violations of one
or more of the regulations contained herein.
A. The Township Manager.
B. The Board of Commissioners.
C. The Township Solicitor.
D. The Fire Marshal.
E. The Superintendent of Public Works.
A. The starting and termination times.
B. The area authorized to be picketed.
C. The maximum number of participants in the picketing.
D. Such other information as the Captain of Police shall find necessary to
the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 213-8 PICKETING § 213-13
213:435
§ 213-13. Interference with picketing.
No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with
any picketing or with any person participating in picketing pursuant to a
license issued under this chapter.
§ 213-14. Violations and penalties.103
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default
of payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Chapter 216
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Licensing of plumbers — See Ch. 173, Art. II.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 181.
Sewer connections — See Ch. 237, Art. IV.
§ 216-1. Adoption of code by reference. [Amended 12-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 1917; 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1960]
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of
Code Enforcement of Ridley Township, being marked and designated as the
International Plumbing Code, 2009 edition, including Appendix Chapters B,
C, D, E, F, and G, as published by the International Code Council, be and
is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of Ridley Township, in the State
of Pennsylvania, regulating and governing the design construction, quality
of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said Plumbing Code on file in the Office of Code Enforcement are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 216-2 of this chapter.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 213-13 RIDLEY CODE § 216-2
213:436
§ 216-2. Revisions. [Amended 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1960]
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Ridley Township
Section 106.6.2 Fee Schedule, shall read "A schedule adopted
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners."
Section 106.6.3 Fee Refunds, is amended to provide that a
request to refund fees be made to the Board of
Commissioners.
Section 108.4 Violation Penalties, is completed by inserting
the words "summary offense" in the space
entitled "specify offense," inserting words
"$1,000" in the space entitled "amount," and
inserting the words "30 days" in the space
entitled "number of days."
Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders, is completed by inserting
the words "250" in the first space entitled
"amount" and inserting the words "$1,000" in
the second space entitled "amount."
Section 109 Means of Appeal, is deleted. A substitute
procedure is adopted by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.
Section 305.6.1 Sewer depth, is completed by inserting the
words "30" in the first space entitled "number"
and inserting the words "12" in the second
space entitled "number."
Section 904.1 Roof Extension, is completed by inserting the
words "12" in the space entitled "number."
§ 216-3. Effect on pending action.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Plumbing Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 216-2 of this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 216-2 PICKETING § 216-3
213:437
Chapter 220
POLICE SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Response to false alarms — See Ch. 66.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 113.
Hazardous materials cleanup fees — See Ch.
151.
Ticket lines for special events — See Ch. 176,
Art. II.
Teen entertainment clubs — See Ch. 176, Art.
III.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 199.
Picketing — See Ch. 213.
Shows and special events — See Ch. 245.
§ 216-3 RIDLEY CODE § 216-3
220:438
ARTICLE I
Business and Industry License
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 105 of the 1975 Code]
§ 220-1. License required.
A license is hereby required from the operators of all supermarkets,
shopping centers, drive-in moving-picture establishments, publicly operated
swimming pools and other places of business and industry.
§ 220-2. Basis for fee. [Amended 5-18-1983 by Ord. No. 1553]
The fee for said license shall be based upon a reasonable estimate of the
number of policemen which, in the opinion of the Police Committee of the
Township of Ridley, are necessary to protect the public safety at, near or on
the licensed premises, at the rate of $15 per man hour.
§ 220-3. License term; renewal.
The license so issued shall be for a period of 30 days and shall be renewable
upon application to the Township Secretary and upon payment of the license
fee for the license for the ensuing thirty-day period.
§ 220-4. Survey; notice to comply.
The Police Committee of the Township of Ridley shall make a survey in
order to determine the reasonable estimate of the number of policemen
necessary to protect the public at, near or on any supermarket, shopping
center, drive-in moving-picture establishment, publicly operated swimming
pool and other place of business and industry, and the Township Secretary
shall immediately notify such private business enterprise of the requirement
to obtain such license and the cost thereof.
§ 220-5. Time limit for obtaining license.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate any supermarket, shopping
center, drive-in moving-picture establishment, publicly operated swimming
pool or other place of business and industry, after having received the notice
set forth in § 220-4 of this article, without having obtained a license so to do
within 24 hours after such notice.
§ 220-6. Stationing of policemen.
No police officer of the Township of Ridley shall station himself, in uniform,
at, by or near any supermarket, shopping center, drive-in moving-picture
establishment, publicly operated swimming pool or other place of business
and industry unless he shall be directed so to do by the Captain of Police.
§ 220-1 POLICE SERVICES § 220-7
220:439
§ 220-7. Record of assignments; payment for services.
The Captain of Police shall keep and maintain a record of his assignments
of police officers to such licensed premises and shall certify the same to
the Police Committee at least once monthly, and upon approval of such
certification by the Police Committee, an order shall be issued to the
Township Treasurer to pay the said police officers from the license fee so
collected.
§ 220-7 RIDLEY CODE § 220-7
220:440
ARTICLE II
Recovery of Costs
[Adopted 7-26-1995 by Ord. No. 1740]
§ 220-8. Purpose; intent.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Ridley finds and
determines:
§ 220-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — A person, persons, corporation or other entity who is (are) the
comprising record owner or owners of any land or building.
POLICE SERVICE COST — An amount fixed by the Township Commissioners
to cover estimated compensation of officers for amount of time normally
spent in responding to a call or otherwise maintaining order and public
peace, appropriate administrative costs, medical treatment to injured
officers and the cost of repairing damaged Township equipment or property.
A. That certain private properties require a disproportionate amount of
police service, with many calls requiring response to maintain order
and public peace and to stop public disturbances. These excess calls
result in less police personnel and resources available for other
locations, emergencies and duties in the Township, and extraordinary
police service at such properties puts a disproportionate and unfair
burden upon the citizens and taxpayers of the Township.
B. That owners and/or rental agents in charge of private properties
requiring excessive police attention derive a benefit from such police
service.
C. That owners and/or rental agents in charge of such private properties
have a responsibility to manage their properties to minimize required
police service to maintain order and public peace, and to thus minimize
the burden upon citizens and taxpayers of the Township and to promote
the health, safety and welfare of the public in general.
D. That owners and/or rental agents in charge of such private properties
can minimize required police service to maintain order, public peace
and to stop public disturbances by diligent and strict management and
regulation of their properties.
E. That assessment of costs as provided in this article is reasonable and
will have a deterrent effect and encourage more responsible
management of such properties. It is not the intent of this article to
discourage or suppress requests for police service, but rather to
encourage and stimulate diligent and strict management and regulation
of private property by owners and/or rental agents in charge.
§ 220-8 POLICE SERVICES § 220-9
220:441
This amount shall be fixed from time to time by resolution and shall be
based upon an average cost for a typical police response.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land or building, including single and
multifamily dwellings and commercial and industrial buildings, not owned
by a public entity.
PUBLIC DISTURBANCES — Any party, gathering, event or disturbance
involving disorderly conduct as described by the Pennsylvania Statutes.104
PUBLIC ENTITY — Any Federal, State or Local Government or School
District or agency or authority created and organized thereby.
§ 220-10. Payment of costs; excluded responses.
Every owner of and/or rental agent with responsibility to manage private
property within the Township is required to pay police service costs to
maintain order and public peace at such private property for each response
by the police in excess of one response per thirty-day period. Such amount
shall be fixed by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Provided,
however, that police service in connection with crimes against residents
and/or property by nonresidents, invited guests or otherwise lawful
occupants of the private property shall not be considered responses for
purposes of this article. Provided further, the police service in connection
with spousal abuse or abuse of children by parents, or service in connection
with crimes classified as misdemeanors or felonies under the Pennsylvania
Crimes Code shall not be considered responses for purposes of this article.
§ 220-11. Notice to owner and/or rental agent.
The Captain of Police or other duly authorized agent of the Township
shall notify the owner of and/or rental agent with responsibility to manage
private property that a response has been made to such property to
maintain order or public peace. Such notice shall be given by regular mail
to the last known address of such owner and/or rental agent. Provided,
however, that an owner and/or rental agent with responsibility to manage
private property shall be required to pay these service costs in accordance
with § 220-10 of this article whether or not such a notice has been given.
§ 220-12. Billing.
Police service costs due in accordance with § 220-10 hereof shall be billed
to the owner and/or rental agent with responsibility to manage private
property by the Township Secretary or her duly authorized agent and shall
be due and payable within 30 days of such billing.
§ 220-13. Failure to pay.
Unpaid police service costs may be collected by civil action by the Township
against the owner and/or rental agent with responsibility to manage private
104. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 113, Disorderly Conduct.
§ 220-9 RIDLEY CODE § 220-13
220:442
property and/or may be imposed or assessed such private property as a
municipal claim under the Act of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, as amended (53
P.S. § 7101). In either event, a penalty of 10% and interest at the rate of 10%
per annum shall be added and collected as provided by law.
§ 220-13 POLICE SERVICES § 220-13
220:443
Chapter 224
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 88.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 95.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Storage of firewood — See Ch. 140, Art. III.
Health Code — See Ch. 155.
Landscaping — See Ch. 168.
Noise and nuisances — See Ch. 190.
Off-street parking — See Ch. 202.
Rental dwelling units — See Ch. 225.
Solid waste — See Ch. 253.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 264.
Trees — See Ch. 290.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 303.
Walls and fences — See Ch. 310.
§ 224-1. Adoption of code by reference. [Amended 12-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 1967]
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of
Code Enforcement of the Township of Ridley, being marked and designated
as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, as published
by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Township of Ridley, in the State of Pennsylvania,
for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and
the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy
and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the Township of
Ridley are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in § 224-2 of this chapter.
§ 224-2. Revisions. [Amended 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1967]
A. Section 101.1, insert: Township of Ridley.
B. Section 103.5, insert: fee schedule shall read "a schedule adopted by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners."
C. Section 302.4, insert: six inches.
D. Section 304.14, delete "during the period from (DATE) to (DATE)" and
insert "at all times."
§ 220-13 RIDLEY CODE § 224-2
220:444
§ 224-3. Effect on pending action.
Nothing in this chapter hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit
or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any
act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in § 224-2 of this chapter, nor
shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired of
affected by this chapter.
E. Section 602.3, delete "during the period from (DATE) to (DATE)."
F. Section 602.4, delete "during the period from (DATE) to (DATE)" and
insert "sufficient to" and change 65° to 68° F.
(1) Section 106.4 is changed to read: [Added 1-27-2016 by Ord. No.
2026]
VIOLATION PENALTIES
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fails to
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall
be fined not more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
G. Add the following section: [Added 11-16-2011 by Ord. No. 1980105]
302.10. Rear yard clotheslines.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to hang or place clothes,
linens or other material on the outside front and side yards of
any property in the Township or otherwise left in such a way as
to be exposed to public view including window sills, balconies
and railings.
B. All clothing items, linens or other materials if placed outside
must be confined to the rear of the property on outdoor
clotheslines or other outdoor clothes drying or airing designated
materials.
H. Section 107-1.1. Notice in case of foreclosure. Whenever a bank,
mortgage company or other lending institution forecloses on a property,
that entity shall notify the Township within 30 days of the foreclosure of
its identity, address and phone number. [Added 2-25-2015 by Ord.
No. 2018]
105. Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance provided as follows: "Any person who shall
violate any of the provisions of the ordinance shall upon conviction pay a fine not to
exceed $100 plus court costs for each offense."
§ 224-2 POLICE SERVICES § 224-3
220:445
Chapter 225
RENTAL DWELLING UNITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of apartment buildings — See Ch.
95, Art. II.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 224.
§ 225-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the public health,
safety and welfare of residents within the Township and to establish the
obligations of both owners and tenants of rental units within the
municipality to maintain the quality of rental units by compliance with the
provisions of this article and other applicable regulations of the Township of
Ridley.
§ 225-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
APARTMENT — A building containing two or more dwelling units such as a
duplex, quadraplex, or multiplex, whether having independent or common
means of egress, including common areas.
CERTIFICATE OF USE — A statement signed by the Director of Rental
Properties setting forth that the use of a building or structure legally
complies with the applicable codes and regulations and that the same may
be used for the purposes stated therein.
CODE — Any code, ordinance and/or regulation adopted or enacted by the
Township.
DIRECTOR OF RENTAL PROPERTIES — The Director of Rental Properties
and/or a duly authorized agent of the Department of Code Enforcement or
other duly authorized representative of the Township.
DUPLEX — Consists of two dwelling units rented, leased or let out.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons functioning as a family, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
A single-family dwelling and a condominium unit shall be considered a
dwelling unit.
FAMILY — Two or more persons living together as a single nonprofit
housekeeping unit and doing their cooking on the premises, excluding,
§ 224-3 RIDLEY CODE § 225-2
220:446
however, occupants of a club, fraternity house, lodge, dormitory, rooming
house, or nursing home which is not owned by the individuals.
LANDLORD — Owner, manager, agent or other responsible person in
control of the rental or leased property(s).
MULTIUNIT — Consists of five or more dwelling units rented, leased or let
out.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Ridley located within the County of
Delaware, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PROPERTY — Consists of land, buildings, structures and other
improvements for the use of operating a dwelling unit(s).
QUADRAPLEX — Consists of four dwelling units rented, leased or let out.
§ 225-3. Issuance of certificates of use.
A. No person, firm or corporation owning, managing, conducting and/or
operating a dwelling unit(s) shall rent, lease, let out or permit the same
to be occupied without first securing the following:
(1) An annual certificate of use for each occupied dwelling unit issued
pursuant to this chapter and other applicable ordinances,
regulations and/or rules enacted by the Township.
(2) A certificate of use for every vacant dwelling unit issued pursuant
to this chapter and other applicable ordinances, regulations, and/or
enacted by this Township.
B. The Director of Rental Properties and/or his agent(s) are hereby
authorized and directed to process all applications for certificates of
use and, prior to the issuance of same, to inspect the dwelling unit to
determine that all of the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable ordinances, regulations and/or rules enacted by this
municipality are met.
C. Fees shall be as follows:
(1) All certificate of use fees, whether annual or upon turnover, shall
be:
(a) One hundred dollars for a single-family dwelling.
(b) Fifty dollars for every other dwelling unit.
(2) If a dwelling unit requires a reinspection due to a failure to pass at
the initial inspection, each additional inspection will cost $50. If the
inspector makes a specific determination that the failure of the
initial or any subsequent inspection was due to the landlords'
responsibility then the landlord shall be prohibited from charging
the tenant for the cost of the reinspection.
§ 225-2 POLICE SERVICES § 225-3
220:447
§ 225-4. Inspection and access to dwelling units.
§ 225-5. Right of entry for repairs.
At reasonable times, every occupant of a rented, leased or let out dwelling
unit shall grant to the landlord or his agents/employees free access for
the purpose of making repairs or alterations to comply with Township
ordinances.
§ 225-6. Access for law enforcement persons.
All information required to be procured and kept pursuant to this chapter
shall be provided to any federal, state or local sworn law enforcement
officer having the lawful power to arrest, upon demand of the officer and
a representation by said officer, that a reasonable suspicion exists that
such information is relevant to a then pending inquiry or investigation.
(3) The Township shall waive any certificate of use turnover fee when
such inspection is made within three months of the annual
inspection.
D. Fees must be paid when applying for the certificate of use or the
inspection.
E. The landlord of any dwelling unit which has been rented, leased, let out
or rerented during any calendar year shall, on or before February 15 of
the following year, file a list with the Code Department setting forth the
total number of units, both occupied and unoccupied, as of December
31 of the reporting year and shall include the names of the tenants
thereof.
F. A new certificate of use shall be required whenever there is a change in
ownership of the property and/or whenever there is a change of
lessee(s).
A. Upon display of proper identification, the Code Enforcement Officer is
authorized to enter, examine and survey the interior of such units on
weekdays between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. for routine inspections or at
such time as may be necessary in an emergency or to verify a violation
of any Township codes and/or regulations. If such entry is refused, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall have recourse to every remedy
provided by law to secure entry, including, but not limited to,
administrative search warrants.
B. The Director of Rental Properties and/or his agent(s) are authorized to
make annual inspections of both the interior and exterior and/or
common areas.
C. Complaints will be followed up with an inspection.
D. The dwelling unit(s) shall be inspected upon change of ownership and/
or lessee.
§ 225-3 RIDLEY CODE § 225-6
220:448
Nothing in this requirement shall be construed as giving any such officer
any greater right or license to enter a dwelling unit or invade privacy than
the officer shall otherwise possess as a matter of common law, probable
cause, constitutional law, statutory right or warrant.
§ 225-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity who violates any
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 plus costs of prosecution and, in default
of payment of such fine and costs, shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 225-8. Injunction; other court action.
In addition to all other remedies and penalties provided by this chapter
and other ordinances, the Township Solicitor may bring suit in a court
of competent jurisdiction to seek an injunction or other appropriate relief
to halt any violation of this chapter. Such action may include seeking a
temporary restraining order or temporary injunction and other appropriate
temporary relief. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to restrict a suit
for damages on behalf of the Township or on behalf of any other person or
entity.
Chapter 228
SALES, SEASONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 209. Use of sidewalks — See Ch. 264.
§ 225-6 POLICE SERVICES § 225-8
220:449

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 11-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1636]
§ 228-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — A natural person, firm, association, corporation or
partnership.
SEASONAL SALES —
Any temporary business of selling and/or delivery of goods,
merchandise or services by any person, as defined herein, whether
as owner, agent, consignee or employee, upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or private ground within the Township of Ridley,
conducted for seasonal purposes for, or in advance of, specific
yearly holidays as provided in this article.
(1)
For the purposes of this article, "seasonal sales" shall not include:
Any person, as defined herein, whether as owner, agent,
consignee or employee, who conducts a permanent business
within the Township; provided, however, that no such person
shall be relieved from the provisions of this article by reason of
a temporary association with any local dealer, trader, merchant
or auctioneer or by conducting such a temporary or transient
business in connection with or as part of or in the name of any
local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer.
(a)
Any such person as defined herein, who, as part of his
permanent business, conducts a temporary sidewalk sale in
an area immediately adjacent to or contiguous to the building
where his permanent business is conducted, provided that
such a sale is operated in such a manner as to comply with any
other chapters of this Code.
(b)
A person, as defined herein, exhibiting goods for sale
concurrent with or as an adjunct to a group display, meeting
or convention duly authorized to be held in a publicly owned
building and authorized and licensed pursuant to the
appropriate sections of the Code of the Township of Ridley.
(c)
A person who sells his or her own property, which was not
acquired for resale, barter or exchange, who does not conduct
such sales more than twice during any calendar year and
who has obtained the appropriate authorization, licenses and
permits pursuant to the Code of the Township of Ridley.
(d)
(2)
§ 228-1 POLICE SERVICES § 228-1
220:451
§ 228-2. Limitations.
§ 228-3. Registration fee. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
Any person who desires to engage in seasonal sales as defined herein shall
be required to register with the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township
of Ridley to pay a registration fee as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners per season per place of business located in the
Township of Ridley.
B. In this article, the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter,
the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the
singular.
A. Seasonal sales shall be limited to a total period of 10 days preceding
and following the following holidays:
(1) Easter.
(2) Mother's day.
B. Seasonal sales shall be limited to a period of 30 days preceding the
following holiday:
(1) Christmas.
C. Seasonal sales shall be limited to sales of flowers, plants, trees and
arrangements of the same.
D. Seasonal sales transactions shall not be conducted from a motor vehicle
or trailer parked upon any street or highway or any lot or premises
within the Township of Ridley, but such motor vehicle or trailer may be
used for the storage of supplies or goods to be sold.
E. Seasonal sales shall not be conducted at any time before 8:00 a.m. or
after 10:00 p.m. on any day.
F. No peddler, hawker or vendor of seasonal sales shall shout or otherwise
cry or advertise his wares in any matter which disturbs the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood.
G. The total area of all signs used in connection with seasonal sales may
not exceed 16 square feet, and all use of any off-premises or illuminated
signs for such purposes is hereby prohibited.
H. The sales display area must be located in such a manner as to allow at
least 12 feet of pedestrian walk between the edge of the street and the
sales display area.
I. If a parking facility is to be shared with an existing permanent business,
then such use shall not reduce the parking available to the permanent
business to that which would be below the number of spaces required
by Chapter 325, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Ridley.
§ 228-1 RIDLEY CODE § 228-4
220:452
§ 228-4. Application procedure.
A. The applicant must complete and file an application in writing, signed
and verified by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, which
application shall set forth:
(1) A detailed description of the kind and character of the business to
be licensed, including a detailed statement of the merchandise to
be sold or for which orders are to be solicited.
(2) The name and address of the person who owns and/or operates the
business to be licensed.
(3) A written confirmation, from the owner of the property to be used
in connection with the seasonal sales, guaranteeing permission to
the seller to use the property for such use.
(4) A detailed description of the location or locations at which the
business is to be operated, including a plan showing in square feet
the area at the site to be devoted for the exclusive use of the
applicant's customers, as well as all required parking spaces.
(5) At least three personal references as to the applicant's character,
honesty and integrity.
(6) At least three business references as to the quality of merchandise
and the reliability of the manufacturer, jobber or seller.
B. The applicant must give to the Township a certificate of insurance
providing for minimum coverage in the amount as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for bodily injury and for
property damage. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
C. The applicant must give to the Township a refundable escrow deposit in
an amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners to guarantee the cleanup and restoration of the sales
site to its preuse condition with such deposit to be returned within two
weeks following the completion of such cleanup. In the event that the
applicant fails to complete such cleanup, the Township may cause the
same to be done and apply the escrow deposit to the cost thereof, as
well as collect any additional cost together with a penalty of 10% of
such cost in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal
claims, or by action of assumpsit without the filing of a municipal claim,
with both the seasonal seller and the property owner held to be jointly
and severally liable for such costs. [Amended 7-24-1991 by Ord. No.
1677; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
D. The Code Enforcement Officer shall refer all such applications to the
Captain of Police of the Township of Ridley for a determination as to
whether the proposed seasonal business operation would constitute a
traffic safety hazard because of any increased parking or highway
traffic congestion it is likely to create.
§ 228-4 POLICE SERVICES § 228-5
220:453
§ 228-5. Exemption.
It shall be permissible for nonprofit and charitable organizations, upon prior
notification to the Department of Code Enforcement and upon compliance
with the other provisions of this article, to engage in seasonal sales, as
defined herein, and be exempt from the registration fee prescribed in
§ 228-3.
§ 228-6. Issuance and exhibit of license; appeals.
§ 228-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof by any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, together with the costs of
prosecution, and each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Where there are multiple locations being operated under a single
A. Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Code
Enforcement Officer, if he shall find such application in order, shall
issue the license required under this article, but no such license shall be
issued if:
(1) The Captain of Police has determined that the proposed seasonal
business operation will create a traffic safety hazard; and/or
(2) The proposed seasonal business operation constitutes a use which
would not be permitted by Chapter 325, Zoning, of the Code of the
Township of Ridley if such use was to be permanent.
B. In the event that it is determined that any of the information supplied by
the applicant has been falsified, or if in the event that the applicant
violates any other provision of this article while operating his seasonal
sales business, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the
previously issued license. In case of any such revocation, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the applicant in writing.
C. Every license holder shall display such license at the location or
locations where he shall engage in such business and shall exhibit such
license, upon request, to all police officers, Township officials and
citizens of the Township and customers.
D. If aggrieved by the Code Enforcement Officer's refusal to issue and
license the applicant or the Code Enforcement Officer's subsequent
revocation of such license, the applicant may appeal, in writing, to the
Board of Commissioners of the Township of Ridley within 10 days after
such refusal or revocation or 30 days after filing his application,
whichever is sooner; and the Commissioners shall thereupon afford
them an opportunity for hearing, after which hearing the
Commissioners may sustain the Code Enforcement's Officer refusal or
revocation or direct the Code Enforcement Officer to issue a license.
§ 228-5 RIDLEY CODE § 228-7
220:454
license and the same violation occurs at each location, then each violation
shall constitute a separate offense. In default of the payment of the fine, the
defendant shall be sentenced to jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 228-7 POLICE SERVICES § 228-7
220:455

ARTICLE II
Yard and Garage Sales
[Adopted 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2019]
§ 228-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL — An individual certified by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and appointed by a municipality to act as a
chief code enforcement official.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — An individual appointed by a
municipality and charged with the administration and enforcement of local
Township ordinances other than the Zoning Ordinance.
PERSON — Individuals, partnerships, family groups, voluntary associations
and corporations.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Property which is owned, used and maintained
by an individual or members of a residence. It does not include merchandise
which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment or by donation.
YARD SALE — The sale or offering for sale of new, used or secondhand
items of personal property at any residential premises. Includes all sales in
residential areas entitled "garage sale," "yard sale," "tag sale," "porch sale,"
"lawn sale," "attic sale," "basement sale," "rummage sale," "flea market
sale," or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property. (This
definition shall not include a sale where no more than four specific items
are held out for sale and where all advertisement of such sale specifically
names those items to be sold.)
ZONING OFFICER — An individual appointed by a municipality and
charged with the administration and enforcement of the local zoning
ordinance.
§ 228-9. Registration required; number and duration of sales; types
of property sold restricted.
A. Participants shall register the sale by contacting the Township office at
least 24 hours in advance and providing the following required
information: name, address, date of sale, telephone number, and e-mail
address, if available.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person to participate in more than two yard
sales in any one calendar year.
C. Not more than two yard sales shall be allowed to be conducted on any
one premises in any one calendar year.
D. Third sale permitted. A third yard sale may be permitted within a
calendar year if satisfactory proof of a bona fide change of ownership of
the real property is first presented to the Zoning Officer.
§ 228-8 POLICE SERVICES § 228-9
220:457
§ 228-10. Sale of other than personal property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, under authority
granted by this article, property other than personal property at a yard sale.
§ 228-11. Hours of sales limited.
Such yard sales shall be limited in time to no more than the daylight hours
of two consecutive days, but not before 8:00 a.m. nor after 6:00 p.m.
§ 228-12. Inclement weather provisions for third sale.
If a yard sale is not held on the original scheduled dates or is terminated
only during the first day of the sale because of inclement weather conditions
and an affidavit by the participant to this effect is submitted, the Zoning
Officer may allow for a yard sale to be conducted at the same location within
30 days from the date when the first sale was to be held.
§ 228-13. Display of property in permitted areas only.
Personal property offered for sale may be displayed in a yard, upon a lawn,
in a carport, upon a porch or patio or within a yard, but only in such areas.
No personal property offered for sale at a yard sale shall be displayed in any
public right-of-way.
§ 228-14. Signs.
E. It shall be unlawful to conduct any yard sale with a duration exceeding
two consecutive days.
F. A person must affirm by statement that the property to be sold was
owned by the person as his/her own personal property and was neither
acquired nor consigned nor donated for the purpose of resale, except
for community yard sales by bona fide civic or nonprofit groups.
A. Signs permitted. Only the following specified signs may be displayed in
relation to a pending yard sale:
(1) Announcement signs. Two signs of not more than four square feet
each are permitted to be displayed on the property of the residence
where the yard sale is being conducted.
(2) Directional signs. Two signs of not more than three square feet
each are permitted when written permission to erect said signs is
received from the property owners on whose property such signs
are to be posted.
B. Time limitations. No sign or other form of advertisement shall be
exhibited for more than two days prior to the day such sale is to
commence.
§ 228-9 RIDLEY CODE § 228-14
220:458
§ 228-15. Stopping and parking of motor vehicles; temporary traffic
controls.
The stopping or parking of motor vehicles shall be conducted in compliance
with all applicable laws and ordinances. Further, the Police Department
may enforce such temporary controls to alleviate any special hazards and/
or congestion created by any yard sale.
§ 228-16. Exemptions.
This article shall not be applicable to:
§ 228-17. Enforcement; failure to register.
C. Removal of signs. All signs must be removed each day at the close of the
yard sale activities or by the end of daylight, whichever first occurs.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of process or a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property (four or less) which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement.
D. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication or other
communications media which publishes or broadcasts anything in good
faith without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character
or without knowledge that the provisions of this article have not been
met.
E. Any sale conducted by any legitimate business or commercial or
industrial establishment upon property zoned under the zoning
regulations of the Township of Ridley, with or without the protection of
the nonconforming use section of the zoning laws, or any sale
conducted by any other vendor or dealer when the sale is conducted in
a properly zoned area and not otherwise prohibited by laws and
statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and ordinances of the
Township of Ridley, including this article.
F. Any public auction having a duration of no more than two days and
conducted by an auctioneer licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer/
Building Code Official, Code Enforcement Officer or any Township
police officer, and it shall be their duty to investigate and prosecute any
violation of this article.
§ 228-14 POLICE SERVICES § 228-17
220:459
§ 228-18. Responsibility for operational conduct.
The person conducting the yard sale and the owner, tenant or occupant of
the premises where the yard sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly
or severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on
the premises during the hours of such yard sale or activity.
§ 228-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $300, in addition to the costs of prosecution, and, in default
of payment thereof, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. Any yard sale conducted in violation of above §§ 228-9, 228-10 and
228-11 may be stopped, shut down or otherwise ceased by the Zoning
Officer, Enforcement Officer or any Township police officer.
C. Failure to register a prior yard sale will prevent an individual from
future sales for a period of one year from the date of violation.
A. No such person shall permit any loud and boisterous conduct on such
premises or permit vehicles to impede the passage of the traffic on any
roads or streets in the area of the premises where the yard sale is being
conducted.
B. In the event of any emergency, all such persons shall obey reasonable
orders from any member of the Police Department or authorized fire/
rescue personnel in order to maintain the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 228-17 RIDLEY CODE § 228-19
220:460
Chapter 232
SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 173.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 209.
Property maintenance and storage of
materials generally — See Ch. 224.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 303.
Zoning — See Ch. 325.
§ 228-19 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 228-19
232:461

ARTICLE I
Storage of Materials
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 109 of the 1975 Code]
§ 232-1. Storage prohibited.
Pursuant to the authorization provided by Section 1502, Clause XLIV, of
the First Class Township Code,106 and in order to promote the health,
safety, cleanliness, beauty, convenience, comfort and general welfare of
the Township of Ridley and the inhabitants thereof, no person, firm or
corporation shall store in any open space or upon any public or private
grounds any used or secondhand goods or materials, including but not
limited to building materials, lumber, bricks, stone and building blocks.
§ 232-2. Removal by Township; assessment of cost. [Amended
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
The Township of Ridley shall have the power, in addition to the penalty set
forth in § 232-3, to require the removal of the aforesaid prohibited articles,
set forth in § 232-1 hereof, by the owner or occupier of such grounds,
in default of which the Township may cause the same to be done and
collect the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of such cost, in the
manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims or by action
in assumpsit without the filing of a claim, or may seek relief by bill in equity.
§ 232-3. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
106. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 56544.
§ 232-1 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 232-3
232:463

ARTICLE II
Secondhand Goods
[Adopted 1-28-1991 by Ord. No. 1504; amended in its entirety
7-27-2005 by Ord. No. 1886]
§ 232-4. Definitions; license.
§ 232-5. Application for license.
§ 232-6. Expiration of license.
A dealer's license shall continue in force to December 31 of the year in
which the license is issued.
§ 232-7. Fees; issuance of license.
Each person applying for a dealer's license shall pay to the Township
Secretary a license fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners, for which the Township Secretary shall give the applicant
an official receipt and issue a license to carry on the trade or business of a
dealer within the Township of Ridley.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEALER — Any person, firm, partnership or corporation that takes part
in retail buying, selling, buy-back, exchanging, dealing in or dealing
with secondhand goods purchased by the secondhand dealer or any
person so employed. This includes accepting or receiving secondhand
goods as returns of merchandise or in exchange for credits on any other
articles or merchandise.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Goods which have been previously owned,
worn or used by another; not new.
B. No person shall carry on the business of dealer within the Township
without first obtaining a dealer's license from the Township Secretary.
C. Application for license
(1) The Township Secretary shall require satisfactory evidence of good
character of an applicant for a dealer's license. A full records check
of dealers and all employees shall be required.
(2) An applicant for a dealer's license shall state the address where
such business is to be carried on.
A. The Township Secretary shall require satisfactory evidence of good
character of an applicant for a dealer's license. A full records check of
dealers and all employees shall be required.
B. An applicant for a dealer's license shall state the address where such
business is to be carried on.
§ 232-4 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 232-8
232:465
§ 232-8. License valid for one place of business.
No person licensed as a dealer in the Township shall, by virtue of one
license, keep more than one place of business for receiving or taking goods.
§ 232-9. Revocation of license.
Any licensed dealer who violates any provision of this article, in addition
to the fine prescribed by § 232-17, shall have his license revoked at the
discretion of the Township Manager.
§ 232-10. Doing business at place not covered by license.
No dealer shall at any time take goods at any other place than the place for
which his license was granted.
§ 232-11. Transaction record book required.
Every person conducting the business of a dealer shall keep a book in
which shall be recorded at the time of purchase an accurate account and
description of the goods, articles or things purchased, the amount of money
paid therefor and the time of purchasing the same, together with the
description of the person selling such goods, articles or things, including
color of complexion, color of eyes and hair and stature and general
appearance.
§ 232-12. Book subject to police inspection.
The book required by § 232-11 shall be subject to the inspection and
approval of police officers periodically.
§ 232-13. Daily reports to police.
Every dealer shall return to the office of the Superintendent of Police,
every day before 12:00 noon, a sheet to be furnished by the Superintendent
showing all business transacted on the previous day and giving the
information required by § 232-11.
§ 232-14. Time limit for possession of articles before sale.
No dealer shall sell any article until the same has been in his possession at
least 15 days.
§ 232-15. Purchase from certain persons prohibited; identification
required.
No dealer or his clerk or employee shall purchase any article from any
person under 21 years of age, anyone intoxicated, any habitual drunkard
or any person known to be a thief, an associate of thieves or receiver of
stolen property or any person he has reason to suspect to be such. Dealers
§ 232-8 RIDLEY CODE § 232-15
232:466
must require that valid identification be presented to the dealer prior to the
transaction of any business.
§ 232-16. Hours of business.
No person licensed as a dealer shall keep his office or place of business
open for the purpose of doing the business of a dealer on Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday before 7:30 a.m. and after 6: 00 p.m., except on
Friday when his office may be kept open until 9:00 p.m. and on Saturday
when it may be kept open until 10:00 p.m.
§ 232-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more
than $1,000, and costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof
shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
§ 232-15 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 232-17
232:467

ARTICLE III
Pawnbrokers
[Adopted 5-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1764]
§ 232-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAPTAIN — The head of the Police Department of the Township of Ridley,
regardless of whether said position is entitled "Captain," "Chief,"
"Superintendent" or other similar title.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business
of:
PAWN TICKET — The card, book, receipt or other record furnished to the
pledgor at the time a loan is granted containing the terms of the contract
for a loan.
PLEDGE — An article, or articles, deposited with a pawnbroker as security
for a loan in the course of his business as defined in the definition of
PAWNBROKER.
PLEDGOR — The person who obtains a loan from a pawnbroker and delivers
a pledge into the possession of a pawnbroker, unless such person discloses
that he is or was acting for another, in which case a pledgor means the
disclosed principal.
§ 232-19. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or transact a pawnbroker
business or pawnshop in the Township of Ridley without first having
procured a license therefor as hereinafter provided. All such licenses must
be renewed annually.
§ 232-20. Application for license; fees.
Lending money on the deposit or pledge of personal property, other
than choses in action, securities or written proof of indebtedness; or
A.
Purchasing personal property with an express or implied agreement or
understanding to sell it back at a subsequent time at a stipulated price;
or
B.
Lending money upon goods, wares, or merchandise pledged, stored, or
deposited as collateral security.
C.
A. The application for a pawnbroker's license shall state:
(1) The name of the person, and in case of a firm or corporation, the
names of all the partners in such firm, or of the directors, officers,
and stockholders of such corporation.
§ 232-18 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 232-20
232:469
§ 232-21. Issuance of licenses.
§ 232-22. Bond.
The applicant shall file, upon approval of the application, a bond running
to the Township, conditioned for the faithful observance of all provisions of
this article respecting pawnbrokers, during the continuance of such license,
and any renewal thereof, for not more than one year. This bond shall be in
the sum of $1,000 dollars, with a corporate surety, or two or more individual
sureties. In the case of individual sureties, such bond shall have attached
a verification to the effect that the sureties are residents within Delaware
County and each is worth the amount specified in such bond, over and
(2) The address of the residence of the applicant, or in the case of a
firm or corporation, the address of said firm or corporation.
(3) The address where the business is to be conducted.
(4) The types of goods the pawnbroker is willing to accept as pledges.
(5) At least three persons of good character that may be used as
character references for the applicant.
(6) The name of one person, not living at the same address as the
applicant, who will always know where the applicant is living if the
applicant should ever move.
(7) Information as to whether the applicant, or, in the case of a firm or
corporation, any of the partners, directors, officers or stockholders,
have ever been convicted of a felony.
B. All initial applications for a pawnbroker's license shall be accompanied
by the application fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners. Renewal applications shall be accompanied by a fee
as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
[Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
A. No such license shall be issued to any person, corporation, partnership
or association, other than the real and actual proprietor of the business,
and place of business for which it is issued. All applications for
pawnbroker's licenses or renewals thereof shall be presented to the
Township Board of Commissioners at a regular meeting thereof. No
application shall be acted upon until a recommendation for or against
the application is received from the Captain of Police, provided that the
Board of Commissioners shall not be bound by the Captain's
recommendation.
B. In addition, no pawnbroker's license shall be issued. without adequate
proof that a pawnbroker's license has been issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to the individual, corporation, or other
association listed in the application at the address specified in the
application.
§ 232-20 RIDLEY CODE § 232-22
232:470
above all just debts and liabilities, and exclusive of property exempt from
execution.
§ 232-23. Contents and posting of license.
All licenses issued for the operation of a pawnshop under this article shall
contain the name of the person to whom it is issued, the address of the
place of business and the valid dates of the license. It shall be unlawful for
any person to conduct or transact a pawnbroker business in the Township,
unless he shall keep posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business
the license certificate therefor, and a copy of all ordinances relating to
pawnbrokers.
§ 232-24. Nonuse and transfer of license.
If a pawnbroker shall not conduct said business for a period of 90 days,
the license shall be null and void. Pawnbroker's licenses shall not be
transferable to any other person except by a majority vote of the Township
Board of Commissioners, and the filing of an application and a new bond by
the person to whom such license is or may be transferred or assigned. It
shall be unlawful for any person to do business or attempt to do business
under a license transferred to him without such approval of the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 232-25. Interest and charges; receipts.
A pawnbroker shall not charge, contract for, or receive interest or charges
in excess of the maximum amount specified under Pennsylvania law. A
pawnbroker shall, at the time of payment, furnish to the pledgor a receipt
showing the number of the pawn ticket on which the payment is made,
the date of payment, the amount paid on principal of the loan, the amount
paid for interest, and fees for storage, insurance, investigation and other
services contemplated by this section, and the amount, if any, paid to the
pawnbroker for cleaning, pressing, repairing or other similar services to the
pledged personal property, which have been requested by the pledgor. A
duplicate copy of every receipt issued shall be retained by the pawnbroker
for his records.
§ 232-26. Pawn ticket to be furnished.
A. At the time of granting a loan, and upon the subsequent renewal of any
loan, the pawnbroker shall furnish to the pledgor a pawn ticket which is
serially numbered and shall contain the following information:
(1) Name and address of the pawnbroker.
(2) Name and address of the pledgor.
(3) Name and address of the secured principal, if any.
(4) The date of the loan.
§ 232-22 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 232-26
232:471
§ 232-27. Records.
Every pawnbroker shall keep a book in which shall be entered and legibly
written in ink, at the time of each loan or receipt of personal property, an
accurate account and description of the goods, articles or things pawned,
or received, the amount of money loaned or advanced thereon, the number
of the pawn ticket given to the pledgor, the time when redeemable, the
time, both day and hour, of pawning or receiving such goods, articles or
things, and the name, residence, age, sex, color and description as near as
possible of the person pawning or delivering the goods, articles or things.
No entry made in such book shall be erased, obliterated or defaced. The
book, as well as every article or thing pawned, pledged or deposited, shall
at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the Captain of Police or any
officer directed by the Captain.
§ 232-28. Identity of pledgor.
At the time of granting an original loan, the pawnbroker shall enter upon his
records a description of the pledgor so as to identify the pledgor, including
the pledgor's name, address, motor vehicle operator number, and social
security number, or if the pledgor does not have this information, any
other proof of identity required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The
pawnbroker shall retain for his records a photocopy of the pledgor's social
security card and motor vehicle operator's number, if the pledgor has such
information. The pledgor may, by delivery of the pawn ticket, assign all
of his right, title and interest in a pawn ticket and the pledge described
therein, except as otherwise provided under the laws of Pennsylvania. The
person presenting a pawn ticket to the pawnbroker shall be presumed to be
the pledgor and shall be entitled to redeem the pledge, and the pawnbroker
shall deliver the pledge to the person presenting such pawn ticket upon
payment of principal, interest, and charges on the loan, and upon surrender
of the pawn ticket.
(5) The amount actually loaned.
(6) The serial number of the loan.
(7) Description of the pledge.
(8) Due date of the loan.
(9) The total amount of principal, interest and charges required to
redeem the pledge on the due date.
(10) A statement setting forth that the pledge may be sold after 90 days
of the due date of the loan if not redeemed. A duplicate copy of the
pawn ticket shall be retained by the pawnbroker for his records.
The pawnbroker shall require the pledgor to surrender the original
pawn ticket when the pledge is released, or the loan is renewed.
B. A separate pawn ticket shall be furnished for each and every item
pledged.
§ 232-26 RIDLEY CODE § 232-29
232:472
§ 232-29. Loss of ticket.
Notice of a pawn ticket which has been lost, destroyed or stolen shall be
furnished to the pawnbroker by the pledgor in person, or by registered mail.
The receipt of notice by registered mail of a lost, destroyed or stolen ticket,
or the issuance of a stop ticket by the pawnbroker after personal notice
by the pledgor of a lost, destroyed, or stolen ticket, shall be treated by
the pawnbroker as a stop against the loan. The pawnbroker shall require
the alleged pledgor to furnish an affidavit or written statement as to the
loss, destruction, or theft of the pawn ticket. The pawnbroker, upon receipt
of such affidavit or written statement, shall permit the pledgor to redeem
the loan or shall furnish the pledgor with a duplicate pawn ticket, and the
pawnbroker shall not be liable for any pledge released on such affidavit or
written statement, unless previous written notice by registered mail of an
adverse claim was received by the pawnbroker or a stop ticket was issued
by the pawnbroker.
§ 232-30. Monthly report; inspections.
§ 232-31. Restrictions.
A. Every pawnbroker or pawnshop keeper in the Township must, before
the last business day of every month, make and deliver to the Captain of
Police, at the police station, a full, true and detailed copy of all pawn
tickets legibly written, setting forth an exact description of each article
or thing pawned or received by such pawnbroker or pawnshop keeper
during the period since the last such report. Said report shall be a full,
detailed and correct copy of all entries in the book required to be kept
in §§ 232-27 through 232-30. If no article or thing has been pawned or
received, a report must be made to that effect.
B. The Captain of Police, or any person designated by him, may at any time
inspect the premises, and examine the books, records and files therein
of every pawnbroker, whether licensed, or unlicensed, but advertising
or soliciting business as a pawnbroker as defined in this article.
A. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, pawnshop keeper, his servant
or employee to receive any goods, articles or things in pawn or pledge
from a person who is intoxicated, under the influence of drugs,
incapacitated, or a person under the age of 18 years.
B. No licensed pawnbroker shall buy, sell, or take for pledge, pawn or
security, any brass knuckles.
C. It shall also be unlawful for any pawnbroker to employ any clerk or
person under the age of 18 years to receive any pledge or make any
loan.
§ 232-29 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 232-32
232:473
§ 232-32. Acts of employees.
The holder of a pawnbroker's license shall be responsible for any and all
acts of his employees, and for any violation by them of the provisions of this
article.
§ 232-33. Safekeeping of pledges.
Every pawnbroker licensed under the provisions hereof shall provide a
safe place for the keeping of the pledges received by him and shall have
sufficient insurance on the property held on pledges, for the benefit of the
pledgors, in case of destruction by fire or loss by theft.
§ 232-34. Revocation of license.
The Board of Commissioners may revoke any pawnbroker's license for two
or more violations of the provisions of this article. Any licensee shall have
the opportunity for a hearing before such revocation. Such revocation shall
be for a period of 30 days pending a hearing by the Secretary of Banking.
§ 232-35. Secondhand dealers.
No pawnbroker shall engage in the business of buying and selling or trading
secondhand merchandise without obtaining a secondhand dealer's license
in addition to a pawnbroker's license.107
§ 232-36. Location.
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued in any location in which such
business is not permitted by Chapter 325, Zoning, of the Code of the
Township of Ridley.
§ 232-37. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 1808]
Any person, firm corporation violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction before a District Justice, be fined not more than $1,000 for
each offense, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof
shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days; and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
107. Editor's Note: See Art. II, Secondhand Good, of this Ch. 232.
§ 232-32 RIDLEY CODE § 232-37
232:474
Chapter 237
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health Code — See Ch. 155.
Plumbing — See Ch. 216.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
268.
Interference of trees with sewer and drainage
systems — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
Wastewater treatment — See Ch. 314.
§ 232-37 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 232-37
232:475

ARTICLE I
Cesspools
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 112, Art. I, of the 1975 Code]
§ 237-1. Covering or fencing of excavation required.108
No person, persons, firm or corporation shall maintain, construct, repair
or enlarge a cesspool on land within the Township of Ridley, or permit the
maintenance, construction, repair or enlargement of the same on land or
property owned or possessed by him, they or it within the said Township,
unless the excavation, hole or other opening in the ground is covered by
a suitable covering or surrounded by a fence not less than four feet in
height at all times when the said cesspool is not actually in the course
of construction, repair or enlargement. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to permit the maintenance of cesspools within the Township of
Ridley where sewers are available to the said premises for sewage.
§ 237-2. Revocation of building or plumbing permits.
If any cesspool is being constructed, repaired or enlarged contrary to the
provisions of this article, the Building Inspector of the Township of Ridley
is hereby authorized to revoke any building permit issued to the builder
or owner of any property on which the said cesspool is being constructed,
repaired or enlarged, and the Plumbing Inspector of the Township of Ridley
is hereby authorized to revoke any plumbing permit issued to the builder
or owner of the property on which the said cesspool is being constructed,
repaired or enlarged.
§ 237-3. Notice of violation; abatement of nuisance.
Any cesspool being maintained, constructed, repaired or enlarged without
being covered by a suitable covering or surrounded by a fence not less than
four feet in height is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the Building
Inspector of the Township is hereby required to give notice to the builder
engaged in such maintenance, construction, repair or enlargement, or to
the owner of the property on which said cesspool is being maintained,
constructed, repaired or enlarged, to remove said nuisance or dangerous
excavation, and in default of the builder's or owner's removing or abating
said nuisance, the Plumbing Inspector is hereby directed to remove and
abate the said nuisance by either filling in the excavation and covering the
same with suitable material or erecting a fence around the same.
§ 237-4. Cost of abatement.
In the event it becomes necessary for the Plumbing Inspector of the
Township to abate or remove any nuisance created in the maintenance,
construction, repair or enlargement of a cesspool, the costs of abatement
or removal thereof shall be paid by the owner or builder, and in default
108. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 129, Excavations and Grading, Art. I, Fencing of Excavations.
§ 237-1 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 237-4
232:477
of payment thereof summary proceedings before a District Justice may be
instituted to correct the costs of such abatement or removal.
§ 237-4 RIDLEY CODE § 237-4
232:478
ARTICLE II
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 112, Art. II, of the 1975 Code]
§ 237-5. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage,
whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is hereby declared
that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit
and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this
Township.
§ 237-6. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Any municipal authority that services sewage in the
Township of Ridley.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
sewage at another site. "Holding tanks" include but are not limited to the
following:
A. CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
B. RETENTION TANK — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by
a water-carrying system.
C. VAULT PIT PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage where
water under pressure is not available.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from
which structure sewage shall or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of any property located in the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association,
corporation or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or
animals, and any noxious or deleterious substance harmful or inimical
to the public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water
for domestic water supply or for recreation.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Ridley, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
§ 237-5 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 237-7
232:479
§ 237-7. Rights and privileges granted.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
Township the control and methods of holding tank sewage disposal and the
collection and transportation thereof.
§ 237-8. Adoption of regulations.
§ 237-9. Right to fix rates and charges.
The Authority shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments and other charges in the area served by its facilities, at
reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
§ 237-10. Performance of work.
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property
utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the direction and
control of the Authority, and the disposal thereof shall be made only at
such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 237-11. Duties of property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules
and regulations concerning sewage as it may deem necessary from time
to time to effect the purposes herein.
B. All such rules and regulations adopted by the Authority shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the
Township, all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Maintain the holding tank in accordance with this article or any
ordinance of this Township, the provisions of any applicable law and the
rules and regulations of the Authority and any administrative agency of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Authority or anyone acting under the direction of the
Authority to collect, transport and dispose of the contents therein.
C. Be required, in the event that there is available a sanitary sewer to any
improved property that uses a holding tank and there is no sewer ban
relating to the use of such sewer, within 90 days of the date of the
removal of such sewer ban, to connect to the said sanitary sewer and,
within such ninety-day period, fill in such holding tank with concrete,
sand or other material approved by the Building Inspector.
§ 237-7 RIDLEY CODE § 237-12
232:480
§ 237-12. Abatement of nuisance.
In addition to any other remedies provided, any violation of § 237-11 shall
constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the municipality or the
Authority by seeking either appropriate equitable or legal relief from a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 237-12 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 237-12
232:481

ARTICLE III
Rents and Charges
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 112, Art. III, of the 1975 Code]
§ 237-13. Notice to connect. [Amended 10-6-1976 by Ord. No. 1430]
§ 237-14. Sewer rents.
A. Whenever, in the judgment of the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Ridley, it shall be determined that sewer connections by
adjoining or adjacent property owners are necessary for the public
health and welfare of the residents of the Township of Ridley, a notice
shall be sent by certified mail or personally delivered to the owners of
property abutting on or adjoining any street or alley in which a sewer
has been constructed, requiring connections with such sewer within 60
days from the sending of such notice, for the purpose of discharge of
waste matter.
B. No discharge or drainage of stormwater shall be permitted into any
sanitary sewer.
C. All such connections shall be in accordance with the Plumbing Code of
the Township of Ridley.109
A. There is hereby imposed upon the owners of property situate in the
Township of Ridley, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, which use and are
served by the sewers and sewer system of the Township, an annual
sewer rental, rate or charge for buildings or other structures
discharging sanitary, commercial or industrial waste into such sewer
system, and the said rental or charge shall be determined as provided in
the Annual Budget Ordinance adopted by the Township Commissioners
and in accordance with the following classifications: [Amended
7-21-1982 by Ord. No. 1535]
(1) Each single-family dwelling unit, whether in a dwelling house,
multiple dwelling or apartment house shall be charged an amount
per unit as determined by the Annual Budget Ordinance.
(2) Each public or private school, church, veterans' or legion post,
store, factory, commercial building, nursing home, greenhouse or
office building shall pay an annual rate per unit as determined by
the Annual Budget Ordinance and based upon the following table of
gallons of water consumed, which table shall be interpolated to the
nearest 10th in order to obtain a more accurate charge. In the case
of industrial usage, the annual rate is to be determined by either
the gallons of water consumed as set forth in the table below or
based on a formula established annually by the Sewer Authorities
servicing the Township wherein a specified number of employees
are designated as the equivalent of a single-family dwelling unit.
109. Editor's Note: See Ch. 216, Plumbing.
§ 237-13 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 237-14
232:483
The sewer rental shall be the greater of the two bases. [Amended
2-16-1983 by Ord. No. 1546]
Water Used Annually
(gallons) Units
60,000 1
100,000 2
200,000 3
300,000 4
400,000 5
500,000 6
600,000 7
800,000 8
1,000,000 9
1,200,000 10
1,400,000 11
1,600,000 12
1,800,000 13
2,000,000 14
2,200,000 15
2,400,000 16
2,600,000 17
2,800,000 18
3,000,000 19
3,500,000 20
4,000,000 21
4,500,000 22
5,000,000 23
5,500,000 24
6,000,000 25
6,500,000 26
7,000,000 27
7,500,000 28
8,000,000 29
8,500,000 30
9,000,000 31
10,000,000 33
§ 237-14 RIDLEY CODE § 237-14
232:484
Water Used Annually
(gallons) Units
11,000,000 35
12,000,000 37
13,000,000 39
14,000,000 41
15,000,000 43
16,000,000 45
17,000,000 47
18,000,000 49
19,000,000 51
20,000,000 53
21,000,000 55
22,000,000 57
23,000,000 59
24,000,000 61
25,000,000 63
26,000,000 65
27,000,000 67
28,000,000 69
29,000,000 71
30,000,000 73
B. The Township of Ridley has determined that the great majority of the
buildings or structures in the Township set forth in Subsection A(2)
above are serviced with water obtained from the Philadelphia Suburban
Water Company, hereinafter called the "Water Company," and the Water
Company has water meters installed in the said properties.
C. Where properties set forth in Subsection A(2) of this section do not
discharge all of the metered or waste water into the sewer system, the
Board of Commissioners of the Township is authorized, upon
application by such property owner, to reduce the total number of
gallons of water upon which the sewer rental, rate or charge is based.
Any such application shall be filed with the Chairman of the Sewer
Committee within one month after the mailing of bills. The decision of
the Board of Commissioners following the recommendation of the
Sewer Committee after hearing thereon shall be final.
D. The entire sewer rental fee shall be due and payable without deduction
if sewer service is initiated to any residential property at any time
during the calendar year. [Amended 7-18-1984 by Ord. No. 1572]
§ 237-14 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 237-14
232:485
§ 237-15. Penalty for nonpayment [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No.
1416; 6-17-1981 by Ord. No. 1523; 12-16-1987 by Ord. No. 1624]
The basic fee for the disposal of sewage shall be determined as provided
in the Annual Budget Ordinance adopted by the Board of Township
Commissioners. If such fee shall remain unpaid on the first day of March of
any year, a penalty of 10% shall be added to the face amount of the sewer
fee. Each month thereafter, lawful interest in the amount of 10% per annum
shall be added to the face amount of the sewer fee on the first day of each
E. The Secretary of the Township shall obtain from the Water Company the
number of gallons of water consumed by users, as set forth in
Subsection A(2) of this section, during the period from October 1 to
September 30 of each year for which computation has been made by
the Water Company and shall compute the sewer rental, rate or charge
to such users during such period. [Amended 7-21-1982 by Ord. No.
1535]
F. Users, as set forth in Subsection A(2) of this section, which secure
water from other than the Water Company, shall pay a sewer rate,
rental or charge in the amount to be fixed by the Township Secretary
and comparable to rentals for establishments of similar character and
size. Where it is necessary to measure the discharge into the sewer
system in order to determine the annual sewer rental, rate or charge
imposed by this article, the proper meters or other measuring devices
shall be installed. Such meters or other measuring devices shall be
under the control of the Township. The owner of the property upon
which such measuring device is installed shall be responsible for its
maintenance and safekeeping, and all repairs thereto shall be made at
the cost of the owner of the property.
G. The Township reserves the right to refuse connection to its sewer
system or to otherwise compel discontinuance of use, or to compel
pretreatment by any industry in order to prevent discharge into the
sewer system of any industrial wastes deemed to be harmful to the
sewer system or to have a deleterious effect on the sewage treatment
processes.
H. The annual sewer rental, rate or charge shall be due and payable on the
first day of July of each year in advance and shall be paid to the
Treasurer of the Township of Ridley.
I. The owner of record of a residence building, or lessee of the residence
building who is obliged by the lease agreement to pay the sewer rental
charge, and who is over 65 years of age and/or widowed person who
qualified for the Pennsylvania Property Tax Refund for the previous
year may request a refund of $100 for the year 2008 and annually
thereafter, unless otherwise determined. The proof of approved
qualification by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania must be submitted
at the time of refund application. [Added 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
1894; amended 1-23-2008 by Ord. No. 1936]
§ 237-14 RIDLEY CODE § 237-15
232:486
and every subsequent month. In the event that the sewer fee shall not be
paid within six months from the date that the same is due and payable,
said sewer fee shall constitute a lien against the property so connected with
the sewer system, and the amount thereof may be recovered by the due
process of law and in all respects to the general law of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania for the filing and recovery of municipal taxes or municipal
liens.
§ 237-16. Notification of sewer rental taxes.
The Board of Commissioners shall furnish the Township Treasurer a sewer
rental tax duplicate showing the sewer rental taxes due on all the properties
within the Township of Ridley, and the Township Treasurer shall thereupon
notify all owners of record of the properties of the amount of sewer rental
taxes due and charged against each property.
§ 237-17. Disposition of funds collected.
A. The sewer rentals so collected shall be placed in a special fund, and
from such fund the following payments shall be made:
(1) The amount to be expended by the Township in the operation,
maintenance, repairs, alterations, inspection, depreciation and
other expenses in relation to such sewer, sewerage system or
sewage treatment works.
(2) The amount necessary to provide for the amortization of any
indebtedness incurred or any nondebt revenue bonds issued by the
Township in the construction or acquisition of such sewer,
sewerage system or sewage treatment works, and interest thereon,
in order that the said improvement may be self-liquidating, or as
may be sufficient to pay the amount agreed to be paid annually
under the terms of any contract with any authority or private
corporation furnishing sewer or sewage treatment services to the
Township.
B. Any unused surplus from any preceding year shall be paid into the fund
accrued from said rentals or charge, and whenever the amount in said
fund exceeds the margin of safety of 10%, the excess shall be paid into
the sinking fund. The amount required for sinking fund and interest
shall be paid into the sinking fund, and the amount so paid, including
any excess as above provided, shall not be used for any other purpose.
C. The Board of Township Commissioners shall have the power and duty,
after determining the amounts required in Subsection A(l) and (2)
herein, to charge an amount equivalent to a margin of safety of 10%,
and shall determine, by resolution, what proportion of the standard
rates set forth in § 237-14 shall be charged for the current year in order
to meet all the charges set forth in this section. Said resolution shall be
adopted at the time of the adoption of the Annual Budget.
§ 237-15 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 237-17
232:487

ARTICLE IV
Connections
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 112, Art. IV, of the 1975 Code]
§ 237-18. Connection required.
Every owner of property abutting on or adjoining any street or highway in
which a sewer has been constructed is hereby required to connect to such
sewer, in accordance with the provisions of the Plumbing Code,110 for the
purpose of proper discharge of waste matter.
§ 237-19. Maintenance of cesspools prohibited.
§ 237-20. Declaration of nuisance; cesspools to be filled.
All cesspools or privy vaults maintained contrary to the provisions of this
article are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the owner of property
where the same is maintained is hereby required to fill up and discontinue
using the said cesspool or privy vault.
§ 237-21. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
A. No cesspool or privy vault, whether or not the same shall be attached to
a septic tank, shall be maintained on any property which can be
connected with a sewer constructed on any street or highway abutting
or adjoining the said property.
B. Cesspools or privy vaults, if attached to a septic tank, shall be permitted
only in cases where sewer connections are unavailable.
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 216, Plumbing.
§ 237-18 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 237-21
232:489

ARTICLE V
Wastewater Control and Treatment
[Adopted 9-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1976]
§ 237-22. Purpose.
This article is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and other aspects of the general welfare. These
general goals include, among other things, the specific enforcement of
the Clean Water Act and the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law111 and the
various regulations promulgated by DELCORA, the City of Philadelphia,
the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, and such other agencies which
may succeed the aforementioned agencies, and the implementation of the
Delaware County Wastewater Management Plan and the National
Pretreatment Standards, 40 CFR 401 et seq.
§ 237-23. Wastewater treatment regulations.
The DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations of 2011, attached hereto
as Exhibit A, and the City of Philadelphia's Sewer and Wastewater Control
Regulations, attached hereto as Exhibit B,112 are hereby collectively
adopted as the Wastewater Treatment Regulations for the Township of
Ridley. Where any conflict exists between any portions of Exhibits A and B,
the most stringent of the portions in conflict shall apply.
§ 237-24. Local limitations.
The DELCORA Local Limitations for the Eastern Service Area (the "Eastern
Limitations") and the DELCORA Local Limitations for the Western Service
Area (the "Western Limitations"), as set forth in DELCORA Resolution
2011-01, attached hereto as Exhibit C113 is hereby adopted as the Local
Limitations for all discharges of wastewater in the Township of Ridley. All
such discharges of wastewater shall comply with the Eastern Limitations.
111. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq., respectively.
112. Editor's Note: Exhibits A and B are on file in the Township offices.
113. Editor's Note: Exhibit C is on file in the Township offices.
§ 237-22 SECONDHAND MATERIALS; PAWNBROKERS § 237-24
232:491
Chapter 241
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 264.
§ 241-1. Identification tag required.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or manager of any store, shop,
market or supermarket to have on the premises where such store, shop,
market or supermarket is located, or to supply to any patron or customer of
such store, shop, market or supermarket, any shopping cart without having
securely attached thereto a metal tag of identification setting forth the
name of the store and its location.
§ 241-2. Carts on public ways prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or manager of any store, shop,
market or supermarket to permit any shopping cart supplied by such store,
shop, market or supermarket to be or remain on any sidewalk, street or
highway of the Township of Ridley.
§ 241-3. Presumption of evidence.
The presence of any such shopping cart on any sidewalk, street or highway
shall be presumed to be with the knowledge and consent of the owner,
operator or manager of the said store, shop, market or supermarket, and
the presence of such cart as herein prohibited shall create an inference that
the knowledge and consent of the owner, operator or manager of the store,
shop, market or supermarket to permit such shopping cart on said sidewalk,
street or highway was first had and obtained.
§ 241-4. Declaration of nuisance; removal of carts.
Any unattended shopping cart found upon any sidewalk, street or highway
of the Township of Ridley is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the police
of the Township of Ridley are hereby authorized and directed to remove
the same and store such shopping cart with the Township of Ridley Police
Department.
§ 241-5. Redemption.114
Any shopping cart removed to the Police Department under § 241-4 hereof
may be returned to the owner thereof upon payment to the Township
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 237-24 RIDLEY CODE § 241-5
241:492
Secretary, for the use of the Township, of the sum as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
Chapter 245
SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 113.
Ticket lines for special events — See Ch. 176,
Art. II.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 199.
Picketing — See Ch. 213.
Police services — See Ch. 220.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 264.
Tents — See Ch. 285.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 299.
§ 245-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CARNIVAL AND TENT SHOWS — Any carnival, circus, tent show or
traveling amusement show organized, sponsored or for the benefit of a "forprofit"
organization.
SPECIAL EVENT — Any activity which occurs upon private or public
property that will affect the ordinary use of public streets, rights-of-way
or sidewalks, including but not limited to social gatherings, special
appearances, promotional activities, foot races and bicycle races.
Specifically excluded from this definition are private social gatherings
which will make no use of Township streets other than for lawful parking.
§ 245-2. Prohibited events.
All carnivals and tent shows are hereby declared to be public nuisances,
prejudicial to the public health, safety and morals and are hereby prohibited
within the limits of the Township of Ridley.
§ 245-3. Permit required.
No person or organization shall conduct a special event that affects the
ordinary use of public streets, rights-of-way or sidewalks without first
having obtained a special event permit from the Township of Ridley.
§ 245-4. Application for permit; fee.115
An application for a special event permit shall be submitted to the Captain
of Police with a nonrefundable payment as set from time to time by
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 241-5 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 245-4
245:493
resolution of the Board of Commissioners no later than 45 days prior to the
proposed event. The following information shall be provided:
§ 245-5. Standards for denial of permit.
Reasons for denial of a special permit include:
§ 245-6. Costs analysis; payment of street management costs.
The Captain of Police, in conjunction with any other appropriate Township
official, shall determine the approximate cost of the special event to the
Township of Ridley to maintain the public peace and order at the special
event. This determination shall include, but is not limited to, the cost
A. Purpose of the special event;
B. Name, address and telephone number of the sponsoring organization or
individual;
C. Proposed date, location and hours of operation;
D. Schedule of proposed events;
E. Any other information as the Captain of Police or another Township
official deems reasonably necessary to determine that the permit meets
the requirements of this chapter.
A. The special event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly
movement of traffic within the Township of Ridley so as to create a real
and present danger to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the Township of Ridley.
B. The special event will create a real and present danger to the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township of Ridley by
preventing fire-fighting equipment, ambulance service rescue vehicles
and/or police vehicles from being able to reach any property in the
Township of Ridley.
C. The special event is reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or
property or to provoke disorderly conduct or to create an unreasonable
disturbance.
D. The special event will cause undue hardship to adjacent businesses or
residents or will require the diversion of so many public employees that
allowing the event would unreasonably deny service to the remainder of
the Township.
E. The application contains incomplete or false information.
F. The applicant fails to comply with all terms of this chapter, including
failure to remit all fees.
G. The special event may substantially interfere in any way with the
general health, safety and welfare of the Township residents.
§ 245-4 RIDLEY CODE § 245-6
245:494
of additional police present at the event, any alterations to the normal
traffic flow, or any other contingency that requires the attention of a public
employee. The total of these costs shall be known as the "total street
management cost to the Township" and shall be paid to the Township by the
sponsoring organization prior to the issuance of a permit.
§ 245-7. Time limit for decision.
The Captain of Police shall act upon the application for a special event
permit within 10 days after the filing thereof. If the Captain of Police
disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant, within 10 days
after the filing date, a notice of his actions stating with specificity the
reasons for his denial of the permit.
§ 245-8. Notice to officials.
Immediately upon the issuance of a special event permit the Captain of
Police shall send a copy thereof to the following:
§ 245-9. Contents of permit.
Each special event permit shall state the information as provided by the
applicant in the permit application, subject to any changes made by the
Township in order to ensure compliance with this chapter.
§ 245-10. Sanitation and cleanup.
Applicant shall have the sole responsibility of clearing the special event
location of any rubbish and debris and returning it to its pre-event condition
within 12 hours of the conclusion of the event. If the applicant fails to do so,
such cleanup shall be arranged by the Township and the cost charged to the
applicant.
§ 245-11. Revocation.
A. Township Manager.
B. Board of Commissioners.
C. Township Solicitor.
D. Fire Marshal.
E. Superintendent of Public Works.
A. Reasons for revocation of a special event permit include:
(1) Application contained incomplete or false information;
(2) Applicant does not comply with all terms and conditions of permit;
(3) Applicant fails to arrange for or adequately remit all fees;
§ 245-6 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 245-11
245:495
§ 245-12. Appeals procedure.
Any applicant whose special event permit application has been denied or
revoked may appeal the decision of the Captain of Police to the Township
Board of Commissioners by filing a written notice of such appeal with the
Township Manager within five days of the notice of denial of applicant's
application by the Captain of Police. The Township Board of Commissioners
shall set a hearing date within 15 days of receiving such appeal request. At
such hearing the applicant is entitled to be heard and present evidence on
his behalf. The Township Board of Commissioners shall determine whether
the denial or revocation of the permit is justified.
§ 245-13. Violations and penalties.116
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default
of payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Chapter 249
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 325.
§ 249-1. Definitions.
The following words shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise
clearly indicated by the context:
BANNER SIGN — Any sign, intended to be hung either with or without
frames, made of paper, plastic, fabric or some similar material. National
flags, flags of any political subdivision and symbolic flags of any institution
or business shall not be considered banners for the purposes of this chapter.
BENCH SIGN — Any sign located on any part of a bench or seat placed
outside of a public right-of-way.[Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 1848]
(4) Disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency exists.
B. Revocation of a special event permit may be appealed by the same
process as an appeal which results from a denial of a permit.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 245-11 RIDLEY CODE § 249-1
245:496
BILLBOARD — An off-premises sign which advertises a business,
organization, event, person, place, or thing. Each face of a billboard shall
constitute a separate sign.[Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 1848]
CANOPY OR AWNING SIGN — Any sign located on a canopy or awning of a
building.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — A sign identifying individuals or companies
involved in design, construction, financing, wrecking or development when
placed upon the premises where work is under construction but only for the
duration of construction or wrecking.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD (LED) SIGN — A sign with a fixed or
changing message composed of a series of lights that may be changed
through electronic means.[Added 6-27-2007 by Ord. No. 1922]
FREESTANDING SIGN — A self-supporting sign resting on the ground or
supported by means of poles or standards in the ground.117
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial
light source.
OVERHANG SIGN — Any sign which is suspended over a public
thoroughfare, including streets, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, or
similar locations.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or
not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string,
usually in a series, designated to move in the wind.[Added 12-17-2003 by
Ord. No. 1848]
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign which is used to offer for sale, lease or rent
that premises upon which the sign is placed.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected or constructed wholly upon and over the roof
of any building and supported solely on the roof structure.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure, surface, fabric, device,
or display or part thereof or any device attached, painted, or represented
on a structure or other surface that displays or includes any letter, word,
insignia, flag, or representation used as or in the nature of any
advertisement, announcement, visual communication, direction, or is
designed to attract the eye or bring the subject to the attention of the
public.
WALL SIGN — Any sign painted on or attached to and erected parallel to
the face of or erected and confined within the limits of the outside wall of
any building and supported by such wall or building and which displays only
one advertising surface. Signs on businesses in a mall or other building that
has a common area for the public to congregate shall be included in this
definition.[Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 1848]
117. Editor's Note: The definition of "gross surface area," which originally followed this
definition, was repealed 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 1848.
§ 249-1 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 249-1
245:497
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign placed inside or upon a window or door facing
the outside and which is intended to be seen from the exterior. Signs on
businesses in a mall or other building that has a common area for the public
to congregate shall be included in this definition.[Amended 12-17-2003
by Ord. No. 1848]
§ 249-2. License required; effect on prior license; exemptions.
§ 249-3. Application for license.
No sign license shall be issued until the application for such license permit
shall first be filed in duplicate with the Township Secretary, on a form
provided by the Township. A separate application form will be required for
each sign. The application form shall consist of:
A. No owner or occupier of any land, structure or building shall erect,
alter, repair, enlarge remove or maintain any sign as defined herein
within the Township of Ridley unless a sign license is obtained from the
Township of Ridley.
B. The term of all such licenses shall be from January 1 until December 31
with no proration for a partial year. Sign licenses must be renewed
annually. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 1848]
C. Said license shall be in addition to any permit required under Article XII
of Chapter 325, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Ridley.
D. The following signs shall not require a sign license: [Amended
12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 1848]
(1) A sign erected by the state, county, Township or other legally
constituted government body or specifically authorized by a
Township ordinance or resolution.
(2) Construction and real estate signs.
E. The following signs shall require a sign license but shall not be required
to pay a fee for such license: [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 1848]
(1) A sign of up to 32 square feet erected by a nonprofit or entirely
charitable entity denoting a special event, provided that it is
erected no more than 45 days total, which includes both before and
after the event.
A. The name and address of the owner of the lot upon which the sign is
located, and the owner of the sign itself, if different.
B. If a new sign, the plan and specifications for the sign, including
dimensions, material and details of construction of said sign, showing
its location and the distance from the side or roof of a building.
C. If an existing, sign, the dimensions of the sign, and any changes to the
sign since the last license and/or permit was issued for the sign.
§ 249-1 RIDLEY CODE § 249-3
245:498
§ 249-4. Certificate of liability insurance required.
The application for such license or permit must be accompanied by a
certificate of liability insurance in such sum as, in the judgment of the
Township Manager, is necessary under all the circumstances of the case,
conditioned for the indemnification of the Township of Ridley from any
and all damages, liabilities, claims, demands, costs and expenses that the
Township may have to pay to any person arising and growing out of the
negligent erection, construction or maintenance of any such sign. If the
applicant is not satisfied with the amount of insurance as fixed by the
Township Manager, the applicant may appeal to the Board of Township
Commissioners, whose action in fixing the amount of the insurance shall be
final.
§ 249-5. Fee.
No such license shall be issued unless the application shall be accompanied
by a fee to be established by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 249-6. Conditions for approval. [Amended 10-22-2014 by Ord. No.
2011]
No application for such license under this chapter shall be approved by
the Code Enforcement Department unless, in the opinion of the Township
Manager, the same does not interfere with the health, safety or welfare of
the community. In addition, the Township Manager shall decide if the sign
content is offensive or objectionable to members of the public and that the
sign utilizes colors and designs that blend with the building and adjacent
buildings.
§ 249-7. Effect on existing signs.
Nothing in this chapter shall require the removal or discontinuance of signs
constructed or maintained prior to the passage of this chapter, provided
that the license is applied for within 30 days of the passage of this chapter.
§ 249-8. Compliance with other standards. [Amended 12-17-2003 by
Ord. No. 1848]
No license under this chapter shall be issued unless it is established, to
the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Department, that the sign is in
conformity with all state, federal and local laws and regulations, as well
as any laws, regulations, or other minimum standards established for the
proper construction, placement, repair, enlargement, illumination, stability
or grounding of signs and/or billboards. Furthermore, no sign other than a
D. The written consent of the owner of the property on which such sign is
to be erected, altered, repaired, enlarged, removed or maintained.
E. A diagram of the lot, showing the exact location on the lot where the
sign will be located.
§ 249-3 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 249-8
245:499
canopy or awning sign or overhang sign shall be placed within the public
right-of-way except for signs in bus shelters which are included within the
Township's Bus Shelter Agreement.
§ 249-9. Prohibition of portable or movable signs; violations and
penalties. [Amended 7-25-2001 by Ord. No. 1813]
§ 249-10. Removal of noncomplying signs.
If a license is not applied for and issued in accordance with the terms of
this chapter or if the license fee is not paid as provided above, the sign
shall be taken down and removed after notice has been given by the Code
Enforcement Department. If not done after notice, the Township, in addition
to the penalties listed in § 249-12, shall have the authority to require the
removal of the sign by the owner or occupier of the grounds and/or the
owner of the sign, in default of which the Township may cause the removal
and collect the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10%, in the manner
provided by law for the collection of municipal claims or by action in
assumpsit without the filing of a claim, or may seek relief by a bill in equity.
§ 249-11. Inspection; removal of hazardous signs.
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Department to inspect every
sign, and if the same is in a condition hazardous to the public safety, to
not the person, firm or corporation owning, controlling or maintaining the
sign to remedy this condition. If not done after notice, the Township, in
addition to the to the penalties listed in § 249-12, shall have the authority
to require the removal of the sign by the owner or occupier of the grounds
and/or the owner of the sign, in default of which the Township may cause
the removal and collect the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10%,
in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims or by
action in assumpsit without the filing of a claim, or may seek relief by a bill
in equity.
A. All portable or movable signs are prohibited from use except those
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance.118
B. All pennants are prohibited from use under this chapter. [Added
12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 1848119]
C. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment
of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30
days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 325, Zoning.
119. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection B as Subsection C.
§ 249-8 RIDLEY CODE § 249-12
245:500
§ 249-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof by any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000, together with the costs, and each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense. Where there are multiple locations being
operated and the same violation occurs at each location, then each violation
shall constitute a separate offense. In default of the payment of the fine, the
defendant shall be sentenced to jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 253
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disposal of animal waste — See Ch. 77.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 224.
Littering — See Ch. 264, Art. I.
Wastewater treatment — See Ch. 314.
§ 249-12 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 249-12
245:501

ARTICLE I
Dumping
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 61, Art. II, of the 1975 Code]
§ 253-1. Permit required.
Hereafter it shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation
to deposit any rubbish of any kind, except as created on the land, unless
the person so using the land shall first obtain a permit from the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of Ridley.
§ 253-2. Application for permit.
The application for such a permit shall describe the location of the land, the
name of the owner or owners and the name of the person, partnership or
corporation seeking permission to make deposit of such materials.
§ 253-3. Fee. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
The person, partnership or corporation receiving this permit shall pay to the
Township of Ridley, for deposit in the treasury of the Township, the sum as
set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for each
year or fraction thereof.
§ 253-4. Maintenance of dump.
The person, partnership or corporation to whom such permit is granted
shall, at his or their expense, keep such dump leveled off and cleaned in a
manner suitable to the Board of Commissioners, and also prevent the same
from catching on fire.
§ 253-5. Inspections; revocation of permit.
Such dump shall be inspected on the part of the Township officers or the
Board of Health, and the disregard of any reasonable regulation shall be
grounds to vacate or cancel the permit.
§ 253-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
§ 253-1 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 253-6
245:503

ARTICLE II
Commercial Trash Collectors
[Adopted 2-20-1985 by Ord. No. 1582]
§ 253-7. Permit required.
No commercial trash collector shall operate within the Township without
first receiving a permit for commercial trash collection from the Township
Manager.
§ 253-8. Application; fees. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
Said permit shall be issued upon completion of an application form and
upon payment of the permit fee in the sum as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Application forms may be
obtained from the Township Manager. The permit fee for any permits issued
after the 31st day of July of any calendar year shall be in the sum as set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 253-9. Required information; insurance.
An application for a commercial trash collection permit shall not be
considered complete until the applicant provides the Township Manager
with a written list of all his commercial customers within the Township
and an insurance certificate showing liability insurance coverage on all his
vehicles with minimum limits of $100,000 and $300,000 for both property
damage and personal injury.
§ 253-10. Expiration of permits.
All commercial trash collection permits shall become null and void on the
31st day of December of each year.
§ 253-11. List of permits to be kept.
The Township Manager shall keep a list of all the commercial trash
collection permits issued each year and shall deliver a copy of said list to
the Police Department of the Township of Ridley to aid in the enforcement
of this article.
§ 253-12. Warning citation.
Any person, firm or corporation which shall operate as a commercial trash
collector within the Township and without a commercial collection permit
as provided for in this article shall be issued a warning citation for the first
offense. Any further offenses by the same person, firm or corporation shall
be punished in accordance with § 253-13.
§ 253-7 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 253-13
245:505
§ 253-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1639; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions in this article shall,
upon summary conviction before any District Justice, pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000, and costs of prosecution, and in default
of payment of fine and costs, the violator may be imprisoned in the county
jail for not more than 30 days. Each and every day which any person, firm
or corporation shall be in violation of this article shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 253-13 RIDLEY CODE § 253-13
245:506
ARTICLE III
Collection of Newspapers
[Adopted 2-20-1985 by Ord. No. 1581]
§ 253-14. Prohibited activity.
From and after the effective date of this article, all residents of the
Township receiving Township trash collection services are prohibited from
mixing or including newspapers, magazines and other like printed material
in their ordinary trash and rubbish.
§ 253-15. Separation of newspapers required.
All residents receiving Township trash collection services shall separate
newspapers, magazines and other like printed material from their ordinary
trash and rubbish and shall place their discarded newspapers, magazines
and other like printed material at or near their regular trash collection
point in securely tied bundles of not more than 25 pounds each on the day
designated for recycling collection by the Township Manager.
§ 253-16. Collection regulated.
No person, firm or corporation shall be permitted to collect discarded
newspapers, magazines and other like printed material without the written
permission of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 253-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1639; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions in this article shall,
upon summary conviction before any District Justice, pay a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000, and costs of prosecution. In default
of payment of the fine and costs, the violator may be sentenced to the
county jail for a term of not more than 30 days. Each and every day which
any person, firm or corporation shall be in violation of this article shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 253-14 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 253-17
245:507

ARTICLE IV
Heavy Trash Disposal
[Adopted 4-25-1990 by Ord. No. 1656]
§ 253-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HEAVY TRASH — Those large household items generated from single family
dwelling units which cannot properly be contained in a standard size
residential trash container. These items include but are not limited to
refrigerators, stoves, water heaters, washing machines dryers and other
larger appliances and furniture.
§ 253-19. Collection.
Heavy trash shall be collected and disposed of by the Township pursuant to
the rules and regulations established by the Township Manager. These rules
and regulations will encompass the manner, materials, number of annual
pickups and costs, if any, and other matters required to implement this
article. The Township Manager may change, modify, repeal or amend any
said portion of said regulations at any time.
§ 253-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1639; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions in this article shall,
upon summary conviction before any District Justice, pay a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000, and costs of prosecution. In default
of payment of the fine and costs, the violator may be sentenced to the
county jail for a term of not more than 30 days. Each and every day which
any person, firm or corporation shall be in violation of this article shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 253-18 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 253-20
245:509

ARTICLE V
Solid Waste Management
[Adopted 7-15-1987 by Ord. No. 1614]
§ 253-21. Definitions. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article:
ACT — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980, as
amended, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
COLLECTOR — Any person collecting or transporting municipal solid waste
for owners or occupants of property in the municipality, including the
municipality itself, if it undertakes the collection of municipal solid waste
directly, and any business or institution within the municipality which
generates municipal solid waste and uses its own employees and equipment
for the collection and transport of the waste.
CONTRACTOR — One or more contractors with whom the county or the
Delaware County Solid Waste Authority (hereinafter referred to as
"Authority") contracts for construction and operation of the proposed
resource recovery plant or plants or other solid waste facilities.
COUNTY — The county, the Delaware County Solid Waste Authority and/or
the Authority's contractor.
COUNTY PLAN — The Delaware County Solid Waste Management Plan
of 1985, which was reviewed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, revised and is dated December 1986.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Ridley.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom
or office waste and other material, including solid or semisolid material
generated in residential, municipal, commercial or institutional
establishments and from community activities, and other solid waste which
is within the definition of "municipal solid waste" as set forth in the Act and
which the county, Authority or contractor, by its ordinance or regulations, is
willing to accept at the plant, but excluding:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or
governmental entity, with the exception of the county, Authority or
designated contractor.
A. Any solid waste or sludge.
All wastes which are defined by existing or future federal or state laws
or regulations as hazardous waste or industrial residual waste.
B.
Any waste which may be marketable and which is intentionally
segregated for purposes of recycling.
C.
D. Materials specifically excluded under applicable county ordinances.
§ 253-21 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 253-21
245:511
PLANT — The energy and/or material recovery facility or facilities, transfer
station or solid waste plants owned by the county or Authority or the
contractor, including all associated property and equipment.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Any site owned and operated by the county,
the Authority or its designated contractor for the purpose of transfer,
processing or disposal of municipal solid waste, including landfills, resource
recovery plants and transfer stations.
§ 253-22. Prohibited acts.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person
to accumulate upon any property in this municipality any municipal solid
waste or to dispose of it except in accordance with this article and other
applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
§ 253-23. Plant operations and charges.
The municipality has been advised by the county that the solid waste plan
proposes to provide for a plant or plants which will be operated efficiently
and economically by the contractor and/or by the county and in accordance
with all applicable laws and regulations and also that the contractor and/or
the county will impose reasonable charges, which will be uniform among all
classes of users of the plant or plants.
§ 253-24. Collection by licensed collectors.
Except as it pertains to municipal solid waste collected directly by this
municipality, all collectors of municipal solid waste generated within the
municipality shall be licensed by the municipality and shall be responsible
for collecting municipal solid waste from properties in the municipality
pursuant to a contract between them and the municipality and/or contracts
between them and the owners or occupants of properties.
§ 253-25. Disposal at designated site.
All collectors shall deliver and dispose of all municipal solid waste collected
within the municipality at the solid waste facility designated by the county,
subject to such reasonable regulations for the operation thereof as may be
established by the county and/or contractor. Delivery and disposal at any
other place shall be a violation of this article and cause for revocation of
the collector's license, except in special circumstances approved in advance
by the municipality and the county and/or contractor. All collectors shall
comply in their operation with all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations pertaining to the collection and transportation of municipal
solid waste.
§ 253-26. Private dumps, transfer stations and landfills prohibited.
No person shall use or permit to be used any property owned or occupied
by him within the municipality as a public or private dump, transfer station
§ 253-21 RIDLEY CODE § 253-26
245:512
or landfill for municipal solid waste, whether generated within the
municipality or elsewhere, without the express written approval of the
municipality.
§ 253-27. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1639; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment thereof shall be committed to the county jail for
a period not exceeding 30 days; and each day's continuance of a violation
of this article, as well as each truckload of illegally delivered trash, shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 253-28. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to the remedies provided in § 253-27 herein, any continued
violation of this article or other applicable law which shall constitute a
nuisance in fact or which, in the opinion of the governing body of this
municipality, shall constitute a nuisance may be abated by proceeding
against the violator in a court of equity for relief.
§ 253-29. Rules and regulations.
The collection of municipal solid waste in the municipality and the disposal
thereof shall be subject to such further reasonable rules and regulations
as may from time to time be promulgated by the governing body of the
municipality, including, but without limitation, regulations as to the form of
license application, the amount of fee to be charged for said licenses and the
terms of the licenses and license issuance procedures; provided, however,
that no such rules and regulations shall be contrary to the provisions of this
article, the county solid waste plan or applicable law.
§ 253-30. Amendments; effect of contract.
The municipality reserves the right to amend this article or repeal it at any
time; provided, however, that the requirement for use of the designated
solid waste facility for disposal of municipal solid waste from the
municipality shall not be amended or repealed without the prior express
written approval of the county during the term of the contract between
the county, or Authority, and the contractor providing for the construction
and operation of the plant, which contract shall have a term of 25 years.
For the purposes of securing the contractor's financing, such requirement
shall be deemed to be a contract between the county, the contractor and
the municipality which the municipality, subject to the terms of the joint
cooperation agreement set forth below, agrees to enforce so that the
municipal solid waste from the municipality will be available to provide a
source of energy for the plant. If the municipality is not now a collector but
§ 253-26 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 253-30
245:513
in the future it becomes a collector, it agrees to deliver all municipal solid
waste so collected to the plant.
§ 253-31. Joint cooperation agreement.
§ 253-32. Adoption of Solid Waste Management Plan.
A. The municipality agrees to deliver or cause to be delivered during the
term of this agreement all municipal solid waste, as defined herein,
generated within the municipality for disposal at a facility designated
by the county.
B. The county agrees to accept for disposal all such municipal solid waste
described in Subsection A above upon completion and commencement
of operation of the plant in accordance with a contract, containing
terms satisfactory to the county, with the contractor providing for
construction and operation of the plant.
C. The term of this agreement shall be for a period of 25 years, and said
term shall commence on January 1, 2017. The municipality, at its
option, may terminate this agreement with 30 days' written notice to
the county in the event that the municipality will incur substantial costs
over and above the costs generally accepted by the other municipalities
in delivering municipal solid waste to the county during the term of this
agreement, provided that the municipality has first obtained final
approval from the Department of Environmental Protection for its own
plan under the Act or an approval from the Department for a
modification that brings the municipality under another plan that has
already obtained final approval. It is understood, however, that, upon
any such termination of this agreement by the Municipality, the county,
the Authority and/or the county's contractor shall be relieved of any
responsibility to accept and dispose of municipal solid waste generated
within the municipality. It is further understood that any such
termination of this agreement by the municipality shall constitute a
repeal, whether express or implied, of § 253-32 of this article.
[Amended 1-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2025]
D. The county shall hold harmless and defend the municipality from any
suit, claim or action challenging the legality of this article against the
municipality. In the event that any such suit, claim or action is brought
against the municipality, the municipality shall authorize the county,
through its designated legal counsel, to defend against the same, and
the municipality shall cooperate with the county in such defense and
shall give the County Solicitor notice of any such suit, claim or action
within five days of the municipality's receiving notice thereof.
A. The Department of Environmental Protection has recommended that
the requirements of the Solid Waste Management Act can best be
accomplished on a county-wide basis.
§ 253-30 RIDLEY CODE § 253-32
245:514
§ 253-33. When effective; disposal prior to completion of plant.
This chapter shall become effective immediately. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, this municipality shall have neither the right nor the obligation
to dispose of its municipal solid waste at the plant which is contemplated
under this article until said plant is constructed and fully operational.
B. The municipality, by formal resolution dated July 15, 1987, authorized
the county to prepare the Solid Waste Management Plan on the
municipality's behalf.
C. The county, through the staff of its Public Works Department, its
Planning Commission and Charles M. Harris and Associates, Inc.,
consulting engineers, prepared a ten-year plan for solid waste
management.
D. The appropriate municipal officials of this municipality have reviewed
the findings and recommendations of the plan as it affects this
municipality, have found the plan acceptable and have recommended
that the plan be adopted.
E. The municipality, accordingly, hereby accepts and adopts the solid
waste management study prepared by the county as the ten-year plan
for solid waste management required by the Act.
F. The county is hereby authorized to submit the plan to the Department
of Environmental Protection for the final approval on behalf of the
municipality.
§ 253-32 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 253-33
245:515

ARTICLE VI
Recycling
[Adopted 4-25-1990 by Ord. No. 1648]
§ 253-34. Purpose.
The purpose of this article of the Township of Ridley is to facilitate the
disposal of solid waste generated within the Township in the most
economical and environmentally accepted manner and reduce the total
amount of solid waste disposed of by the Township. This program is further
designed to protect the health and safety of the residents of the Township.
§ 253-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
CURBSIDE RECYCLING COLLECTION — The scheduled collection and
transport of recyclable material placed at the curbline by residences,
subject to Chapter 253 of the General Code of the Township of
Ridley.[Amended 9-24-2008 by Ord. No. 1944]
GLASS CONTAINERS — All empty bottles and jars made of clear, green
or brown glass except non-container glass, plate glass, blue glass and
porcelain and ceramic products.
SINGLE-STREAM RECYCLABLES (referred to as "recyclables") —
[Amended 9-24-2008 by Ord. No. 1944]
§ 253-36. Program established.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
recyclable materials from solid waste by persons residing in residential
dwellings for which the Township of Ridley, hereinafter referred to as the
"Township," provides municipal waste collection services.
Recyclables shall include the following: newspapers, inserts and junk
mail; magazines, catalogs and envelopes; paperback books and
phonebooks; cardboard and clean pizza boxes; office and school papers
(including colored paper); boxboard (cereal, cake and cracker boxes);
paper egg cartons; paper bags (grocery type); aluminum cans and clean
foil; tin and steel aerosol cans (empty); empty glass jars and bottles; all
plastic containers labeled "1" through "7."
A.
The following materials are not accepted: plastic bags; polystyrene
cups or plates; motor oil bottles; hazardous chemical containers; plastic
toys or sporting goods; electronics or batteries; compact discs or DVDs;
foam egg cartons; ice cream cartons; light bulbs; hangers; yard waste
or garden tools; hardcover books.
B.
§ 253-34 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 253-37
245:517
§ 253-37. Separation and collection. [Amended 6-23-2004 by Ord.
No. 1867; 9-24-2008 by Ord. No. 1944]
A. Residential.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of all residents to separate recyclables
from all residential solid waste and place them out for collection in
the following manner:
(a) Recyclables shall be placed in a separate container supplied by
the resident (without a liner) not be exceed 50 pounds total
weight.
(b) Prior to placement for collection and removal, recyclables shall
be cleaned, and all contents shall be removed therefrom. Caps
shall be removed from glass.
(c) Recyclables for collection shall be placed in separate
containers supplied by residents with stickers provided by the
Township affixed thereto, and placed at the curbside on the
date prescribed by the Township.
(d) Recyclables shall not be placed in the same container as or
otherwise mixed with other forms of solid waste.
(e) Leaf waste, as defined by Act 101, must be separated and shall
not be mixed with other forms of solid waste.
(2) It shall be unlawful for a person to collect from a resident and
dispose of solid waste which consists of recyclables combined with
other forms of solid waste.
(3) The Township is empowered to designate the day of the week on
which recyclables shall be collected and removed from a particular
area. Recyclables shall not be collected or removed from any area
except on the day of the week designated by the Township.
B. Multifamily dwellings. The owner, landlord, or an agent of an owner or
landlord of multifamily dwellings whose solid waste is not collected by
the Township shall establish a collection system for recyclables as
defined above at each property. The collection system must contain
suitable containers for collecting materials, easily accessible locations
for the containers and written instructions to the occupants concerning
the use and availability of the collection system. Leaf waste, as defined
by Act 101, must be separated and shall not be mixed with other forms
of solid waste.
C. Commercial establishments. Commercial, industrial, municipal and
institutional establishments shall separate and store, until collection,
all recyclables as defined above. These establishments must arrange for
the transfer of the materials to a recycling system and, if that system is
separate from that used in the Township for residential dwellings, the
§ 253-37 RIDLEY CODE § 253-37
245:518
§ 253-38. Collection by unauthorized persons.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person(s) unauthorized by
the Township to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up any such recyclable material. Each such collection in violation hereof
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided. Ownership of recyclables set out at curbside for collection shall
thereupon vest in the Township.
§ 253-39. Administration and enforcement.
The Township Manager or his/her designee is authorized and directed to
enforce this article. The same is hereby authorized and directed to establish
and promulgate reasonable regulations as to the manner, materials, days
and times for the collection of recyclable materials in accordance with
the terms hereof and any other matter required to implement this article.
The Township Manager or his/her designee may change, modify, repeal or
amend any portion of said rules and regulations at any time.
§ 253-40. Violations and penalties.
establishments shall annually provide to the Township evidence of such
arrangement and documentation of the total number of tons recycled.
A. Any person engaged in the business of collecting solid waste or
rendering solid waste services, who is not authorized by the Township,
shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $200
and not exceeding the sum of $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment thereof shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 30 days. Each day such violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 10-25-2000
by Ord. No. 1808]
B. The violation of § 253-37A and B shall be punishable as follows:
(1) For first conviction: by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than
$25.
(2) For a second conviction within one year: by a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $50.
(3) For a third conviction within one year: by a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $100.
(4) For a fourth and each subsequent conviction within one year: by a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $250.
C. The violation of § 253-37C shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
$100 and not exceeding the sum of $1,000, plus costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment thereof shall be sentenced to imprisonment
for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day such violation occurs or
§ 253-37 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 253-40
245:519
§ 253-41. Collection agreements.
The Township may enter in an agreement or agreements with public or
private agencies or firms to authorized them to collect all or part of the
recyclable material from the curbside.
continues shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 10-25-2000
by Ord. No. 1808]
§ 253-40 RIDLEY CODE § 253-41
245:520
ARTICLE VII
Collection
[Adopted 5-28-2003 by Ord. No. 1840]
§ 253-42. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials for the purposes of heating and cooking. It shall not
include the cinders produced in steam-generating plants.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE — All refuse generated from sources within
Ridley Township which are not included in the definitions of residential or
residential/commercial solid waste.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of foods. It shall not include more
than a minimum amount of free liquids. It shall not include food-processing
waste from canneries, packing plants or similar industries, nor large
quantities of condemned food products.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, association, corporation or housing
authority.
REFUSE — Garbage, ashes and rubbish as herein defined.
RESIDENTIAL/COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE — Refuse generated from
individually owned townhouses and condominiums or a building or group
of buildings having a common ownership and containing or comprising
multiple-family dwelling units of seven or more units.
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE — Refuse generated from single-family
dwelling units, including individually owned townhouses and
condominiums, or generated from a building or group of buildings having
a common ownership and containing multiple-family dwelling units not
exceeding six units in number.
RUBBISH — All waste materials not included in garbage and ashes, except
building rubbish from building construction or reconstruction, street refuse,
industrial refuse, dead animals, abandoned machinery or vehicles or parts
thereof and such other waste materials as are not commonly produced in
homes, stores and institutions.
§ 253-43. Collection by Township; exception.
A. All ashes and rubbish accumulated in any single-family or two-family
house, apartment or condominium consisting of six or fewer units or
dwellings in the Township of Ridley shall be collected, conveyed and
disposed of by the Township, and the cost of such service shall be paid
for as provided in the schedule of fees set forth in § 253-46 hereof by
§ 253-42 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 253-43
245:521
§ 253-44. Preparation for collection; containers and storage.
the person owning the building or buildings from which the ashes and
rubbish have been accumulated.
B. All garbage accumulated in any single-family or two-family house,
apartment or condominium consisting of six or fewer units or dwellings
in the Township of Ridley shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of
by the Township.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and dispose of any refuse
within the Township of Ridley except as provided in this article.
D. By reason of the great amount of refuse being accumulated by shopping
centers, supermarkets, manufacturing plants, hotels, restaurants and
apartments or condominiums consisting of more than six units, the
collection of which would unduly burden the facilities of the Township,
all shopping centers, supermarkets, manufacturing plants, hotels,
restaurants and apartment or condominiums consisting of more than
six units shall dispose of their own refuse in watertight vehicles
provided with tight covers and so operated as to prevent offensive odors
escaping therefrom and refuse from being blown, dropped or spilled. It
shall be unlawful for any such shopping centers, supermarkets, hotels,
restaurants and apartments or condominiums consisting of more than
six units to dispose of any such refuse within the Township of Ridley.
E. By reason of the great expense imposed by Delaware County on
disposal of commercial solid waste, the collection of which would
unduly burden the facilities and financial resources of the Township, all
commercial establishments shall dispose of their own refuse in
watertight vehicles provided with tight covers and so operated as to
prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and refuse from being
blown, dropped or spilled. It shall be unlawful for any such commercial
unit to dispose of any such refuse within the Township of Ridley.
F. Within 30 days of the effective date of this article, all owners and
tenants in possession of commercial or industrial property within the
Township and generating commercial solid waste, as that term is
defined in § 253-42 of the Code, shall notify the Township Manager, in
writing, of the name and address of the commercial trash collector
responsible for the collection and removal of their commercial solid
waste.
A. Separation of refuse. Garbage, ashes and rubbish shall each be placed
in separate containers.
B. Preparation of refuse.
(1) All garbage, before being placed in garbage cans for collections,
shall be drained of all free liquids and may be wrapped in paper.
§ 253-43 RIDLEY CODE § 253-44
245:522
(2) All rubbish shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for
collection.
(3) All cans and bottles which have contained food shall be thoroughly
rinsed and drained before being deposited for collection.
(4) Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar material shall be cut to
a length not to exceed two feet and securely tied in bundles not
more than two feet thick before being deposited for collection.
C. Refuse containers.
(1) Garbage.
(a) Garbage receptacles shall be made of metal and must be
watertight and shall be provided with a tight-fitting cover.
(b) In all single-family or two-family dwellings, no garbage
receptacle shall have a capacity of more than 20 gallons.
(c) In all multiple dwellings, apartments or condominiums
consisting of six or fewer units and jointly owned buildings that
house more than two families, each garbage receptacle shall
be of sufficient capacity to service not less than three nor more
than eight families and of a type commonly known as a
"dumpster," the specification of which is on file in the office of
the Township Secretary.
(d) All receptacles shall be kept in a sanitary condition, in view of
their use, and shall be thoroughly cleansed by the occupant or
janitor of the premises within three hours after the garbage is
removed by the collector.
(2) Ashes. The provisions of this Subsection C pertaining to garbage
shall apply to ashes.
(3) Rubbish. All rubbish receptacles shall be of such type as shall
securely contain their contents.
(4) All refuse receptacles shall be maintained in good condition and
shall not have ragged or sharp edges. Refusal to comply with this
provision will result in refusal to collect the refuse.
(5) The Secretary of the Township is hereby directed to send a copy of
this Subsection C by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to each owner of multiple dwellings, apartment houses,
condominiums and jointly owned buildings that house more than
two families; the copy of this Subsection C being notice to comply
with the provisions hereof within 30 days.
(6) All cans, containers, receptacles and dumpsters used for
commercial solid waste shall have a permanent label affixed
thereto with the words "commercial waste" printed on said label.
§ 253-44 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 253-44
245:523
The Township shall provide said labels to all owners and tenants
in possession of commercial and industrial property generating
commercial solid waste, as that term is defined by § 253-42 of the
Code.
D. Storage of refuse.
(1) No person shall place any refuse in any street or highway, alley or
other public place or upon any private property, whether owned by
such person or not, within the Township, except that the same shall
be in receptacles, as above defined, for collection, or except by an
express approval granted by the Board of Township
Commissioners. As to the requirements for refuse containers
commonly known as "dumpsters," it shall be mandatory that
dumpsters by placed in an enclosed area and surrounded by either
a cyclone fence with plastic slats or, in the alternative, a wall
consisting of a minimum of eight-inch block and/or masonry
construction at a height of not less than six feet and not more than
eight feet, with walls enclosing three sides of the dumpster, with a
gate being placed on the front portion of the fence or wall of a type
and size which shall allow for the movement of dumpsters in and
out of the enclosed area for loading and unloading. All dumpsters
shall be located at least three feet from any property line and shall
not encroach within the area known as the "front building line."
(2) Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse is deemed to be a
nuisance and is hereby prohibited. Failure to remove any existing
accumulation of refuse within five days of written notice of said
accumulation of refuse shall be deemed a violation of the provisions
of this article. In addition, the Township shall have the power and
authority to collect said refuse and remove it, in default of which
the Township may cause the same to be done and collect the cost
thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of said costs, in the manner
provided by law for the collection of municipal claims or by action
of assumpsit without the filing of a municipal claim.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the occupants of the
premises upon which the refuse receptacles are stored or the
collector, to remove covers or any of the contents of refuse
receptacles.
E. Points of collection. Refuse receptacles shall be placed for collection at
ground level on the property, not within the right-of-way of a street,
highway or alley, and accessible to and not more than 10 feet from the
side of the highway, street or alley from which collection is made,
provided that receptacles may be placed for collection at other than
ground level and at a distance of more that 10 feet when approved by
the Health and Sanitation Committee of the Township Commissioners
and upon an additional payment for the extra service, such charge to be
agreed upon by the said Committee and the landowner. All such
§ 253-44 RIDLEY CODE § 253-44
245:524
§ 253-45. Manner of collection.
payments must be made by check, made payable to the Township of
Ridley.
A. Frequency of collection. Refuse shall be collected at least once a week.
Stores, shopping centers, supermarkets, manufacturing plants, hotels,
restaurants and apartments or condominiums consisting of more than
six units, which are required to dispose of their refuse, must dispose of
the same at least once a week and, where necessary to protect the
public health and safety, the Health and Sanitation Committee of the
Township may require that more frequent collections be made.
B. Limitation of quantity.
(1) It is the intent of this article that the reasonable accumulation of
refuse of each family for the collection period will be collected at
the standard charge. The Health and Sanitation Committee of the
Township may refuse to collect unreasonable accumulations of
refuse, or in its discretion, may make additional charges for such
amounts.
(2) It is the intent of this article that stores, shopping centers,
supermarkets, manufacturing plants, hotels, restaurants and
apartments or condominiums consisting of more than six units shall
privately contract for the collection of and have collected their
accumulation of refuse at reasonable times so that there shall not
be an undue or unreasonable amount accumulated prior to
collection.
C. Special refuse problems.
(1) Contagious-disease refuse. The removal of wearing apparel,
bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly
infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed should be
performed under the supervision and direction of the Health
Officer. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular
collection.
(2) Flammable or other explosive refuse. Highly flammable or other
explosive materials should not be placed in containers for regular
collection but shall be disposed of as directed by the Chairman of
the Health and Sanitation Committee, at the expense of the owner
or possessor thereof.
(3) All garbage receptacles shall have prominently displayed thereon
the occupant's or owner's house address, including apartment
numbers and/or letters of the premises upon which the refuse
receptacles are stored.
(4) It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises
within the Township of Ridley to leave garbage receptacles at the
§ 253-44 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 253-45
245:525
§ 253-46. Fees.
points of collection as defined herein in excess of 12 hours before
or after the refuse has been collected. Where it is impossible to
determine to a certainty the start of the twelve-hour period prior
to collection, such period is deemed to begin at 6:00 p.m. local
time on the day before the date of pickup. Where it is impossible
to determine to a certainty the end of the twelve-hour period after
collection, such period is deemed to end at 12:00 midnight local
time on the date of pickup.
(5) In all multiple dwellings, apartment houses, condominiums and
jointly owned buildings that consist of more than three units, each
premises must have a storage facility adjacent to the building to
store the refuse receptacles, and such refuse receptacles must be
stored therein when not at the point of collection.
(6) Both the owner and the occupant may be held jointly or singularly
liable for any violation of the regulations provided for by
Subsections C(3), (4) and (5).
(7) Broken glass, syringes, needles and other sharp objects must be
disposed of in suitable closed containers before being placed in
normal trash in order to prevent exposure to the general public and
the trash collectors in particular. [Added 4-25-2007 by Ord. No.
1920]
A. The basic fee for the collection and disposal of ashes, garbage and
rubbish shall be determined as provided by the Annual Budget
Ordinance adopted by the Board of Township Commissioners. If such
fee shall remain unpaid by the first day of June of any year, a penalty of
10% shall be added to the face amount of such fee. Each month
thereafter, lawful interest in the amount of 10% per annum shall be
added to the face amount of the fee. In the event that the fee shall not
be paid within six months from the date that the same is payable, the
fee, penalty and interest shall constitute a lien against the property
charged, and the amount thereof may be recovered by due process of
law in all respects to the recovery of municipal liens.
B. The owner of record of a residence building, or lessee of the residence
building who is obligated by the lease agreement to pay the refuse
collection charge, and who is a person over 65 years of age and/or a
widowed person who qualified for the Pennsylvania Property Tax
Refund for the previous year may request a refund of $25 for the year
2006 and annually thereafter, unless otherwise determined. The proof
of approved qualification by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania must
be submitted at the time of refund application. [Added 12-27-2005 by
Ord. No. 1895]
§ 253-45 RIDLEY CODE § 253-47
245:526
§ 253-47. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall,
upon summary conviction before any District Justice, pay a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $1,000 and the costs of prosecution. In default of
the fine and costs, the violator may be sentenced to the county jail for a
term of not more that 30 days. Each and every day in which a person, firm
or corporation shall be in violation of this article shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 253-47 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 253-47
245:527

ARTICLE VIII
Receptacles and Bins
[Adopted 12-29-2004 by Ord. No. 1878120]
§ 253-48. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the terms "receptacles" and "bins" refer to
such containers that are placed on properties for the purposes of collecting
donated materials, such as clothing.
§ 253-49. Permit required for placement of receptacle or bin.
No person, partnership, corporation or property owner shall place or
maintain a collection receptacle or bin on his property unless a permit has
been obtained from the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Ridley.
The Board shall not charge a fee for this permit.
§ 253-50. Application for permit.
The application for such a permit shall describe the location of the land, the
name of the owner or owners of the land, the name of the organization for
whom the receptacles or bins are collecting items, and the length of time
the applicant plans to have the receptacle or bin on his property.
§ 253-51. Regulations of receptacles and bins.
§ 253-52. Revocation of permit.
Violation of any of the regulations of this article by the applicant shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit. The receptacle or bin shall be
removed upon revocation of the permit.
A. The receptacle or bin must be conspicuously marked with the name and
address of its owners and have a copy of the permit affixed.
B. The receptacle or bin must be properly adorned with flashing signals,
lights, illuminated barricades or reflectors in order to ensure the safety
of pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic.
C. The placement of the receptacle or bin shall not block the flow of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
D. The receptacle or bin shall not be placed where the location or
scattered debris may come within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
E. The receptacle or bin must be emptied in a timely manner so that
excess materials do not gather outside the receptacle or bin.
120. Editor's Note: This ordinance was adopted as Art. VII, §§ 253-48 through 253-52 and
renumbered for purposes of codification.
§ 253-48 SHOWS AND SPECIAL EVENTS § 253-52
245:529
Chapter 256
SPEED-TIMING DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 299.
§ 256-1. Use authorized.
The Police Department of Ridley Township is hereby authorized to use
electrical speed-timing devices to enforce the speed restrictions established
by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code121 and the ordinances of the
Township of Ridley; provided, however, that such devices may only be used
under the following conditions:
§ 256-2. Purchase of approved devices.
The Captain of Police is hereby authorized to purchase an electrical speedtiming
device of the type approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
§ 256-3. Periodic testing.
The Captain of Police is directed to arrange for periodic testing of the
accuracy of the electrical speed-timing device, said testing to be carried out
every 60 days or sooner.
§ 256-4. Training of police officers.
The Captain of Police is authorized to arrange for the training of police
officers in the operation and use of the electrical speed-timing device.
§ 256-5. Erection of signs.
The Captain of Police is authorized to direct the Superintendent of
Highways of the Township to erect official highway signs warning the public
of the use of electrical speed-timing devices. Said warning signs are to be
posted in a conspicuous place on any highway or street where the Police
Department intends to use the electrical speed-timing device.
A. The device must be of a type approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation.
B. The device must have been tested for accuracy within 60 days of its
intended use.
C. The device must be operated by a trained and qualified police officer.
121. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 253-52 RIDLEY CODE § 256-6
256:530
§ 256-6. Establishment of regulations and procedures.
The Captain of Police shall establish regulations and procedures for the use
of an electrical speed-timing device.
Chapter 260
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Chapter 264
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fencing of excavations — See Ch. 129, Art. I.
Loitering on streets — See Ch. 176.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 199.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 224.
Seasonal sales — See Ch. 228.
Obstruction of streets and sidewalks by trees
and branches — See Ch. 290, Art. II.
On-street parking — See Ch. 299.
§ 256-6 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 256-6
256:531

ARTICLE I
Littering
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 123, Art. I, of the 1975 Code]
§ 264-1. Deposit of litter prohibited.
No person shall litter nor place any waste, debris or other like material on
any sidewalk or pavement in the Township of Ridley.
§ 264-2. Maintenance of premises.
No owner, tenant or occupier of any land or building in the Township of
Ridley shall permit any sidewalk or pavement adjacent or contiguous to
lands owned or occupied by him to have any waste, debris or other like
material thereon.
§ 264-3. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
§ 264-1 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-3
256:533

ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Construction Regulations
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 123, Art. III, of the 1975 Code]
§ 264-4. Compliance with specifications required. [Amended
8-1-1979 by Ord. No. 1484]
§ 264-5. Construction by property owner.
Before any curbs or sidewalks shall be constructed in the Township of
Ridley, the owner of the property along whose land the same are
constructed shall first obtain from the Township Engineer the lines and
grades for such curbs and sidewalks, at the cost and expense of the
landowner, and shall construct the same only in accordance with such lines
and grades.
§ 264-6. Permit required; fee. [Amended 11-2-1977 by Ord. No.
1451]
A. No curbs or sidewalks shall be constructed along any street, highway or
road in the Township of Ridley except in accordance with the
specifications set forth in Article III, Sidewalk Construction
Specifications, of this Chapter 264 of the Code of the Township of
Ridley.
B. Before any transfer in ownership of any improved property containing a
building takes place, the owner shall be required to reconstruct the
existing curbs and sidewalks located thereon upon receiving an order to
do so from the Township Code Enforcement Officer. Said reconstruction
shall be carried out in accordance with the specifications for
construction of sidewalks and curbs contained in Article III of this
Chapter 264 of the Code of the Township of Ridley. [Amended
2-16-1983 by Ord. No. 1547]
A. After such lines and grades are obtained, the owner of the property
shall present them to the Township Secretary and apply for a permit for
the construction of curbs and/or sidewalks, attaching to such
application a copy of the lines and grades obtained from the Township
Engineer for the construction thereof.
B. In all cases where the work is proposed to be done by a private
contractor, the application shall be accompanied by:
(1) A corporate surety performance bond in the sum as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for the use of the
owner of the property for whom such work is to be done,
conditioned that such work shall fully comply with provisions of
Article III, Sidewalk Construction Specifications, of this Chapter
264 of the Code of the Township of Ridley, being the specifications
for the construction of curbs and sidewalks. In lieu of a separate
bond for each contract, the private contractor may file with the
§ 264-4 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-6
256:535
§ 264-7. Removal and reconstruction of noncomplying sidewalks.
Any curbs or sidewalks constructed at lines or grades not established by
the Township Engineer or contrary to the application shall be subject to
removal by the Township officials, and the property shall be recurbed and
repaved in accordance with the Township lines and grades, at the cost of
the landowner.
§ 264-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
In addition to any other remedies provided herein, any person, firm or
corporation who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine and
costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day such
a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
Township a corporate surety bond in the sum as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners, naming the
Township of Ridley as obligee, for the use of any person for whom
such work is to be done, conditioned that such work shall fully
comply with Article III, Sidewalk Construction Specifications, of
this Chapter 264 of the Code of the Township of Ridley. Said
bond shall be for a period of one year. Said surety bonds shall
be accepted by the Township only upon approval of the Township
Solicitor. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
(2) A certification by the contractor that he will not commence work
until the Township Engineer or Township Inspector approves the
type of materials and their placement.
(3) A certificate to be signed by the contractor that he will not seek
payment for the cost of construction and material until he receives
a written certification by the Township Engineer or Township
Inspector that all work and materials are in accordance with
Township specifications.
(4) Cash, certified check or money order, payable to the Township of
Ridley, covering the costs of a permit fee and the line and grade and
inspection fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners. [Amended 6-15-1988 by Ord. No. 1628;
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
§ 264-6 RIDLEY CODE § 264-8
256:536
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Construction Specifications
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 123, Art. IV, of the 1975 Code]
§ 264-9. Conformance required.
Hereafter all sidewalks constructed in the Township of Ridley shall conform
to the specifications contained in this article.
§ 264-10. Work subject to inspection.
All work shall be done subject to the inspection of the Township Engineer,
and if in his opinion such work does not conform to the Township standards,
the same shall be removed and made to conform thereto.
§ 264-11. Specifications. [Amended 9-22-1993 by Ord. No. 1709]
Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the excavation, mortar strength,
expansion joints and finishing of said sidewalks shall conform to the
following:
Specifications for the
Construction of Sidewalks
and Curbs for the
Township of Ridley,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania
A. Specifications for plain cement concrete curb.
(1) Description. Concrete curb shall be six inches wide at the top, eight
inches in width at the bottom and 18 inches in depth, unless
otherwise specified, and shall be constructed on the prepared
subgrade to the approved line and grade and shall consist of
concrete complying with the requirements specified. Work within
state highway rights-of-way shall conform to latest edition of
PennDOT Specifications.
(2) Forms. The forms for the curb shall be of approved metal, except
wood forms may be used on sharp curves and short tangent
sections when approved by the Engineer. Forms shall be straight,
free from warp, and of sufficient strength when staked to resist the
pressure of the concrete without springing. At least three stakes
shall be provided for each 10 feet. Metal forms shall be of approved
section and shall have a flat surface on top and wood forms shall be
one-and-one-half-inch surfaced planks. These forms shall be of a
depth equal to the depth of curb, so designed as to permit secure
fastening of face and back forms at the tops. These fastenings shall
be so designed that they will not obstruct satisfactory finishing and
§ 264-9 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-11
256:537
edging of the top of the curb and will permit removal of the face
forms. The outside of back forms shall be straight from top to
bottom. The inside of face forms shall have a batter from the top
of the curb to the bottom and shall be straight. Steel templates 1/
8 inch in thickness of the width of the curb, and not less than two
inches longer than the depth of the curb, shall be used to separate
adjacent sections. All forms and templates shall be cleaned
thoroughly and treated with an approved material as required to
prevent the concrete from adhering thereto. Oil, tar paper or other
material which will adhere to or discolor the concrete shall not be
used. Forms and templates which have become worn, bent, warped
or broken shall not be used. The forms shall be accurately set
to line and grade in such a manner an to prevent settlement or
displacement.
(3) Excavation. Excavation shall be made to the required depth and the
material upon which the curb is to be constructed shall be
compacted to a firm, even surface. Where foundations are
unsuitable, select material shall be constructed under the curb.
(4) Placing and finishing concrete. The concrete shall be placed in the
forms in horizontal layers not to exceed five inches and spaded
sufficiently to eliminate all voids. Where indicated or directed,
drainage openings shall be made through the curb at the elevation
and of the size required. The curb shall be depressed as indicated
and directed. The top surface of the curb shall be finished true to
the line and grade in a smooth, neat and even manner by means of
wood floats and the edges of the face and back shall be rounded to
a radius of not more than 3/4 inch and 1/4 inch, respectively, while
the concrete is still plastic.
(5) Joints. The curb shall be constructed in uniform lengths or sections
of 10 feet, except where shorter sections are necessary for closures
of curves, but no section shall be less than four feet. Premoulded
expansion joints, 1/4 inch in thickness and cut to conform with the
cross-sections of curved curb and at intervals of not more than 96
feet. Intermediate joints between sections shall be formed of two
thicknesses of one-ply bituminous paper, cut neatly to the crosssection
of the curb and one paper placed on each side of the
templates. If the method of handling the work is such that the
templates are not removed satisfactorily, the curb shall be
constructed in alternate sections. Where new curb abuts existing
curb, premoulded expansion joints shall be placed.
(6) Removal of forms. The forms shall not be removed within 24 hours
after the concrete has been placed. No rubbing to correct
irregularities will be permitted until the full curing period has
elapsed. Any irregular surface shall be corrected by rubbing with a
carborundum stone. Brush finishing or plastering will not be
permitted and all rejected curb shall be promptly removed and
replaced at the expense of the contractor. All joints in the curb shall
§ 264-11 RIDLEY CODE § 264-11
256:538
be opened from top to bottom immediately after the forms are
removed and the edges adjacent to the joints shall be sharp and
clean cut. After the forms are removed, minor defects shall be filled
with mortar composed of one part of cement and two parts of fine
aggregate.
(7) Curing. All concrete shall be kept damp for period of at least three
days. Moisture retaining covers such as burlap, cotton or jute mats
are to be used. The covers shall be kept constantly moist enough to
provide a film of moisture on the concrete surface. Curing by any
other standard method shall be subject to the approval of the
Engineer. Pigmented compound must be used if selected as an
alternate method.
(8) Backfilling. After the concrete has attained the required strength,
the spaces in front and in back of the curb shall be backfilled with
acceptable material in layers of not more than four inches in depth.
Each layer shall be thoroughly compacted to the required elevation
and cross-section.
(9) Removing and replacing existing curb.
(a) Removing and replacing existing curb will include the removal
and disposal of all unsound or disintegrated concrete and the
renewal with new curbing, 18 inches in depth, in accordance
with these specifications.
(b) The surface of the adjoining old concrete, if not a joint, shall be
thoroughly wetted and painted with neat cement grout prior to
placing the concrete for the new curbing.
(c) When concrete curbing is to be reconstructed against
approved existing street paving, the front form may be of wood
and shall extend from the top of the curbing to the gutter.
(10) Ready-mixed cement concrete.
(a) All concrete shall be ready-mixed cement concrete and shall
conform in every respect with the latest requirements for
materials, quality, mixing, delivery and tests as set forth in the
Standard Specifications for Ready-Mixed Concrete, Serial
Designation C-94, as adopted by the A.S.T.M. and the general
specifications herein.
(b) The following table gives the general specification for the
quality of concrete to be used in the various classes of
construction. The contractor shall assume responsibility for
the manufacturer's design of the concrete mixture and shall
furnish to the manufacturer every item listed for the class of
construction required.
§ 264-11 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-11
256:539
Class of construction: Curb
Minimum compressive strength at 28 days: 3,500 psi
Size of coarse aggregate: 1 inch
Minimum cement content pounds per cubic
yard:
625
Air entraining percent air content: 3 to 6
Slump on the job:
Maximum: 4 inches
Minimum: 2 inches
(c) The basis for final acceptance of concrete shall be the specified
minimum allowable compressive strength at 20 days in terms
of tests of standard specimens cured under standard
laboratory conditions for moist curing as determined on
samples taken from the transportation unit at the point of
discharge.
(d) The contractor shall provide the Engineer with a carbon copy
of each original delivery ticket accompanying loads of readymixed
cement concrete for each day's pour. The manufacturer
shall certify on each delivery ticket that the proportions
selected will produce concrete of the quality specified and that
the mix has the desired air content and slump.
(e) The contractor shall also furnish a statement to the Engineer
giving the proportions by weight (dry) of cement and of fine
and coarse aggregates used in the manufacture of each class of
concrete.
(f) All rejected concrete shall be promptly removed and replaced
at the expense of the contractor.
(11) Gutter restoration.
(a) The contractor shall excavate that area adjacent to the new
curbing at a distance of 1 1/2 feet from the curbing to a depth
of 7 1/2 inches. The excavated area shall be filled with 6 inches
of 1,000 psi concrete and 1 1/2 inches of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specification ID-2 Wearing
Course.
(b) The paving joints shall be sealed with approved hot asphaltic
cement for a distance of 12 inches from the face of curb and
the existing paving. The seal shall be evenly applied to the
surface by means of hot irons or squeegees so that the surface
voids are completely filled.
§ 264-11 RIDLEY CODE § 264-11
256:540
(12) Alternate driveway and apron replacement. Where depressed curb,
apron and sidewalk are to be removed and replaced, the following
construction standards may be used:122
B. Specifications for cement concrete sidewalks.
(1) Cement concrete sidewalks shall be four inches in thickness,
except six inches in thickness for width of driveways and alleys and
four feet in width, unless otherwise specified. They shall be
constructed on the prepared subgrade to the approved line and
grade and shall consist of concrete complying with the
requirements specified and in accordance with details in Appendix
A.123
(2) Forms.
(a) The forms shall be set to a grade having a rise of 1/4 inch to the
foot, at right angles to and from the top of the curb.
(b) Forms shall be of wood or metal, straight, free from warp and
of sufficient strength when staked to resist the pressure of the
concrete without springing. If of wood, they shall be two-inch
planks, surfaced on the inside and the top; or if of metal, they
shall be of approved section. Forms shall be of a depth equal to
the depth of the concrete and shall be cleaned thoroughly and
oiled each time they are used before concrete is placed against
them. Forms that have become worn, bent or damaged shall
not be used.
(3) Excavation. Excavation shall be made to the required depth and the
material upon which the sidewalk is to be constructed shall be
compacted to a firm, even surface. Where foundations are
unsuitable, select materials shall be constructed under the joints.
(4) Joints.
(a) Sidewalks shall be constructed in separate slabs, 28 feet in
length, except for closures. These slabs shall be separated by
transverse premoulded expansion joints, 1/4 inch in thickness
for the full depth of the concrete. Transverse premoulded
expansion joints shall also be placed adjacent to the existing
structures and walks where directed. The slabs between
expansion joints shall be divided into blocks, four feet in
length, by scoring transversely. Where the slabs are more than
four feet in width, they shall be scored longitudinally in the
center. Transverse and longitudinal scoring shall extend for a
depth of at least 1/3 of the thickness of the concrete slab.
122. Editor's Note: The diagram immediately following this subsection is on file in the
Township offices.
123. Editor's Note: The diagram immediately following this subsection is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 264-11 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-11
256:541
(b) Premoulded expansion joints, 1/4 inch in thickness for the full
depth of the concrete, shall be placed longitudinally when the
sidewalk slab is to be constructed in contact with curb. Where
existing structures, such as light standards, poles and fire
hydrants are within the limits of the sidewalk area, the
concrete around such structures shall be scored in clock eight
inches wider than the maximum dimension of the structure at
the sidewalk elevation. Prior to placing the concrete around
such structures, a premoulded expansion joint, 1/4 inch in
thickness, shall be placed around the structure for the full
depth of the concrete in the sidewalk.
(5) Ready-mixed cement concrete.
(a) All concrete shall be ready-mixed cement concrete and shall
conform in every respect with the latest requirements for
materials, quality, mixing, delivery and tests as set forth in the
Standard Specifications for Ready-Mixed Concrete, Serial
Designation C-94, as adopted by the A.S.T.M. and the general
specifications herein.
(b) The following table gives the general specification for the
quality of concrete to be used in the various classes of
construction. The contractor shall assume responsibility for
the manufacturer's design of the concrete mixture and shall
furnish to the manufacturer every item listed for the class of
construction required.
Class of construction: Walks
Minimum compressive strength at 28
days:
3,500 psi
Size of coarse aggregate: 1 inch
Minimum cement content pounds per
cubic yard:
625
Air entraining percent air content: 3 to 6
Slump on the job:
Maximum: 4 inches
Minimum: 2 inches
(c) The basis for final acceptance of concrete shall be the specified
minimum allowable compressive strength at 20 days in terms
of tests of standard specimens cured under standard
laboratory conditions for moist curing as determined on
samples taken from the transportation unit at the point of
discharge.
(d) The contractor shall provide the Engineer with a carbon copy
of each original delivery ticket accompanying loads of readymixed
cement concrete for each day's pour. The manufacturer
§ 264-11 RIDLEY CODE § 264-11
256:542
§ 264-12. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
shall certify on each delivery ticket that the proportions
selected will produce concrete of the quality specified and that
the mix has the desired air content and slump.
(e) The contractor shall also furnish a statement to the Engineer
giving the proportions by weight (dry) of cement and of fine
and coarse aggregates used in the manufacture of each class of
concrete.
(f) All rejected concrete shall be promptly removed and replaced
at the expense of the contractor.
(6) Placing and finishing concrete. The concrete, as soon as placed,
shall be accurately struck off, tamped and screeded by an approved
hand method. The surface shall be given a granular finish by
rubbing with a wood float without the addition of cement to the
surface. All edges of the slab and joints shall be carefully finished to
a true line with an edger having a one-fourth-inch radius.
(7) Removal of forms. Side forms shall not be removed within 24 hours
after the concrete has been placed. After removal of the forms,
minor honeycombed areas shall be filled with mortar composed of
one part of cement and two parts of fine aggregate.
(8) Curing.
(a) All concrete shall be kept damp for a period of at least three
days. Moisture retaining covers such as burlap, cotton or jute
mats are to be used. The covers shall be kept constantly moist
enough to provide a film of moisture on the concrete surface.
(b) Curing by any other standard methods shall be subject to the
approval of the Engineer. Pigmented compounds must be used
if selected as an alternate method.
(9) Backfilling. After the concrete has cured for a period of not less
than 72 hours, the spaces adjacent to the sidewalk shall be
backfilled with acceptable material in layers of not more than four
inches in depth and shall be thoroughly compacted to the required
elevation and cross-section.
§ 264-11 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-12
256:543

ARTICLE IV
Street Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 6-17-1981 by Ord. No. 1519]
§ 264-13. Prohibited excavations; excavations allowed by permit.
[Amended 6-15-1988 by Ord. No. 1628; 11-19-2008 by Ord. No.
1945]
§ 264-14. Time limit for commencement and completion of work;
extensions. [Amended 11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1945]
Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within 30 days
after the issuance of the permit, but in default thereof, the permit shall
automatically be terminated. Additionally, work shall be completed within
six months after the permit has been issued. An extension may be granted
by the Township only for a good cause shown, if an application has been
made for an extension within the time period of the life of the permit.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
OPENINGS and EXCAVATIONS — Including, but not limited to, open
excavation, trenching, tunneling, boring, directional drilling and
plowing.
PERSON — Means and includes any natural person, partnership,
association, utility, corporation or other entity.
STREET — The entirety of the right-of-way, including but not limited to
the cartway, curb, sidewalk and lawn.
B. Applicability. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any opening or
excavation of any kind in or under the surface of any street without first
securing a permit from the Township of Ridley for each separate
undertaking.
C. Emergency work. When emergency circumstances demand that repair
work be done immediately to prevent harm to persons and property,
provided that the permit could not reasonably and practically have been
obtained beforehand, any person maintaining pipes, lines or other
underground facilities in or under the surface of any street may
proceed with an opening without a permit. The Township of Ridley
Police Department shall be notified prior to such emergency openings.
The person shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular
business day on which the offices of the Township of Ridley are open for
business and said permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work
was begun, if approved.
D. Nonemergency work. In all cases which are not emergencies, the
applicant shall file a street opening permit application with the
Township at least 10 days prior to work.
§ 264-13 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-15
256:545
§ 264-15. Permits not transferable; exception to requirements.
Permits are not transferable from one person to another, and the work
shall not be performed in any place other than the location specifically
designated in the permit. If additional work is required other than listed
in the original permit or work in a different location, a new permit is
required. All street openings required by utilities owned and/or operated
by the Township of Ridley shall be made and restored under the direction
and supervision of the Township Engineer and as to which the permit,
fee-deposit insurance and bond requirements of this article shall not be
applicable.
§ 264-16. Applicability. [Amended 11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1945]
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable, where the street
or highway is owned or maintained by the federal government, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the County of Delaware, if said
organization notifies in writing the Township of the location and description
of the work to be done so that proper safety precautions may be taken by
the Township of Ridley during the continuance of said work.
§ 264-17. Revocation of permit. [Amended 11-19-2008 by Ord. No.
1945]
Any permit may be revoked by the Township, three working days after
notice to the permit holder that there is a violation of any condition of the
permit or provision of this article, if said permit holder does not remedy the
situation within that time. Such notice shall be served on the permit holder
by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, or personal
service.
§ 264-18. Application procedures.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any applicant to:
A. Make written application for such permit with the Township in such
form as he shall prescribe. No work shall commence until the Township
has approved the application and plan and has issued a permit and until
the permittee has paid and provided all fees, deposit certificates and
bonds required by this article. [Amended 11-19-2008 by Ord. No.
1945]
B. Furnish a plan showing the work to be performed under the said period
in triplicate. One copy of such plan shall be returned to the applicant at
the time the permit is granted.
C. Agree in writing to save the Township, its officers and police and agents
harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may
accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of such work performed under
said permit. The acceptance of any permit under this article shall
§ 264-15 RIDLEY CODE § 264-18
256:546
§ 264-19. Responsibilities of permit holder. [Amended 6-15-1988 by
Ord. No. 1628; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808; 11-19-2008 by Ord.
No. 1945]
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person receiving a permit to:
constitute such an agreement by the applicant whether the same is
expressed or not.
A. Pay a permit fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners; provided, however, that the public utility companies
and municipal authorities may, upon written notice to the Township of
Ridley, elect to be billed for such fees as they accrue.
B. Make a deposit to cover the costs of inspecting the work authorized by
the permit and the costs of restoring the street surface removed or
damaged by the work done under such permit. The amount of such
deposit shall be computed by the Township of Ridley. In the case of
public utility companies, the Township of Ridley may waive this
requirement of a deposit if such utility companies file with the Township
of Ridley their corporate bond in a form satisfactory to the Township
Solicitor, conditioned upon the payment to the Township of Ridley of all
costs which would otherwise be covered by and paid out of such a
deposit. In the event that such utility companies elect to file such a
bond, the Township of Ridley shall bill such utility companies monthly
for such costs as they accrue.
C. Furnish a maintenance bond in an amount set by the Township with a
surety conditioned for the compliance with the street repair openings
specifications of the Township and the other provisions of this article,
and an amount in relation to the cost of restoring the pavement, paid by
the permittee, and a performance bond with surety acceptable to the
Township to guarantee faithful performance of the work authorized by
permit pursuant to this article. The amount of said bond shall be 100%
of the estimated cost of restoring the street opening. It shall also
expressly covenant that the work be done in good and workmanlike
manner and guarantee the work to remain in good condition for 18
months after completion of the work.
D. Furnish a certificate of insurance, naming the Township as a coinsured
on the policy indicating that the permittee is insured against claims for
damages for personal injuries as well as against claims for property
damage which may arise from or out of the performance of the work,
whether such performance be by himself, his subcontractor or anyone
directly or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall cover
collapse, explosive hazards and underground work by equipment on the
street and shall include protection against liability arising from
completed operations. The amount of insurance shall be prescribed by
the Township in accordance with the nature of the risk involved;
provided, however, that the liability insurance for bodily injury shall not
be in an amount less than $100,000 for each person and $300,000 for
§ 264-18 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-19
256:547
§ 264-20. General regulations. [Amended 6-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1628]
each accident, and for property damages in an amount not less than
$50,000 with an aggregate of $100,000 for accidents. Public utility
companies and authorities may be relieved of the obligation of
submitting such certification if they submit satisfactory evidence that
they are insured in accordance with the requirements of this article
or have adequate provision for self-insurance, which coverage is
satisfactory to the Township. Public utility companies and authorities
may file an annual certificate of insurance in lieu of individual
certificates for each permit.
E. Submit a list of owners and/or tenants and the addresses of all
properties abutting the area where the work authorized by the permit is
to be performed. The applicant shall notify these residents at least 10
days prior to the work being started by either hand delivery or firstclass
mail. A copy of such notification along with a list of those notified
shall be filed with the Township before initiating the work.
F. Present evidence when required that all materials, labor and equipment
which are needed to complete the work authorized by the permit are
available. Keep the original copy of the permit and an approved copy of
the plan at all times while such work is in progress at the location for
which said permit was granted and show such permit and/or plan upon
demand by the Township Highway Department, Code Enforcement
Officer, Engineer or police personnel.
A. All utility facilities shall be exposed sufficiently or a definite location
shall be determined ahead of trench excavation work to avoid damage
to those facilities and to permit their relocation, if necessary.
B. Pipe drains, pipe culverts or other facilities encountered shall be
protected by the permittee.
C. Any person whose facilities are damaged or caused to be relocated by
the permittee shall notify the permittee and the Township of such
damage and thereafter may make the necessary repairs or relocation
and file a claim against the permittee with the Township for the cost of
such repairs or relocation. Public utility companies concerned shall be
notified by the Township in sufficient time to determine the validity of
the damage or relocation claims. The cost of such repair or relocation
work may be held by the Township from the deposit pending
determination of liability for damage. [Amended 11-19-2008 by Ord.
No. 1945]
D. When work performed by the permittee interferes with the established
drainage system of any street, provision shall be made by the permittee
to provide proper drainage.
§ 264-19 RIDLEY CODE § 264-20
256:548
E. When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is caused to flow,
roll or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause removal of same
from the street within eight hours after deposit to permit safe flow of
traffic. In the event that the earth, gravel or other material excavated so
deposited is not removed as specified, the Township Engineer shall
cause such removal and the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee
or deducted from his deposit.
F. Safety requirements. [Amended 6-29-1994 by Ord. No. 1722]
(1) All work shall be subject to the requirements of the Township of
Ridley Standards for Work Zone Maintenance and Protection of
Traffic, PennDot Standards or other applicable standards,
whichever are more stringent. [Added 11-19-2008 by Ord. No.
1945124]
(2) (Reserved)
(3) All applicable rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry shall be complied with.
(4) Whenever any person fails to provide or maintain the safety devices
required by the Township Engineer, such devices shall be installed
and maintained by the Township. The amount of the cost incurred
shall be paid by the permittee or deducted from his deposit.
(5) No person shall willfully move, remove, injure, destroy or
extinguish any barrier, warning light, sign or notice erected, placed
or posted in accordance with the provisions of this article.
G. Access to private driveways shall be provided except during working
hours when construction operations prohibit provision of such access.
Free access must be provided at all times to fire hydrants.
H. Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m., prevailing time, Monday through Friday, unless the
permittee obtains written consent from the Township to do the work at
an earlier or later hour. Such permission shall be granted only in the
case of an emergency or in the event that the work authorized by the
permit is to be performed in traffic-congested areas. [Amended
11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1945]
I. In granting any permit, the Township may attach such other conditions
thereto as may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage to public or
private property or to prevent the operation from being conducted in a
manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely to create a
nuisance. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to,
limitations on the period of the year in which the work may be
performed; restrictions as to the size and type of equipment;
124. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection F(1), regarding the need
for barricades, lights, warning flags and danger signs, and former Subsection F(2),
regarding the specific regulations for barricades.
§ 264-20 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-20
256:549
§ 264-21. Backfilling; restoration of pavement surface; inspection.
designation of routes upon which materials may be transported; the
place and manner of disposal of excavated materials; requirements as
to the laying of dust, the cleaning of streets, the prevention of noise and
other results offensive or injurious to the neighborhood, the general
public or any portion thereof; and regulations as to the use of streets in
the course of the work. [Amended 11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1945125]
A. All backfilling and restoration of pavement surface shall be completed
in accordance with the Township of Ridley trench, backfill and
restoration specifications. [Amended 6-15-1988 by Ord. No. 1628;
11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1945]
B. The Township Engineer must be notified by the permittee during the
twenty-four-hour period preceding beginning of backfilling of the date
and approximate time at which backfilling will be begun. Backfilling
must be completed within 36 hours of the installation of the facility in
accordance with Township specifications.
C. No backfilling shall be accomplished unless or until the Township
Engineer or a designated Township inspector is present or permission
has been granted for backfilling after inspection by the Township
Engineer.
D. The work of final restoration, including both paving surface and paving
base, shall be performed directly by the permittee under the
supervision of the Township Engineer, according to Township
specifications, and shall be subject to inspection by the Township.
[Amended 6-15-1988 by Ord. No. 1628; 11-19-2008 by Ord. No.
1945]
E. If the work damages the paving surface adjacent to the street opening,
the permittee shall restore the damaged street to the limits established
by the Township Engineer or Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended
11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1945]
F. After excavation is commenced, the work of making and backfilling the
same shall be prosecuted with due diligence.
G. Inspections of all work authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this
article shall be made by the Township of Ridley Engineer, Highway
Department or Code Enforcement Officer at such times and in such
manner as required to assure compliance with the provisions of this
article. If the nature of the work to be performed under any permit is
such as to require the services of a full-time inspector, the Township
Engineer shall provide for the services of such an inspector. [Amended
6-15-1988 by Ord. No. 1628; 11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1945]
125. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection J, regarding use of a
mechanical device for the breaking of pavement, and Subsection K, regarding inspections
of excavation sites, as amended, and which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 264-20 RIDLEY CODE § 264-21
256:550
§ 264-22. Notice of ownership of structures under streets.
[Amended 11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1945]
Every person owning, using, controlling or having any interest in
communications, cables and tele communications cables along with pipes,
conduits and ducts or other structures under the surface of any street used
for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity, communication
impulses, water or steam to or from the Township or to and from its
inhabitants, or for any other purpose, shall file with the Township within
four months after the adoption of this article, a written statement
containing the names of the Township streets wherein the aforementioned
facilities owned by such person are located.
H. All inspection costs shall be borne by the permittee. Such costs shall be
based upon a schedule of charges on file in the office of the Township
Engineer.
I. Upon completion of all work accomplished under the provision of the
permit, the permittee shall notify the Township in writing. An interim
inspection report by the Township is required within 30 days after the
permittee has notified the Engineer in writing that the excavation and
repair work has been completed. A certificate of final inspection shall
be issued by the Township Engineer to each permittee no sooner than
one year and not later than 18 months after the permanent restoration
of the excavation has been made, provided that the work authorized by
the permit has been performed according to Township specifications.
Prior to the issuance of a certificate, the Township Engineer shall make
a final inspection of the restoration to determine whether Township
specifications have been adhered to. [Amended 11-19-2008 by Ord.
No. 1945]
J. If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of 18 months
from date of completion of the permanent restoration and the permittee
fails to make such correction after notification, any expense incurred by
the Township in correcting such settlement shall be paid by the
permittee or recovered from his bond, unless the permittee submits
proof satisfactory to the Township Engineer that the settlement was not
due to defective backfilling. [Amended 11-19-2008 by Ord. No.
1945]
K. In no case shall any opening made by a permittee be considered in the
charge or care of the Township or any of its officers or employees, and
no officer or employee of the Township is authorized in any way to take
or assume any jurisdiction over any such opening, except in the
exercise of the police power, when it is necessary to protect life and
property; provided, however, that the Township assumes charge when
making final surface restoration, unless permittee has been granted
permission to perform the work of restoration of the street surface as
hereinbefore provided in Subsection D of this section.
§ 264-21 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-23
256:551
§ 264-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1628]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or any regulations
and specifications adopted hereunder shall, upon conviction therefor before
a District Justice of the Township or any other court of competent
jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 for each
offense, and costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of said fine
and costs, shall be imprisoned in the Delaware County Jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 264-23 RIDLEY CODE § 264-23
256:552
ARTICLE V
Obstructions and Encroachments
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 123, Art. VII, of the 1975 Code]
§ 264-24. Deposit of materials on streets prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall cause any earth, stones, bricks,
building material or other matter or substance to be collected or remain
upon any streets, roads or highways of the Township of Ridley by reason
of moving the same over such streets, roads or highways in or upon any
vehicle, or by hauling through mud or dirt onto such road, street or highway
so as to deposit the same thereon, so as to be unsightly or to interfere with
the use of said roads, streets or highways, or shall place any earth or any
other substance in the gutters of said roads, streets or highways so as to aid
in the crossing of the curblines.
§ 264-25. Failure to abate nuisance; removal by Township.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall do any of the acts prohibited in
§ 264-24 of this article shall be deemed to have committed a nuisance, and if
any such person, firm or corporation shall fail to remove and abate the same
within 24 hours after notice so to do, the Township of Ridley may cause the
same to be done and collect the costs thereof, together with a penalty of
20% of such costs, either by action of assumpsit or in the manner provided
by law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 264-26. Storage of goods on sidewalks prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall use any part of a sidewalk or any
part of a highway which has been set aside for pedestrians, either for any
business purpose or for the storage, display, rental or sale of any goods,
wares, merchandise or personal property.
§ 264-27. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
§ 264-24 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-27
256:553

ARTICLE VI
Utility Installations in Improved Streets
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 123, Art. IX, of the 1975 Code]
§ 264-28. Notice of intent to improve streets; openings prohibited
for five years.
Whenever the Board of Township Commissioners shall hereafter determine
to improve any street, road or highway for the grading, guttering,
macadamizing, curbing, recurbing, paving, repaving, constructing or
repairing of the footways thereof, the Secretary of the Board of Township
Commissioners shall give written notice to the owners of properties
abutting said street, road or highway of such intended improvement and to
such public utility companies serving the area, at least 30 days prior to the
date of the intended improvement, which said notice shall be served either
upon the assessed owner of the property thereof or upon any occupant
thereof, personally or by mail or by posting the said premises, and upon
such public utility companies, and thereafter the surface of the street,
highway or road shall not be torn up or opened, except in the case of
unavoidable accident or emergency, for a period of five years from the
date of final completion of the improvement of the aforesaid street, road or
highway.
§ 264-29. Reservation of rights.
The Board of Township Commissioners does hereby reserve unto itself,
in any special case, the right, liberty and privilege, upon sufficient cause
shown, to permit the tearing up or opening of any such street, road or
highway during such five-year period upon due application made to the
said Board of Township Commissioners and approval thereof and by the
paying by such applicant of all necessary permit fees, including the cost of
restoration of such street, road or highway.
§ 264-28 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-29
256:555

ARTICLE VII
Benches on Sidewalks
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 123, Art. X, of the 1975 Code]
§ 264-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — An owner, co-owner, occupant, tenant or subtenant of any lot or
structure.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street, thoroughfare, road or highway which
has been set apart for pedestrian travel.
§ 264-31. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for.any person to erect, install or maintain, or permit
to be erected, installed or maintained, any seat or bench in the sidewalk
contiguous to any lot or structure which he owns, occupies or leases without
obtaining a permit therefor.
§ 264-32. Permit fee; term. [Amended 8-20-1980 by Ord. No. 1498;
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
Permits shall be issued by the Township Secretary upon the payment of a
fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for
every such seat or bench, and the said permits shall be for a period of one
year beginning the first day of October of each year.
§ 264-33. Insurance. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
No permit shall be issued by the Township Secretary unless the applicant
shall tender with his application a certificate of insurance, naming the
Township of Ridley as coinsured, for public liability and property damage
in the amounts as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 264-34. Conditions for issuance.
Each permit issued hereunder shall be subject to the express condition that
the permittee, for himself, his heirs, legal representatives, successors and
assigns, agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Township of Ridley from
all damage, claims, costs and expenses which may be incurred by reason of
the erection, installation or maintenance of such seat or bench.
§ 264-35. Failure to comply; removal by Township. [Amended
8-20-1980 by Ord. No. 1498]
Any seat or bench erected, installed or maintained without a permit having
been first obtained therefor, or any seat or bench that has not been removed
within 30 days of receipt of a removal notice, is hereby declared a nuisance,
§ 264-30 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-35
256:557
and the Superintendent of Highways is hereby directed to abate such
nuisance and to remove such seat or bench. The Township of Ridley shall
proceed to collect the cost of such removal, together with a penalty of 10%
of such cost, in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal
claims or by action of assumpsit without the filing of a claim.
§ 264-36. Number of benches per street corner; exceptions. [Added
8-20-1980 by Ord. No. 1498; amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
No permit shall be issued by the Township Secretary for more than one seat
or bench per street corner. Exceptions to this limitation may be granted
upon the showing of good cause by the applicant.126
§ 264-37. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
In addition to any other remedies provided herein, any person, firm or
corporation who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine and
costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day such
a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
126. Editor's Note: Former § 123-33.2, Removal of existing benches; notice, as added 8-20-1980
by Ord. No. 1498, which immediately followed this section, was deleted 10-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 1808.
§ 264-35 RIDLEY CODE § 264-37
256:558
ARTICLE VIII
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 123, Art. XI, of the 1975 Code]
§ 264-38. Clearing of sidewalks required. [Amended 10-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 1808]
Not later than 24 hours after snow has ceased to fall, the occupant of
occupied property or premises and the owner of any apartment house,
multiple dwelling or unoccupied property or premises shall clear a path in
the sidewalk upon which such property or premises abuts, which said path
shall be not less than 30 inches in width and which shall be thoroughly
cleaned of snow and ice.
§ 264-39. Piling of snow in street prohibited.
Snow or ice removed from sidewalks, driveways or other areas shall not be
placed or piled in the gutter or streets.
§ 264-40. Failure to comply; removal by Township.
The failure of the occupant or owners of property or premises as aforesaid
to remove the said snow and ice during the period as hereinabove set forth
shall be deemed to be a public nuisance, and in default of removing said ice
and snow as herein provided, the Township may cause the same to be done
and collect the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of such cost,
in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims or by
action of assumpsit without the filing of a claim.
§ 264-41. Designation of separate violations.
For the purposes of this article, failure to remove snow and ice, as required
by this article, from the sidewalk abutting each separate building owned by
the same owner in a series of apartment houses or multiple dwellings shall
be deemed to be a separate offense under the terms of this article.
§ 264-42. Snow piles must not obstruct. [Added 12-29-2004 by Ord.
No. 1879127]
Snow shall not be piled in a manner that obstructs the proper lighting
of streets, sidewalks, and highways or obstructs the view of traffic or
pedestrians. Snow shall not be piled so that it blocks streetlights, traffic
signals, or street signs from plain view. Snow will not be considered
obstructive if it is piled less than three feet in height. It is the responsibility
of the property owner to ensure that snow is piled in a manner that complies
with this section. If the owner fails to comply, § 264-40 will apply.
127. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 264-42 as § 264-43.
§ 264-38 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-43
256:559
§ 264-43. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
In addition to any other remedies provided herein, any person, firm or
corporation who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$1,000 plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day such
a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 264-43 RIDLEY CODE § 264-43
256:560
Chapter 268
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 9, Art. IV.
Board of Appeals — See Ch. 9, Art. IX.
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 95.
Construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 124.
Excavations — See Ch. 129.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 138.
Landscaping — See Ch. 168.
Plumbing — See Ch. 216.
Sewers — See Ch. 237.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 260.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 264.
Zoning — See Ch. 325.
§ 264-43 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 264-43
256:561

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 268-1. Title.
Ridley Township, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended,128 hereby establishes this chapter
which may be cited as the "Ridley Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance."
§ 268-2. Scope.
§ 268-3. Authority.
§ 268-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for harmonious development of the
Township and county by:
A. All subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land
including new street, sanitary or storm sewer, water main or other
improvement intended to be dedicated for public use or intended for
the common use of occupants or tenants of buildings abutting thereon,
shall comply with this chapter. A resubdivision shall be considered the
same as a new subdivision herein.
B. This chapter shall also apply to previously approved subdivisions when
the required improvements and other approved aspects of the
subdivision in accordance with the terms of such approval have not
been carried out within one year of such approval.
A. The Ridley Township Planning Commission is hereby designated by the
Township Board of Commissioners as the agency which shall review
and make recommendations on all preapplication plans and data and
preliminary plats as required herein prior to action on same by the
Board of Commissioners. [Amended 8-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1750]
B. The Ridley Township Planning Commission is further designated as the
agency which shall review and make recommendations on all final plats
as required herein, prior to action on same by the governing body.
C. The municipal office is designated as the place of submission of all plats
required herein.
D. Those specifications establishing, regulating or relating to the details of
construction of improvements, such as streets, curbs, sidewalks, and
any other facilities or improvements, which are duly adopted by the
governing body, are designated as the engineering specifications for the
purpose of this chapter.
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 268-1 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-4
256:563
§ 268-5. County Planning Commission review. [Amended 8-28-1996
by Ord. No. 1750]
Applications for review of subdivision and land development within Ridley
Township shall be forwarded by the Township to the Delaware County
Planning Commission for review and report, together with a fee sufficient
to cover the costs of the review and report which shall be paid by the
applicant; provided that the Township shall not approve such application
until the county report is received, or until the expiration of 30 days from
the date the application was forwarded to the county.
§ 268-6. Application of regulations.
A. Ensuring the orderly and efficient integration of subdivision into the
development of Ridley Township.
B. Ensuring sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation.
C. Ensuring conformance of subdivision plan with public improvements
plans.
D. Ensuring coordination of intermunicipal public improvement plans and
programs.
E. Ensuring the protection of water resources and drainageways.
F. Ensuring the efficient movement of traffic.
G. Ensuring equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing
uniform standards and procedures.
H. Ensuring the greater health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Ridley
Township.
I. Ensuring the efficient and orderly extension of community services and
facilities at minimum cost and maximum convenience.
A. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract, or parcel of land
located in Ridley Township shall be effected, and no street, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other facilities in connection
therewith shall be laid out for the common use of occupants of buildings
thereon, unless and until a final subdivision plat has been approved by
the governing body and publicly recorded in the manner prescribed
herein, nor otherwise except in strict accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
B. No lot in a subdivision may be sold; no permit to erect or any building
upon land in a subdivision or land development may be issued; and no
building may be erected or altered in a subdivision or land development
unless and until a final subdivision plat has been approved by the
governing body and recorded, and until construction of the
improvements required in connection therewith has been guaranteed in
the manner prescribed herein.
§ 268-4 RIDLEY CODE § 268-6
256:564
C. Unit or condominium subdivision of real property is included within the
meaning of the subdivision as defined herein and must comply with the
subdivision regulations. Such compliance shall include, but not be
limited to, the filing of preliminary and final plats, the dedication and
improvement of rights-of-way, roads and streets, and payment of fees
and charges as established by the governing body.
(1) Preliminary and final plats shall indicate the location of each
structure and clearly define each unit and shall indicate public
easements, common areas, and improvements, all easements
appurtenant to each unit and improvement to public right-of-way.
(2) Unit or condominium subdivisions are subject to the zoning
regulations129 as they apply to use and density requirements,
setbacks, parking and other features and shall be indicated on the
subdivision plans.
D. No earth moving activity, such as grading, excavating or filling of land,
soil, rock or otherwise, shall be conducted on any land in the Township
for any purpose until an earth moving activity plan, described in
§§ 268-43 and 268-52 herein, has been approved by the Commission.
(1) These requirements shall not apply to normal tilling of the soil or
agricultural land use activities.
(2) These requirements shall not apply to separate individual lot
development of single-family detached dwellings, provided that all
earth moving activities and final reseeding and other permanent
erosion control measures will be completed within 180 days, and
that no erosion or drainage problems originating from said
activities are detected on adjoining property, streams or streets.
E. Any lot, tract or parcel of land on which it is proposed to locate a
structure or use which is for multifamily dwelling, commercial,
manufacturing or other nonresidential purposes shall be platted in
accordance with the requirements herein for site development plats.
F. Any land development or subdivision as herein defined shall be properly
platted and subject to municipal approval as herein provided.
G. All lands held in contiguous single ownership, or as may come to be so
held, whether before or after the adoption of these regulations, shall be
platted at such time as any portion of such ownership is proposed for
land development or subdivision.
H. For this purpose, contiguity shall continue across any right-of-way or
easement, although any portions separated by an existing public street
may be designated as separate development tracts on an initial plat,
and subsequently separately proposed for development.
129. Editor's Note: See Ch. 325, Zoning.
§ 268-6 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-6
256:565
§ 268-7. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety,
comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Where provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of other ordinances, this chapter
shall be controlling. Where the provisions of a statute, resolution,
regulation, or other ordinance imposes greater restrictions than this
chapter, the provisions of such statute, resolution, regulation, or other
ordinance shall be controlling.
I. Each such single ownership or development tract, as defined
immediately above, shall be platted to propose its layout in entirety,
except as follows:
(1) Parcels held under separate deeds may be conveyed or transferred
in whole, provided such parcels are in conformity with the
minimum lot areas and dimensions of the zoning district in which
located.
(2) Any parcel of land which is, or comes to be, part of a single
contiguous ownership as herein defined, and which is not in
accordance with the minimum area and dimensions of the zoning
district in which located, shall be incorporated in a plat of
resubdivision which proposes new parcels in accordance with the
minimum requirements.
J. Layout of a portion of the single ownership or development tract may be
proposed, provided as follows:
(1) The remainder of the single ownership or tract shall be platted and
sketched to show the topography, other natural features, existing
structures and such other information as may be pertinent in
assuring that future layout of the remainder can be accomplished
in accordance with Township standards and good practice.
(2) Layout of the portion proposed for immediate development shall
adequately provide for access to the remaining land.
K. Final plats for sections of such proposed partial developments may be
submitted as provided herein.
L. All lands proposed to be developed as planned residential development
as provided in Chapter 325, Zoning, shall be platted in accordance with
regulations and specifications set forth therein.
§ 268-6 RIDLEY CODE § 268-7
256:566
ARTICLE II
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 268-8. Word usage.
As used in this chapter, words expressed in the singular include their
plural meanings and words expressed in the plural include their singular
meanings. The word "person" includes a corporation, unincorporated
association, and a partnership or other legal entity as well as an individual.
The words "building" and "street" are used generally and shall be construed
as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof." The word "building" includes
structure. The word "shall" and "will" are mandatory.
§ 268-9. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meaning hereby ascribed thereto, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ALLEY (SERVICE DRIVE) — A minor right-of-way, publicly or privately
owned, primarily for service access to the back or side of properties and not
intended for general traffic circulation.
APPLICANT (DEVELOPER AND SUBDIVIDER) — A land owner or
developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filled an application for the
subdivision or development including, but not limited to, an application for
a building permit for the approval of a development plan.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all mobile homes and trailers used
for human habitation.[Added 12-22-1982 by Ord. No. 1543]
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the front, side or rear lot line set so as
to provide the required yard.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE (SETBACK) — The line within a property
defining the required minimum distance between any enclosed structure
and the adjacent right-of-way, and the line defining side and rear yards,
where required.
CARTWAY or ROADWAY — That portion of a street or alley which is
improved, designated, or intended for vehicular use.
CHAIRMAN — The Chairman of the Ridley Township Planning Commission.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections. It is defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of the street center lines.
COMMISSION — The Ridley Township Planning Commission.
COMMON ELEMENTS — Means and includes:
§ 268-8 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-9
256:567
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water, or a combination of land and water, within a development site and
designated and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the
development, not including facilities. Common open space shall be
substantially free of structures, but may contain such improvements as are
in the development plan as finally approved and as are appropriate for the
recreation of residents.
CONDOMINIUM — Ownership in common with others of a parcel of land
and certain parts of a building thereon which would normally be used by all
the occupants, together with individual ownership in fee of a particular unit
or apartment in such building or on such parcel of land and may include
dwellings, offices and other types of space in commercial buildings or on
property.
COOPERATIVE — Ownership in common with others of a parcel of land
and of a building or buildings thereon which would normally be used by all
the occupants, together with individual rights of occupancy of a particular
unit or apartment in such building or buildings or on such parcel of land,
and may include dwellings, offices and other types of space in commercial
buildings of a unit is subject to the agreement of the group of persons
having common ownership.130
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, intended to
furnish access of pedestrians.
CUT — An excavation; the difference between a point on the original ground
and designated point of lower elevation on the final grade; also, the material
removed in excavation.
The land on which the building is located and portions of the building
which are not included in a unit.
A.
The foundation, structural parts, supports, main walks, roofs,
basements, halls, corridors, lobbies, stairways, and entrances and exits
of the building.
B.
C. The yards, parking area and driveways.
Portions of the land and building used exclusively for the management,
operation or maintenance of the common elements.
D.
E. Installations of all central services and utilities.
All other elements of the building necessary or convenient to its
existence, management, operation or maintenance and safety, or
normally in common use.
F.
G. Such other facilities as are designated as common elements.
130. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 268-9 RIDLEY CODE § 268-9
256:568
DEVELOPER (APPLICANT and SUBDIVIDER) — Any landowner, agent or
tenant with permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made
a subdivision of land or land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials and the subdivision of land.[Amended
12-22-1982 by Ord. No. 1543; 11-20-1993 by Ord. No. 1714]
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for the development of a tract of
land, including a subdivision plat, all covenants relating to use, location
and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, street ways and parking facilities, common open space and
public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the development plan" when used
in this chapter shall mean written and graphic materials referred to in this
definition.
DRAINAGE — The flow of water or liquid waste and the method of directing
such flow, whether natural or artificial.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, culvert, storm sewer, or other
structure designed, intended, or constructed for the purpose of diverting
surface waters from or carrying surface water off streets, public rights-ofway,
parks, recreational areas, or any part of any subdivision or contiguous
land areas.
DRIVEWAY — A minor vehicular right-of-way providing access between a
street and a parking area or garage within a lot or property.
DWELLING — A building designed for residential purposes and used as
living quarters for one or more persons.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes and having a kitchen with fixed cooking facilities arranged for
occupancy by one family or a single person.
EASEMENT — A land area for which the owner grants legal right to others
to use, generally for specific, limited purposes.
ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer in Pennsylvania
designated by the governing body to perform the duties of engineer as
herein specified.
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS — The engineering specifications of
Ridley Township regulating the installation of any required improvement or
for any facility installed by any owner, subject to public use.
EROSION — The removal of surface materials by the action of water or
wind.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed. It shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
§ 268-9 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-9
256:569
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location
above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface. It
shall include the conditions resulting therefrom; the difference in elevation
between a point on the original ground and a designated point of higher
elevation of the final grade; the material used to make fill.
FLOODPLAIN (IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA OR DISTRICT) — Those
floodplain areas specifically designated in Chapter 325, Zoning, as being
inundated by the one-hundred-year flood. Included would be areas
identified as the Floodway District (FW), Flood Fringe District (FF), and
the General Floodplain District (FA).[Amended 12-22-1982 by Ord. No.
1543]
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Includes:
GOVERNING BODY — The Township Commissioners of Ridley Township,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
HALF OR PARTIAL STREET — A street, generally parallel with and adjacent
to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way width than required for
improvement and used as a street in accordance with this chapter.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA OR DISTRICT — Those floodplain areas
specifically designated in Chapter 325, Zoning, as being inundated by the
one-hundred-year flood. Included would be areas identified as the Floodway
District (FW) Flood Fringe District (FF) and the General Floodplain District
(FA).[Added 12-22-1982 by Ord. No. 1543]
IMPROVED PUBLIC STREET — Any street for which the Township or
commonwealth has maintenance responsibility and which is paved with an
approved hardtop surface.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions, installations, and changes
required to render land suitable for the use intended including grading,
paving, curbing, streetlights, signs, fire hydrants, water mains, electric
service, gas service, sanitary sewers, storm drains, sidewalks, crosswalks,
driveways, culverts and street shade trees.
INTERIOR WALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian use extending from a
street into a block or across a block to another street.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (SUBDIVISION) — Includes:
Right-of-way width required for the expansion of existing streets to
accommodate anticipated future traffic loads.
A.
A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through
undeveloped land.
B.
The improvement of one or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of
land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings; or
A.
§ 268-9 RIDLEY CODE § 268-9
256:570
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any conditions), a lessee having a remaining term
of not less than 40 years, or other person having a proprietary interest in
the land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the purpose of this chapter.
LOT — A plot or parcel of land which is, or in the future may be, offered for
sale, conveyance, transfer, or improvement.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot as shown
on a subdivision plan excluding space within any street, but including the
area of any easement.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot extending between, and having frontage
on, an arterial street and minor street, and with vehicular access solely from
the latter.
LOT, THROUGH OR DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot with front and rear street
frontage.
MUNICIPAL, MUNICIPALITY — Ridley Township, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, its governing body, agencies and agents thereof.
MUNICIPAL OFFICE — The business office of Ridley Township operated
during regular business hours and otherwise as needed by the Township or
its agents, representatives and staff.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring
each year, although the flood may occur in any year).[Added 12-22-1982
by Ord. No. 1543]
OWNER — Any person having any title or interest whatsoever in any land
subdivision as the word "subdivision" is hereinafter defined in this article
and section.
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, partnership or
corporation.
PLAN, CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT — A plan prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor showing the construction details of street,
The division or allocations of land between or among two or more
existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose
of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A division of land into lots for the purpose of conveying such lots singly
or in groups to any person, partnership or corporation for the purpose
of the erection of buildings by such person, partnership or corporation.
B.
Any new, additional or expanded nonresidential building, structure or
land use.
C.
D. A subdivision of land, residential or nonresidential.
§ 268-9 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-9
256:571
drains, sewers, bridges, culverts and other improvements as required by
this chapter.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, the development plan for which does not correspond in size, bulk
or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and required open space to the
regulations established in any one residential district created from time to
time under the provisions of Chapter 325, Zoning.
PLAN, OFFICIAL — The Comprehensive Plan and/or Development Policy
Plan (Master Plan) and/or Future Land Use Plan and/or Ultimate Right-of-
Way Plan and/or Official Map or other such plans, or portions thereof, as
may be adopted, pursuant to statute, for the area of the municipality in
which the subdivision or land development is located.
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale,
indicating salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings and the
general layout of a proposed subdivision.
PLAT — The map or plan of a land development or subdivision, whether
preliminary or final, including all covenants relating to use, location and
bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use, or density of
development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and
public facilities.
PRIVATE ROAD — A legally established right-of-way, other than a street,
which provides the primary pedestrian and vehicular access to one or more
lots.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — An initial plan consisting of either of the
following:
PRELIMINARY PLAT (REGULAR) — An initial plat providing an
approximate layout of the proposed development, having less exact
detail than a final plat, presented as a basis for review and
comment by the Commission and approval by the Board of
Commissioners prior to the completion of a final plat; or
(1)
DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAT — An initial plan submitted at
the preliminary stage, when the developer intends to submit final
plats for successive portions of the total development providing
the information required for a regular preliminary plat and such
additional detailing as necessary to assure that the implementation
of the plan will not impose undue problems or degrade conditions
in and surrounding the development.
(2)
A.
FINAL PLAT — A complete and exact plan, as required herein, with
accompanying data and guaranties or required, duly attested and
proposed for public recording by the owner of record or authorized
leaseholder of the land.131
B.
131. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 268-9 RIDLEY CODE § 268-9
256:572
PROFILE LINE — The profile of the center line of the finished surface of the
street, which shall be midway between the side lines of the street.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency, whether
federal, state or local, and including any corporation created by law for the
performance of certain specialized governmental functions, and any public
school district.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Include:
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood elevation
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.[Added 12-22-1982 by Ord.
No. 1543]
RESERVE STRIP — A narrow parcel of ground separating a street from
other adjacent properties.
RESIDENT PROPERTY OWNER — Any individual maintaining a voting
address in the municipality, within 1,000 feet of the proposed subdivision,
owning real estate in his own or joint names. A tenancy in common or
any other means of joint ownership shall be considered as an individual;
however, the signature of any single joint owner shall be considered as
binding the others.
RESUBDIVISION — Any subdivision or transfer of land, laid out on a plan
which has been approved by the Township Commissioners, which changes
or proposes to change property lines and/or public right-of-way not in strict
accordance with approved plan.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic and/or
pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley or however designated.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs
off the surface of the land.
SEDIMENT — The residue which results from erosion, which residue is
deposited or remains suspended in water.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water, or gravity.
A. Parks, playgrounds and other public areas; and
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal, and other publicly
owned or operated facilities.
B.
§ 268-9 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-9
256:573
SEEPAGE PIT — A covered pit with open pointed lining through which the
septic tank effluent may seep or leach into the surrounding soil.
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight tank in which raw sewage is broken down into
solid, liquid, and gaseous phases to facilitate further treatment and final
disposal.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (ON SITE) — Any structure designed to
eliminate sanitary sewage within the boundaries of the lot.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (PUBLIC) — A sanitary sewage collection
method in which sewage is carried from the site by a system of pipes to a
central treatment and disposal plant.
SHOULDER — The portion of a roadway (cartway) between the curb or
gutter and the travelway, intended for emergency and parking use.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to the driver of a
passenger vehicle at any given point of the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100
feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test conducted to determine the
absorption capacity of soil at a specified depth in a given location for the
purpose of determining suitability of soil for on-site sewage disposal.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment designed to
increase or maintain the stability of a mass of soil or otherwise to improve
its engineering properties.
STREET — A public right-of-way which affords primary vehicular pedestrian
access to abutting properties, including a street, highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley or however designated.
Streets in Ridley Township shall be classified according to the following
descriptions:
EXPRESSWAY — A street or highway which carries a large volume of
traffic at comparatively high speed, having limited access points only at
certain public roads or streets, and not from adjoining properties.
A.
ARTERIAL STREET — A major street or highway with fast or heavy
traffic volumes of considerable continuity and used primarily as a traffic
artery for intercommunication among large areas.
B.
COLLECTOR STREET — A major street or highway which carries traffic
from minor streets to arterial streets including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within
such a development.
C.
MINOR STREET — A street used primarily for access to abutting
properties.
D.
§ 268-9 RIDLEY CODE § 268-9
256:574
STREET WIDTH — The shortest distance between the lines delineating the
right-of-way of a street.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including but not limited to buildings, factories, sheds,
cabins, mobile homes and other similar items.[Added 12-22-1982 by Ord.
No. 1543]
SUBDIVIDER (APPLICANT AND DEVELOPER) — The owner or authorized
agent of the owner of a lot, tract, or parcel of land to be subdivided for sale
or development under the terms of this chapter.
SUBDIVISION (LAND DEVELOPMENT) —
CUL-DE-SAC — A street intersecting another street at one end
terminating at the other in a vehicular turnaround.
E.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A minor street which is parallel and
adjacent to limited access highways or arterial streets and which
provides access to abutting properties and protection from through
traffic.
F.
SERVICE STREET (ALLEY) — A right-of-way providing secondary
access to one or more lots, intended primarily for vehicular access on
the side or rear of nonresidential facilities.
G.
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including
changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot development.
The term subdivision includes:
Subdivision. A division of any part, parcel or area of land by the
owner or agent, either by lots or metes and bounds, into lots or
parcels, two or more in number, for the purpose of conveyance,
transfer, improvement, or sale, with appurtenant roads, streets,
lanes, alleys and ways, dedicated or intended to be dedicated to
public use, or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting
thereon.
(1)
A division of a parcel of land having frontage on an existing street
into two or more lots each having frontage on the existing street.
(2)
A division of a parcel of land into two or more lots when such
subdivision created any new road, roads, street, lane, alley, alleys,
way, ways, easement, easements of access or the need therefor.
(3)
Any development of a parcel of land (for example, as a shopping
center, industrial park, or multiple-dwelling project), which
involves installation of streets, driveways and/or alleys, even
though the streets and alleys may not be dedicated to public use
and the parcel may not be divided immediately for the purpose of
conveyance, transfer or sale.
(4)
A.
§ 268-9 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-9
256:575
SURFACE DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan showing all present and proposed
grades and facilities for stormwater drainage.
SURVEYOR — A licensed surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land characterized as a depression used to
carry surface water runoff.
TILE DISPOSAL FIELD — A system of open jointed or perforated pipes laid
in the upper strata of the soil for absorption.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile
soils and soil material ordinarily rich in organic matter of humous debris.
Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the A Horizon.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Ridley, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, the
Township Commissioners, its agent or authorized representatives.
TRAVELWAY — The portion of a roadway (cartway) intended for throughtravel
use, which may have a heavier base construction and/or additional
top paving, as compared to the roadway shoulder.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not been
graded or in any other manner prepared for the construction of a building.
UNIT — A part of the property, structure or building designed or intended
for any type of independent use, which has direct exit to a public street or
way or to an easement or right-of-way leading to a public street or way, and
includes a proportionate undivided interest in the common elements, which
is assigned to the property, structure or building.
WATERCOURSE — A stream of water, river, brook, creek or channel or ditch
for water, whether natural or man-made.
WATER FACILITY — Any water works, water supply works, water
distribution system or part thereof designed, intended or constructed to
provide or distribute potable water.
Resubdivision and, as appropriate in these regulations, shall refer
to the process of subdividing land or to the land subdivided.
(5)
(6) A land development as herein defined.
For the purpose of these regulations, division of land for agricultural
purpose into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement, shall not be deemed a subdivision.
B.
§ 268-9 RIDLEY CODE § 268-9
256:576
ARTICLE III
Plat Requirements and Processing Procedures
§ 268-10. General plat preparation.
Whenever a subdivision of land or land development is desired to be
effected in Ridley Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, a plat of the
layout of such subdivision or land development shall be prepared, filed,
and processed with the Commission according to the requirements of this
chapter, except as follows.
§ 268-11. Waiver of preapplication requirements.
Where two or fewer lots are proposed to be subdivided from a tract of
land or where land is being transferred to be combined with an existing
lot, the governing body, being advised by the Planning Commission in
response to a written request by the applicant, may waive the requirements
of preapplication plans and data and the preliminary plat requirements,
provided such proposal is on an existing street and no new streets are
involved. In such cases the applicant shall submit a final plat as follows:
A. A final plat shall be submitted and processed as required under
§ 268-17 using the following procedure:
(1) Obtain soil characteristics report and information on erosion and
sediment control from the Delaware County Conservation District
through the Soil Conservation Service.
(2) The final plan (six copies) prepared by a registered surveyor or
engineer on sheets 17 inches by 22 inches showing the following:
(a) Outline of the property from which the lot or lots are being
subdivided, scale one inch equals 200 feet.
(b) Bearings and distances of the property taken from the property
deed including the primary control point.
(c) Adjacent landowners' names.
(d) Location of the property map of existing buildings, proposed
lots, existing streets, streams and woods.
(e) A separate drawing of the proposed lot or lots (scale one inch
equals 50 feet) with lot areas, lot numbers, lot dimensions,
bearings and distances of lot lines, existing street rights-of-way
and street name and number, building setback lines, contours
with a five-foot interval.
(f) A general location map of the plat (scale one inch equals 1,000
feet) showing property location, streets and other pertinent
information.
(g) Name and address of owner or subdivider.
§ 268-10 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-11
256:577
§ 268-12. Procedure for preapplication plans and data.
(h) Name and seal of surveyor or other person responsible for the
plan; also, signed certification by surveyor that the plan is
correct.
(i) Date of plan preparation.
(j) Municipality where property is located.
(k) North point and scale.
(l) Certification of ownership and dedicatory statement signed by
owner.
(m) Notary public and recording statement.
(n) Allow space for stamped approval block to be signed upon
approval by the Planning Commission.
(o) Location of survey monuments shown by an "X" on the plat.
(p) Proposed protective covenants running with the land, if any.
(q) Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted
land and by record name, date and number.
(r) Title of subdivision.
(s) Zoning district.
(t) Total acreage of tracts.
A. Procedure. Prior to the preparation and filing of the preapplication
plans and data with the Township, the applicant shall consult the
Delaware County Conservation District concerning the preparation of
plans for erosion and sedimentation control and to secure soil
information in order to:
(1) Obtain a report indicating the extent and content of erosion and
sedimentation control plans needed and whether a permit for earth
moving activity may be required from the Department of
Environmental Protection under the Rules and Regulations,
Chapter 102 "Erosion Control" P.L. 1987, June 22, 1937, as
amended, and Chapter 124, Erosion and Sediment Control, of the
Code of the Township of Ridley. [Amended 12-7-2000 by Ord.
No. 1810]
(2) Obtain a report on the soil characteristics of the site so that the
Commission may determine the type and degree of development
the site may accommodate because of the limitations of soils as
related to basement and foundation conditions.
§ 268-11 RIDLEY CODE § 268-12
256:578
§ 268-13. Preapplication plans and data specifications.
The specifications are general information describing or outlining existing
covenants, land characteristics, community facilities and utilities, and
information describing the proposed subdivision or land development, such
as the number of lots, typical lot width and depth, parking areas, business
areas, playgrounds, park areas, common open space, other public areas,
proposed protection covenants, proposed utilities and street improvements.
B. Prior to the preparation and filing of the preapplication plans and data
for a subdivision containing three or more lots, three or more dwelling
units on a single lot, or the development of tracts for commercial,
industrial or other purposes, the applicant shall consult the local
Sewage Enforcement Officer in regard to the method of sewage
disposal and obtain an advisory memorandum indicating
recommendations and advice.
C. Filing.
(1) Twenty-one days prior to a regular meeting of the Planning
Commission, the subdivider shall submit four copies of the
preapplication plans and data as further described under § 268-13
to the Ridley Township Secretary for distribution to the following:
(a) Ridley Township Engineer: one copy.
(b) Ridley Township Planning Commission: one copy.
(c) Delaware County Planning Commission: two copies.
(2) The submission of such preapplication plans and data shall not
constitute a formal filing with the municipality.
D. At this stage, the Commission shall so inform the applicant if his tract is
located where a flood hazard exists, in which case the regulations in
Article VII shall apply. [Amended 12-22-1982 by Ord. No. 1543]
A. A copy of the report on soils characteristics of the site prepared by the
Delaware County Conservation District.
B. A copy of the report from the County Conservation District indicating
the extent of erosion control plans needed and whether in its opinion a
permit for earth moving activity may be required from the Department
of Environmental Protection.
C. A signed copy of an advisory memorandum from the local Sewage
Enforcement Officer as required under § 268-12B.
D. Evidence in writing, where 50 or more dwelling units are proposed in a
subdivision or land development, from the school district in which the
subdivision or land development is located containing the review and
comments of the school district on the proposed development.
§ 268-12 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-13
256:579
E. A copy of a report, where 50 or more dwelling units are proposed in a
subdivision or land development, indicating any estimated and existing
streets and highways to carry the traffic both within and beyond the
proposed development and possible solutions to such problems as may
be thereby identified.
F. A copy of a report, where 50 or more dwelling units are proposed in a
subdivision or land development, indicating the general arrangement
for development, indicating the general arrangement for stormwater
drainage, the estimated volume of water to be generated and the effect
of such volumes on the drainageways or streams within the
development and that projected volumes can be accommodated by the
existing drainage facilities or streams beyond the proposed
development.
G. Location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision or
land development to existing community facilities which serve or
influence it, including the development name, location of any existing
community facilities, traffic arteries, utilities, shopping centers,
hospitals, title, scale, North arrow and date. Such map may be a
municipal map at a scale of one inch equals 800 feet.
H. Property map showing the entire lot, tract or parcel to be affected by
the proposed subdivision or land development, drawn to a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet or less. A different scale may be used subject to the
approval of the Commission.
(1) The proposed name of the subdivision or land development.
(2) Name of applicant.
(3) Name of the registered owner.
(4) North point, scale and date.
(5) Name of engineer, surveyor, or other qualified person responsible
for the map.
(6) Tract boundaries with bearing and distances.
(7) Approximate location of watercourses, tree masses, rock outcrops,
existing buildings, and actual location of sewers, inlets, water
mains, easements, fire hydrants, railroads, existing or confirmed
streets and their established grades.
(8) Adjacent streets.
(9) Topography, with elevations based on datum approved by the
Commission and showing intervals of five feet.
(10) Sketch plan, drawn on a print of the property map, showing in a
simple sketch form the proposed layouts of streets, lots, proposed
§ 268-13 RIDLEY CODE § 268-13
256:580
§ 268-14. Preliminary plats or development master plat procedure.
The applicant, 21 days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning
Commission at which consideration is desired, shall file with the Township
Secretary nine copies of a preliminary plat or a development master plat or
the proposed subdivision or land development and other required data and
maps.
erosion and sediment control measures and other features, in
relation to existing conditions.
(11) In cases where the Commission has granted a waiver from the
preapplication plans and data procedure, Subsections A through F
above shall be included as part of the preliminary plat or
development master plat submission.
(12) Zoning district.
(13) Total acreage of tract.
A. The Secretary shall submit copies to the Board of Commissioners, the
County Planning Commission (four copies), the Engineer, and may
submit copies to the Public Utilities Municipal Authority, School Board,
Delaware County Soil and Water Conservation District, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and other public agencies.
The Commission shall act to recommend approval or disapproval of
each preliminary plat submitted, within such time as will permit
transmittal to and approval or disapproval by the Board of
Commissioners in accordance with the time set forth hereinafter. The
Board of Commissioners shall act to approve or disapprove each
preliminary plat submitted and communicate its decision to the
applicant not later than 90 days following the said next regular meeting
of the Ridley Township Planning Commission at which the application
will be considered next following the date the application is filed,
provided that should the said next regular meeting occur more than 30
days following the date of the application, the said ninety-day period
shall be measured from the 30th day following the day the application
has been filed. The submission of an amended or revised plan shall
constitute a new application date with new application fees, and the 90
days mentioned above for the required review process shall begin upon
the date of resubmission of the amended or revised plans, if the
Township Engineer determines that the amended or revised plans are
substantially different from the original plans. [Amended 8-28-1996
by Ord. No. 1750; 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 1821]
B. The County Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plat and
data and shall issue a written report stating its suggestions for
modifications and design changes to the Board of Commissioners within
30 days of its receipt of same or forfeit its right to review. [Amended
8-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1750]
§ 268-13 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-14
256:581
C. The Board of Commissioners shall determine whether the preliminary
plat or development master plan shall be approved, approved with
modifications or disapproved. The decision of the Board of
Commissioners shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the
applicant personally or mailed to him at his last known address not later
than 15 days following the decision. When the application is not
approved in terms as filed, the decision shall specify the defects found
in the application and describe the requirements which have not been
met and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the statute or
ordinance that it is relied upon.
D. Before acting on any subdivision plat, the Commission, may hold a
public hearing thereon after public notice.
E. When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the
provisions of the ordinance.
F. When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the
provisions of the ordinance.
G. Failure of the Board of Commissioners to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in terms
as presented unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension
of time or change in the prescribed manner for presentation of
communication of the decision, in which case, failure to meet the
extended time or change in manner of presentation of communication
shall have like effect.
H. The Township Planning Commission shall transmit its comments and
recommendations to the Township Commissioners.
I. Before final action is taken on any submitted plat, the Commission shall
submit copies of the preliminary plat and accompanying data to the
Engineer who shall advise the Commission and governing body as to
the suitability of all engineering details and specifications; to the local
office of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
where septic tanks and/or wells are to be utilized; to all affected public
utilities who shall be requested to make recommendations as to the
suitability of the utility easements and to the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation where the subdivision or land development will front
on existing or proposed state highways or has a proposed street
entering on such highway.
J. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the
final subdivision plat by the Township Commissioners.
§ 268-14 RIDLEY CODE § 268-15
256:582
§ 268-15. Preliminary plat.
A. Specifications. The preliminary plat shall be drawn on a copy of the
property map as required under § 268-13H and shall show:
(1) Existing contours at vertical intervals of five feet or less as required
by the Commission.
(2) Acreage of tract.
(3) The layouts, names, and widths of the right-of-way, cartway and
paving of proposed streets, alleys and easements.
(4) Zoning district.
(5) The layout of lots showing approximate dimensions, lot numbers
and approximate area of each lot.
(6) Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds, parking areas, common open space, or other
public, semipublic or community purposes.
B. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the following data and
plans:
(1) A profile of each street, including grades.
(2) Location of existing and proposed utility mains.
(3) Location plans of proposed sanitary or stormwater sewers and of
any proposed water distribution systems.
(4) A profile of the proposed sanitary and storm sewers and water
lines, with invert elevations and connections to existing systems.
(5) A preliminary erosion and sedimentation plan together with a
report of the County Conservation District indicating whether a
permit for earth moving activity is required from the Department of
Environmental Protection under the Rules and Regulations,
Chapter 102, "Erosion Control," P.L. 1987, June 22, 1937, as
amended, and Chapter 124, Erosion and Sediment Control, of the
Code of the Township of Ridley. [Amended 12-7-2000 by Ord.
No. 1810]
(6) A report showing the review and comments of the Sewage
Enforcement Officer on the proposed sewage treatment facilities.
(7) Evidence in writing of the school district's review and comments as
required under § 268-13D.
(8) A report showing the adequacy of streets and highways as required
under § 268-13E.
(9) A report showing the adequacy of storm drainage as required
under § 268-13F.
§ 268-15 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-16
256:583
§ 268-16. Development master plat specifications.
A development master plat shall be in accordance with the specifications for
a preliminary plat, and shall additionally provide assurance of the integrity
of the total contemplated development by presenting the following in
acceptable detail:
A. A complete street plan.
B. A complete surface water drainage plan.
C. Complete provisions for sanitary sewer service.
D. Complete provisions for water supply.
E. Complete description of proposed building development, including the
following:
(1) Building plans are required only as to height limitations.
(2) Locations and horizontal sizes of buildings, except for single-family
detached or single-family semidetached lots.
(3) Dwelling densities, overall and sections.
(4) Number of each kind of dwelling and minimum habitable floor area
thereof.
(5) For any included commercial facilities, an estimated floor area for
retail sales, office space and other space and brief description of
expected occupancy of such facilities.
F. A proposed time schedule within which the total development activity is
to be completed.
(1) This schedule shall show the proposed sequence of sectional
development, including a summary of what is included in each
section and the time at which the last final plat is to be submitted
and the development completed.
(2) This time schedule may not exceed five years unless approved by
the governing body.
(3) A time schedule, once approved, may be extended by the governing
body following written request by the developer presenting good
cause for such extension.
(4) Such extensions shall not exceed two years at any one time, nor
shall a development master plat be accorded a total time schedule
from first approval in excess of 10 years.
§ 268-16 RIDLEY CODE § 268-17
256:584
§ 268-17. Final plat procedure. [Amended 8-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1750]
The applicant shall, not later than five years after the date of approval of the
preliminary plat or a development master plat, for that portion he intends to
develop, file with the Secretary a final plat. Failure to comply with the time
limitation herein provided shall make the approval for the preliminary plat
null and void unless an extension of time is requested by the applicant and
for good cause granted by the Township Commissioners.
A. The applicant, 21 days prior to the regular meeting of the Commission
at which consideration is desired, shall file with the Township Secretary
the following:
(1) Two clear durable reproducible copies, or the original drawing and
one reproducible copy;
(2) Eight paper print copies of the plat;
(3) Eight copies of all attachments to the plat.
B. The Commission shall distribute the document as follows:
(1) The reproducibles, in accordance with Subsection J or K.
(2) Four copies to the Delaware County Planning Commission.
(3) One print and one copy each of all attachments for:
(a) Municipal Engineer.
(b) Retention by the Commission.
(c) Transmittal by the Commission of notations and
recommendations to the governing body.
(d) Developer, with any Commission and/or governing body
recommendations.
(4) Additional copies may be required when necessary for transmittal
to other agencies.
C. The Commission shall determine, at its meeting at which a plat is
submitted, whether it may then properly act on information, in which
case it shall be subject to action at the next regular meeting of the
Commission.
D. The developer should, prior to submission of a final plat, obtain
required reports or other information concerning the proposed
development from other agencies and present same with the plat.
E. The Commission shall act to recommend approval or disapproval of
each final plat submitted, within such time as will permit transmittal to
and approval or disapproval by the governing body in accordance with
Subsection H hereinbelow.
§ 268-17 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-17
256:585
F. For plats recommended for approval, the date of recommendation and
signatures of the Commission Chairman and Secretary shall be affixed
on the reproducible copies. These and such other copies and
attachments as are pertinent shall be transmitted by the Commission to
the governing body.
G. For plats recommended for disapproval, the Commission shall provide a
written statement of the reasons, citing defects from the provisions of
this chapter concerning plat submission, plat requirements or design
standards or from the provisions of other applicable ordinances. Such
written statement, copies of the plat and attachments as are pertinent
shall be transmitted by the Commission to the governing body.
H. The Board of Commissioners shall act to approve or disapprove each
final plat submitted and communicate its decision to the applicant not
later than 90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the
Ridley Township Planning Commission at which the application is
considered next following the date the application is filed, provided that
should the said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days following
the date of the application, the said ninety-day period shall be measured
from the 30th day following the day the application has been filed. The
submission of an amended or revised plan shall constitute a new
application date with hew application fees, and the 90 days mentioned
above for the required review process shall begin upon the date of
resubmission of the amended or revised plans, if the Township Engineer
determines that the amended or revised plans are substantially
different from the original plans. [Amended 12-19-2001 by Ord. No.
1821]
(1) Before approving any final plat for recording, the governing body
shall either require that the necessary grading, paving and other
street improvements, including, where specified, curbs, sidewalks,
streetlights, fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary sewers and storm
sewers, shall have been installed in strict accordance with the
municipal standards and specifications and the pending plat, or
that the municipality be assured, by means of a proper completion
guaranty in the form of a bond or the deposit of funds or securities
in escrow, sufficient to cover the cost of the required improvements
as estimated by the Engineer or the governing body, that the said
improvements will be subsequently installed by the developer.
(2) Such completion guaranties shall require the installation of the
improvements by the developer within a given period of time as
prescribed by the governing body, not to exceed one year.
(3) Failure of the developer to provide the required improvements, or
acceptable guaranty thereof, may be the sole reason for
disapproval of a plat, in which case technical review of the plat for
conformity with the provisions of this and other applicable
ordinances and regulations shall not be required.
§ 268-17 RIDLEY CODE § 268-17
256:586
I. For approved plats, the date of approval of the Board of Commissioners
and signatures of the President and Secretary of the Township shall be
affixed on the reproducibles and one print copy. The signed print copy
shall be returned to the developer at the meeting or delivered or mailed
to the developer within 15 days after the meeting.
J. When the final plat is not approved in terms as filed, the decision shall
specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the
provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon. Such written
statement and a copy of the disapproved plat shall be given to the
developer within 15 days following the decision. Failure of the Board of
Commissioners to render a decision and communicate it to the
applicant within the time and in the manner required herein shall be
deemed an approval of the application in terms as presented unless the
applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the
prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the decision, in
which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
(1) The procedure for refiling a plat which has been disapproved shall
in general be the same as for the original filing.
K. For plats which have been approved and endorsed by the designated
Township officials, the developer shall file the record plat with the
County Recorder of Deeds within 90 days of the date of final approval. If
the developer fails to record the final plat within such period, the action
of the governing body shall be null and void unless an extension of time
is granted in writing by the Township Commissioners upon written
request by the developer.
(1) A plat approved by the court on appeal shall be recorded in a
similar manner, after annotation of such approval on the plat.
L. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made on any
plat after approval has been given by the governing body and
signatures affixed unless the plat is first refiled.
M. A final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved
development master plat which the developer proposes to record and
develop immediately, provided that such portion conforms with the
requirements of this chapter.
N. A final plat shall be submitted within one year after approval of a
preliminary or development master plat. The provisions of this and
other ordinances and specifications of the municipality which govern
aspects of the land development or subdivision, in effect at the time of
approval of the preliminary plat, shall apply throughout this one-year
period.
(1) Following approval of a final plat, the developer shall complete all
aspects of the land development or subdivision therein described
§ 268-17 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-17
256:587
within a period of three years. The provisions of all ordinances
or specifications of the municipality which govern aspects of the
development, in effect at the time of approval of the final plat,
shall apply throughout this three-year period. Upon lapse of this
three-year period, further activity by the developer, pursuant to the
development described by the final plat, is prohibited until one of
the following occurs:
(a) The developer may submit renewed plans for the development,
which may be required by the municipality to be in accordance
with any changes in the ordinances or specifications which
govern any aspect of the development which have been made
during the lapsed period.
(b) The governing body may, for good cause shown, grant an
extension of time to complete the lapsed plat.
O. When a final plat is not submitted within one year of approval of a
preliminary plat, approval of said preliminary plat shall lapse, and no
final plat shall be considered until one of the following occurs:
(1) The developer may submit a renewed preliminary plat, which may
be required by the municipality to be in accordance with any
changes in the ordinances or specifications which govern any
aspect of the development which have been made during the lapsed
period.
(2) The governing body may, for good cause shown, grant an extension
of time for the submission of a final plat.
P. When final plats for successive sections of a total development are
submitted, following approval of a development master plat, such final
plats shall be considered in accordance with the provisions and
standards in effect and established for the total development when the
development master plat was approved, provided that the final plats are
submitted within the development time schedule approved with the
master plat.
(1) Any final plat submitted after expiration of the approved time
schedule for that development section shall not be considered until
one of the following occurs:
(a) The developer may submit a renewed master plat, which may
be required by the municipality to be in accordance with any
changes in the ordinances or specifications which govern any
aspect of the development which have been made during the
lapsed period.
(b) The governing body may, for good cause shown, grant an
extension of time for the submission of that development
section.
§ 268-17 RIDLEY CODE § 268-17
256:588
§ 268-18. Final plat specifications.
The final plat shall be drawn on reproducible linen or other reproducible
material of equal quality, 17 1/2 inches by 24 inches in size with a two-andone-
half-inch binding border along the left hand seventeen-and-one-halfinch
edge (17 inches by 22 inches in size) at a scale of one inch equals 50
feet and shall show:
(c) The developer may submit a renewed time schedule for the
entire remainder of the development.
Q. Following approval of any final section plat, after approval of a
development master plat, the developer shall complete all aspects of
the development described in and related to such final section within a
period of three years, unless otherwise established in the development
time schedule. Upon lapse of the three years of the approved time
schedule, further activity by the developer pursuant to the described
development section is prohibited.
(1) Before acting on a final plat, the governing body may arrange for a
public hearing thereon, after giving public notice.
A. Primary control points, approved by the Engineer, or description and
"ties" to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings
and similar data on the plat shall be referred.
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other
rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots or parcels in unit,
cooperative or condominium subdivisions and other sites with accurate
dimensions, bearing or deflection angles and radii, arcs, and central
angles of all curves.
C. Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
D. Location, dimensions and purpose of easements.
E. Number to identify each lot or parcel in unit, cooperative or
condominium subdivisions and/or site.
F. Total acreage of tract.
G. Zoning district.
H. Purpose for which sites other than residential lots or parcels in unit,
cooperative or condominium subdivisions are dedicated or reserved.
I. Building setback lines on all lots or parcels in unit, cooperative or
condominium subdivisions and other sites.
J. Locations and description of survey monuments. All permanent
reference monuments shown by an "X" on the plat.
K. Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
§ 268-17 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-18
256:589
L. Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by
record name, date and number.
M. Certification by a registered surveyor or registered engineer, licensed
in the state of Pennsylvania, certifying to accuracy of survey and plat.
N. Certification of title showing that the applicant is the owner of land,
agent of the landowner or tenant with permission of the landowner.
O. Statement by the owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and any sites
for public uses which are to be dedicated.
P. Proposed protective covenants running with the land, if any.
Q. Existing and proposed contours at vertical intervals of five feet or less
as determined at the preliminary plat stage.
R. Other data. The final plat shall be accompanied by the following data
and plans as prescribed by the governing body or as required by the
laws of the commonwealth:
(1) Profiles of streets and alleys showing grades.
(2) Typical cross sections of each type of street, minor street, collector,
etc., showing the width of sidewalks, if required, and location and
size of utility mains.
(3) Plans and profiles of proposed sanitary and stormwater sewers,
with grades and pipe size indicated, and a plan of any proposed
water distribution system showing pipe sizes and location of valves
and fire hydrants.
(4) A final erosion and sedimentation control plan, showing the
location and types of erosion and sediment control measures
together with a report, signed by the County Conservation District,
indicating that the plan has been prepared and reviewed as
required by the Clean Streams Law of Pennsylvania, Act 222, July
31, 1970, as amended.132
(5) A copy of an application for a permit for earth moving activity or a
permit issued and signed by the Department of Environmental
Protection as required by the Rules and Regulations, Chapter 102,
"Erosion Control," under P.L. 1987, June 22, 1937, as amended (see
Section 505-1-C), and Chapter 124, Erosion and Sediment Control,
of the Code of the Township of Ridley. [Amended 12-7-2000 by
Ord. No. 1810]
(6) In the case of subdivision and land development plans proposed for
the sale of lots only, the subdivider shall include on the final plat a
covenant with the land assuring the implementation by the lot
owners of the erosion and sedimentation control plan.
132. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 268-18 RIDLEY CODE § 268-18
256:590
§ 268-19. Planned residential development plats.
Plats of tracts proposed for development in accordance with the provision
for planned residential development in Chapter 325, Zoning, shall be
processed and the specifications for plat submission shall be as required
therein.
§ 268-20. Site development plats.
Plats for multifamily dwelling, commercial, manufacturing and other
nonresidential purposes, as required in § 268-12 herein, shall be identified
as site development plans. Such plats shall be submitted and processed
in accordance with the provisions herein for preliminary and final land
development plats and shall be in accordance with the specifications for
such plats.
§ 268-21. Earth moving activity plans.
Plats describing earth moving activities shall be identified as earth moving
activity plans and shall be processed as follows:
(7) A letter from the Department of Environmental Protection assuring
the governing body that all data, plans and information required by
the "Rules and Regulations," Chapter 71, Administration of Sewage
Facilities Act 537,133 have been submitted to the Department of
Environmental Protection for review and approval of sewage
facilities.
(8) Where a developer intends to provide a separate water supply
system to serve more than one dwelling unit, the developer shall
submit with the final plat a copy of a permit issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection, to be filed with the
municipality, for the proposed water supply system.
(9) Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications as
may be required by the governing body in the enforcement of these
regulations.
(10) Location plan, clearly describing the location of the tract in the
municipality. This plan may appear directly on the subdivision plan.
A. When preliminary, final or site development plats are involved, earth
moving activity plans shall be part of such submissions.
B. When earth moving activity plans are submitted separately, they shall
be considered and approved by the Commission in accordance with the
procedure for preliminary plats.
C. Earth moving activity plans shall be generally in accordance with the
applicable specifications for preliminary plats, adequately and
133. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 268-18 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-21
256:591
accurately describing the land involved, its location and surroundings,
existing natural features and topography, proposed uses and structures,
finished grading and temporary and permanent erosion control
measures.
(1) Such plats shall include appropriate erosion and sedimentation
control plans, in accordance with the provisions of § 268-15B(5)
herein.
§ 268-21 RIDLEY CODE § 268-21
256:592
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 268-22. Streets.
§ 268-23. Alleys.
Alleys shall be prohibited in residential districts except where proved to be
necessary.
§ 268-24. Alignment.
Streets entering opposite sides of an existing or a proposed street shall be
laid out directly opposite one another.
§ 268-25. Curves.
Where connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by
more than 10°, the line must be connected with a true, circular curve.
A. General standards. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade
and location of all streets shall conform to the Ridley Township
Comprehensive Plan, as adopted, and shall be considered in their
relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to
public convenience and safety and in the appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. Where not
shown on the Ridley Township Comprehensive Plan, design standards
of streets shall conform to the provisions found herein.
B. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions
for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas.
C. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions
for the proper projection of streets to adjoining unsubdivided land,
when such land is appropriate for subdivision.
D. If lots resulting from original subdivision are large enough to permit
resubdivision, or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, adequate
street right-of-way to permit further subdivision shall be provided or
necessary.
A. The minimum radius of the center line for the curve must be as follows:
Type of Street
Minimum Radius
(feet)
Arterial 350
Collector 300
Minor 150
§ 268-22 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-25
256:593
§ 268-26. Dead-end streets.
Permanent dead-end streets shall be prohibited unless designed as cul-desac
streets in accordance with the following standards:
§ 268-27. Intersections.
Intersections involving the junction of more than two streets are prohibited.
Right angle intersections must be used wherever possible; however, in no
case shall streets intersect at less than 75°.
§ 268-28. Intersection curve radii.
At intersections of streets the radius of the curb or edge of pavement shall
not be less than the following:
Intersection
Minimum Simple Curve Radii of
Curb or Edge of Pavement
(feet)
Collector with collector street 40
Collector with minor street 30
Minor street with minor street 20
NOTE: Rounded corners or diagonal cutoffs must be provided on the rightof-
way lines substantially concentric with or parallel to the chord of the
curb radius corners.
§ 268-29. Intersection sight distance.
Proper sight lines must be maintained at all street intersections. Measured
along the center line, there must be a clear sight triangle of 75 feet (150
feet for arterial streets) from the point of intersection and no building or
obstruction higher than 30 inches above the grade of the center line of the
streets shall be permitted in this area.
B. Straight portions of the street must be tangent to the beginning or end
of curves. Except for minor streets there must be a tangent of at least
100 feet between reverse curves.
A. Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 500 feet in length.
B. Cul-de-sac streets shall be provided with a turnaround right-of-way of
50 feet and a paved turnaround having a minimum roadway diameter of
40 feet.
C. Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way of the same width on the street shall be carried
to the property line in such a way as to permit future expansion of the
street into the adjoining tract.
§ 268-25 RIDLEY CODE § 268-30
256:594
§ 268-30. Marginal access streets.
Where a subdivision or land development abuts or contains an existing or
proposed major traffic street, the Commission may require marginal access
streets, alleys, reverse frontage lots or such other treatment as will provide
protection for abutting properties, reduction in the number of intersections
with the major street and separation of local and through traffic.
§ 268-31. Sight distance.
Sight distance must be provided with respect to both horizontal and vertical
alignment. Measured along the center line, for four feet above grade, this
distance must be as follows:
Type of Street
Sight Distance
(feet)
Collector 300
Minor 200
§ 268-32. Street grades.
The grades of streets shall not be less than the minimum or more than the
maximum requirements listed below:
Type of
Streets
Minimum
Grade Maximum Grade
All streets 0.75%
Arterial
streets
As determined by the Commission after
consultation with the municipality and the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Collector
streets
6%
Minor streets 8%
Alleys 8%
NOTE: Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade when the
algebraic differences exceed 1% and shall be designed for maximum
visibility. Intersections shall be approached on all sides by leveling areas.
Where the grade exceeds 7%, such leveling areas shall have a minimum
length of 60 feet (measured from the intersection of the center lines) within
which no grade shall exceed a maximum of 4%.
§ 268-33. Street names and signs.
A. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or approximate existing or
platted street names, or approximate such names by the use of suffixes
such as "lane," "way," "drive," "court" or "avenue." In approving the
names of streets, cognizance may be given to existing or platted street
§ 268-30 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-33
256:595
§ 268-34. Street widths.
Street right-of-way and roadway widths shall be as follows:
Street Type
Right-of-Way
Width
(feet)
Paved Travel Way
(feet)
Improved
Shoulder Width
(feet)
Arterial As determined by the Commission and the governing body,
in consultation with the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation
Collector 60 36 Each: 8
Minor 50 27 Each: 7
Alley 20 20
§ 268-35. Partial and half streets.
names within the postal delivery district served by the local post office.
New streets shall bear the same name or number of any continuation
or alignment with an existing or platted street.
B. Street signs of a permanent nature approved by the Commission shall
be erected at all intersections.
A. Where abutting residential lots are not provided with stoned or paved
off-street parking space in the minimum ratio of one space of 200
square feet per dwelling unit, a minor street shall have a right-of-way of
54 feet and a paved cartway of 34 feet.
B. Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be required by the
Planning Commission for the following purposes:
(1) To promote public safety and convenience.
(2) To provide parking space in commercial districts and in areas of
high-density residential development.
C. Short extension of existing streets with lesser right-of-way and/or
cartway widths than prescribed in this section may be permitted;
provided, however, that no section or new right-of-way less than 50 feet
in width shall be permitted.
D. Where subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate
right-of-way width, additional right-of-way width in conformance with
the above standards shall be required.
A. The dedication of half streets at the perimeter of new subdivisions is
prohibited.
B. Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial
street, the other part of the street shall be plotted within such tract.
§ 268-33 RIDLEY CODE § 268-36
256:596
§ 268-36. Slope of banks along streets.
The slope of banks at the right-of-way line of streets measured
perpendicular to the street center line shall be no steeper than the
following:
§ 268-37. Driveways.
All driveways proposed by subdivision or land development plats or
otherwise, whether installed by the developer or the individual lot owner,
shall conform to the following design standards:
A. One foot of vertical measurement for four feet of horizontal
measurement for fills.
B. One foot of vertical measurement for three feet of horizontal
measurements for cuts.
A. Location. No driveway shall be less than 30 feet from any intersection
of roads or streets.
(1) No driveway shall be less than 20 feet from any other driveway.
(2) Driveways having a throat width not in excess of 20 feet shall be
not less than 10 feet from a side property line.
(3) Driveways having a throat width in excess of 20 feet shall be not
less than 20 feet from a side property line.
(4) No driveway shall be less than 10 feet from a fire hydrant.
B. Angle with street. Driveways shall be as nearly as possible at right
angles with the road or street upon which they enter.
(1) In no case shall a driveway intersect the road or street at an angle
less than 60°.
(2) A curb opening may be of the width required to accommodate the
angled width of a driveway.
C. Grade or slope. Driveways shall not exceed a slope of 10% and shall
have a leveling area with a slope not exceeding 2% within 15 feet of the
public street cartway line. Where drives enter a bank through a cut,
retaining walls shall be provided or, in lieu thereof, the side slopes of
the cut shall be graded to not more than 1/2 foot vertical to one foot
horizontal within 10 feet of the point where the drive intersects with the
right-of-way line of the public street.
(1) The center line elevation of the driveway shall be on grade with the
curb cut or in lieu of a curbing not more than two inches above the
cartway surface of the public street.
§ 268-36 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-37
256:597
(2) Adjustment of the elevation of the driveway at the gutter line, to
smoothly connect with the existing shoulder, shall not be such as to
create obstacles to drainage or snow removal.
(3) Where road or street shoulders are not adequately stabilized, the
driveway paving may be extended to the main roadway paving of
the road or street.
(a) The extension from gutter line to main paving shall be in
accordance with the specification for grade of shoulder,
appropriately adjusted with respect to existing shoulder
conditions, so as to not create obstacles to drainage or snow
removal.
(b) The municipality shall have no responsibility for the
maintenance of such extensions, and such extensions may be
removed or otherwise altered by the municipality, in the course
of street improvements.
D. Curb openings. Where a curb exists, or is to be installed, it may be
reduced in height, for the width of the driveway, to an elevation two to
2 1/2 inches above the gutter line elevation.
(1) The surface of the reduced height section shall be smoothly
finished and connected with smoothly curved surfaces to the full
elevation curbing on each side.
(2) The driveway elevation shall meet the reduced height curb
elevation.
(3) Curb openings shall have reduced height widths equal to the throat
width of the driveway or greater in accordance with Subsections B
and F(2) herein.
E. Storm drainage provisions. No driveway, existing or proposed, may be
installed, maintained or used in such manner as to impede the flow of
stormwater from and along the street. Nor shall any driveway impede
such flow and cause drainage water or waterborne soil or debris to flow
upon the street.
(1) Where improved curb and gutter do not exist and roadside
drainage is or comes to be conducted in an open gutter the bottom
elevation of which is more than four inches below the shoulder, the
municipality shall require the owner of the property to which the
driveway provides access to install piping, at the expense of the
property owner, of a type and size approved by the municipality,
under the driveway and extending not less than four feet on either
side.
(a) Such an installation shall be made to have a finished elevation
which will not create an obstacle to snow removal.
(b) The minimum pipe size shall be 12 inches in diameter.
§ 268-37 RIDLEY CODE § 268-37
256:598
§ 268-38. Easements.
§ 268-39. Blocks.
Blocks shall not exceed 1,800 feet nor be less than 500 feet in length and
shall be of sufficient depth to permit two tiers of lots, except as otherwise
provided for herein.
§ 268-40. Lots.
The arrangement and other design standards of lots shall conform to the
following requirements:
(c) The municipality may require a pipe size as computed by
estimating the drainage area and flow involved, applying the
Rational method for a ten-year-frequency twenty-minuteduration
storm.
F. Curb and flare radii. In any case where curbing is to curve toward the
right-of-way line from the curbline it shall have a face radius in
accordance with Subsection F(2) immediately below.
(1) When driveways are extended to connect directly with the main
roadway paving, they shall be provided with a flared paving in
Subsection F(2) immediately following.
(2) All driveways shall have an actual or theoretical flared connection
to the nearest main roadway paving. This flare standard width of
the main roadway of the street, to a point of tangency with the
throat width of the driveway.134 Any flared paving, curved curbing
or curb opening shall be in accordance with such computed line.
A. The following minimum widths of easements shall be observed unless
otherwise required by the engineering specifications:
(1) Underground public utility facilities: 15 feet.
(2) Overhead public utility facilities: 10 feet.
(3) Drainage facilities: 20 feet.
B. Easements for public utilities shall, wherever possible, be centered on
side or rear lot lines.
C. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement
conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, and of such width as will be adequate
to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage or for the purpose
of widening, deepening, relocating, improving or protecting such
drainage facilities, or for the purpose of installing a stormwater sewer.
134. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 268-37 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-40
256:599
§ 268-41. Sanitary sewer.
A. Every lot shall abut a street and shall not be smaller in size than the
minimum requirements of Chapter 325, Zoning, as to area and
dimensions, for the district in which the subdivision is to be located.
B. Double frontage lots shall not be permitted, except that, where desired
along limited access highways, lots may face on an interior street and
back on such thoroughfares. In such event, a planting strip for a screen,
at least 20 feet in width, shall be provided along the back of the lots.
Where lots back on a railroad, creek, or other natural barrier, there may
also be required a twenty-foot strip. Interior lots having frontage on two
streets shall be prohibited, except where required by unusual physical
conditions.
A. Manholes shall not be more than 400 feet apart on straight runs and
there shall be a manhole at every point of change in course or grade
and at intersections of sewer lines.
B. Sanitary sewer lines shall be constructed within street rights-of-way
before construction of the street is begun and shall be placed in space
allocated according to the engineering specifications.
C. If the existing sanitary sewer system or planned extension does not
meet the boundaries or come within 150 feet of a proposed subdivision,
the subdivider shall construct any necessary main or trunk line to
connect the subdivision with the existing or planned system.
D. The collector main shall be of a material and design approved by the
Township Commissioners and shall conform in all respects to the
standards and requirements as published in the Sewage Manual by the
Department of Environmental Protection. The lateral to the building
line shall be of a material and design approved by the Township
Commissioners and for residences shall be of a minimum inside
diameter of six inches between the collector main and the right-of-way
line of the street or highway. Laterals for buildings other than singlefamily
residences shall be commensurately larger and as approved by
the Municipal Sanitary Engineer. The sewage collector mains and
lateral shall be plugged watertight pending connection with a public
sewer system. All sewage collector mains and lateral designs shall be
reviewed and inspected, and approved by the Municipal Sanitary
Engineer at the cost and expense of the subdivider or developer.
E. Following the construction of the sewage collection system, the
subdivider shall provide the Township Commissioners with "as built"
plans prepared by a registered engineer and bearing his seal showing
the size, location and length of all lines. All descriptions are to include
bearings and distances.
F. Upon proper cause, the Township Commissioners, at an open meeting,
may waive, modify, alter or suspend the requirement of Subsection D.
§ 268-40 RIDLEY CODE § 268-41
256:600
§ 268-42. Storm drainage.
§ 268-43. Erosion and sedimentation control. [Amended 12-7-2000
by Ord. No. 1810]
In the event that any person shall intend to make changes in the contour of
any land or engage in earth moving activity where earth moving affects 25
acres or more, whether for subdivision, land development or any purpose,
such person, who is required to obtain a permit under Section 102.41,
shall obtain a permit from the Department of Environmental Protection in
accordance with the requirements of "Rules and Regulations" Chapter 102,
Erosion Control, authorized under P.L. 1987, June 22, 1937, and Chapter
124, Erosion and Sediment Control, of the Code of the Township of Ridley.
G. Where sewer lines are installed in undedicated land, a public easement
7.5 feet on each side of the line shall be required. Suitable easements
may also be required along the course of streams.
A. Lots shall be graded to provide drainage away from buildings.
B. The design of a construction of the storm drainage shall comply with
the following requirements:
(1) The minimum requirement shall be a ten-year storm with a twentyminute
duration.
(2) The storm drainage system shall permit unimpeded flow of natural
watercourses.
(3) The system shall ensure adequate drainage of all low points along
the line of streets.
(4) The system shall intercept stormwater runoff along streets at
intervals reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area
drained.
(5) Street drainage will not be permitted to cross intersections or the
crown of a road.
A. Under the requirements noted above, the Township shall notify the
Department immediately upon receipt of an application for a building
permit involving earth moving activity which affects five acres or more
of land.
B. The Township shall not issue a building permit to those engaged in
earth moving activities requiring a Department of Environmental
Protection permit until the Department has issued the permit.
C. An erosion and sedimentation control plan must be prepared for a
single lot or more where subdivision, land development or other earth
moving activity is proposed. The plan must be submitted:
§ 268-41 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-43
256:601
§ 268-44. Land development and open space. [Amended 9-26-2007
by Ord. No. 1925]
(1) As required by the Rules and Regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection noted above; and
(2) As required by the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law,135 Act 222,
July 31, 1970, as amended.
D. Such erosion and sedimentation control plan must be submitted to the
County Conservation District Directors for review, and a copy of the
plan and the Conservation District Directors' review shall be submitted
to the Commission as part of the final plat submission section.
E. In the preparation of erosion and subdivision plans the person
preparing such plans shall consult the County Conservation District to
determine the erosion and control measures needed to control erosion
and reduce sedimentation.
A. All commercial, industrial, multifamily, or other subdivisions or land
development plats submitted after the effective date of this chapter
shall provide for suitable and adequate recreation in order to:
(1) Ensure adequate recreational areas and facilities to serve the
future residents of the Township.
(2) Maintain compliance with recreational standards as developed by
the National Recreation and Parks Association as modified by the
Township recreation plan.
(3) Reduce increasing usage pressure on existing recreational areas
and facilities.
(4) Ensure that all present and future residents have the opportunity to
engage in many and varied recreational pursuits.
(5) Reduce the possibility of the Township becoming overburdened
with the development and maintenance of many small, randomly
planned and widely separated recreation areas.
B. Exemptions and requirements.
(1) The following are exempt or partially exempt from the provisions of
this section:
(a) Any single and/or multifamily residential subdivision or land
development plan in a residential zone classification for which
a preliminary plan has been submitted prior to the effective
date of this chapter.
135. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 268-43 RIDLEY CODE § 268-44
256:602
(b) Any residential subdivision or land development plan, whether
single and/or multifamily, that contains less than 10 dwelling
units shall be exempted by the Board from dedicating land for
recreational purposes or from paying the fee in lieu of
dedication as provided in this section.
(c) Any commercial or industrial development containing less than
five acres shall be exempted by the Board from dedicating land
for recreational purposes or from paying the fee in lieu of
dedication as provided in this section.
(2) The amount of land required to be provided for dedication of land
for recreational purposes for residential subdivision or land
development plans not exempted from the provisions of this section
shall be as follows:
(a) Single-family and twin developments. In the case of singlefamily
subdivisions, the developer shall provide a minimum of
1,500 square feet per lot.
(b) Multiple-family developments. In multiple-family
developments, a minimum contiguous area of 10% of the gross
area shall be provided for recreation.
(c) Commercial, industrial, or other development. A minimum
contiguous area of 10% of the gross area shall be provided for
recreation.
(d) The Township has generally determined that 10% of the gross
land area is a minimum in relation to the general use of the
facilities to be dedicated for the above categories.
(3) A maximum of 10% of the total land area required by this section to
be provided for recreation may consist of floodplain areas.
(4) Such land set aside shall be suitable to serve the purpose of active
and/or passive recreation by reason of its size, shape, location, and
topography and shall be subject to the approval of the Board.
(5) The developer shall satisfy the Board that there are adequate
provisions to ensure retention and all future maintenance of such
recreation areas by maintaining ownership or by providing for and
establishing an organization for the ownership and maintenance of
the recreation area, and such organization shall not be dissolved
nor shall it dispose of the recreation area by sale or otherwise,
except to an organization conceived and established to own and
maintain the recreation area, without first offering to dedicate the
same to the Township without cost to the Township.
(a) The Township may impose costs to place such recreation area
in appropriate condition prior to accepting dedication.
§ 268-44 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-44
256:603
(b) All costs of dedication shall be at the expense of the developer
or association who owns the same.
C. Recreation area location criteria. The Planning Commission and Board
(with the assistance of the Recreation Board), in exercising their duties
regarding the approval of subdivision and land development plans, shall
consider the following criteria in determining whether to approve the
proposed location of recreation areas in the developer's subdivision and
land development plans:
(1) The site or sites shall be accessible from all areas of the
development to be served, have good ingress and egress, and have
access to a public road, however, no public road shall traverse the
site or locales.
(2) The site or sites shall have suitable topography and soil conditions
for use and development as a recreation area.
(3) The size and shape of the site or sites shall be suitable for
development as a particular type of park. Sites will be categorized
by the Township using the standards established by the National
Recreation and Parks Association ("Park, Recreation, Open Space
and Greenway Guidelines" dated 1996, as may be amended from
time to time).
(4) When designing and developing these recreation areas, it shall be
done according to the standards established by the National
Recreation and Parks Association as modified by the Township
recreation plan.
(5) The site or sites shall, to the greatest extent practical, be easily
accessible to essential utilities, such as water, sewer and electric.
(6) The site or sites shall meet minimum size requirements for usable
acreage with respect to national Recreation and Parks Association
standards, with 75% of such area having a maximum slope of 7%.
(7) Recreation sites shall be located in a manner which allows the
maximum practical sunlight to neighboring structures.
(8) Where open space is being provided, it shall be located, wherever
possible, to provide a buffer from the shading effects of taller
structures or obstructions on existing or proposed shorter
buildings.
D. Dedication to the Township.
(1) In a case where the developer does not wish to retain the required
recreation area, such area may be offered for dedication to the
Township.
(2) In addition to approving the recreation site areas to be dedicated to
the Township, the Planning Commission shall make its
§ 268-44 RIDLEY CODE § 268-44
256:604
recommendation to the Board as to whether the dedication shall
be accepted by the Township (including input by the Recreation
Board).
(3) Such areas dedicated to the Township for public use shall be
suitable for recreation purposes by reason of size, shape, location,
topography, and access.
(4) The Planning Commission, Recreation Board, or Board may find
dedication to be impractical because of the size, shape, location,
access, topography, drainage, or other physical features of the land
and that such dedication would adversely affect the subdivision and
land development and its future residents or occupants or that
there is no land area within the proposed subdivision which is
practical for dedication to the public because of size, access,
topography, or other physical characteristics.
(5) When the Board deems it to be in the public interest to accept
dedicated land, such acceptance shall be in accordance with the
law.
E. Fee in lieu of dedication.
(1) Where the Board agrees with the developer that because of the
size, shape, location, access, topography, or other physical features
of the land that it is impractical to dedicate land to the Township or
set aside a recreation area as required by this section, the Board
shall agree on a payment of a fee in lieu of dedication of such land
which shall be payable to the Township prior to approval of each
final section of the overall plan by the Township.
(2) The amount of the fee shall be set from time to time by resolution of
the Board.
(3) All monies paid to the Township pursuant to this section shall be
used only for the acquisition of and/or capital improvements for
park and recreation purposes accessible to the development.
(4) A fee authorized under this section shall, upon its receipt by the
Township, be deposited in an interest-bearing account, clearly
identifying the specific recreation facilities for which the fee was
received. Interest earned on such accounts shall become funds of
that account. Funds from such accounts shall be expended only in
properly allocable portions of the cost incurred to construct the
specific recreation facilities for which the funds were collected.
(5) Upon request of any person who paid any fee under this section,
the Township shall refund such fee, plus interest accumulated
thereon from the date of payment, if the Township has failed to
utilize the fee paid for the purposes set forth in this section within
three years from the date such fee was paid.
§ 268-44 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-44
256:605
§ 268-45. Petroleum transmission lines; outfall sewers; storm
drainage lines.
There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet measured from the right-ofway
line between any proposed building and any petroleum line, petroleum
products or natural gas transmission line, outfall sewers and storm drainage
lines which traverse the subdivision.
§ 268-46. Other public facilities.
Subdivision and land development plats shall give consideration to the
adequacy of existing or proposed community facilities, as to their capacity
to serve the additional dwellings, or occupants of other buildings or
facilities, of the proposed subdivision or land development.
(6) The date upon which the fee is received shall be recorded in the
records of the Township recreation fund and an annual report of
the status of each account and of such proposed facilities as are
funded by each account shall be provided by the Recreation Board
at the February Board meeting to the Commissioners.
(7) Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the person who paid the fee
and the Township from agreeing that the original recreation facility
as proposed by the Township has been superseded or made
unnecessary and reallocating the fee and any interest accumulated
to such other project as the parties agree; provided, however, that
it meets the above standards with regard to a reasonable
relationship to the parcel in question.
(8) All expenditures from fees shall be of interest first and thereafter
principal.
F. Applicability of the Zoning Ordinance. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to reduce the total open space requirements of § 325-100
E(3) of the Township of Ridley Zoning Ordinance.136
A. Consideration shall be given to the desirability of providing or reserving
areas for facilities normally required in residential sections, including
schools and other public buildings, churches, libraries and local
business centers.
B. Subdivisions and land developments of all kinds shall consider the need
for inclusion of provisions for open or "green" spaces, as small parks,
malls or rest areas, and shall, wherever possible, preserve tree groves,
trees of six inches or more in diameter at the base of the trunk,
waterways, scenic points, historic areas and facilities and other
community assets and landmarks.
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 325, Zoning.
§ 268-44 RIDLEY CODE § 268-46
256:606
C. Areas offered for school or other purposes shall be reasonably compact
parcels, not excessively irregular in terrain and having a front foot
width on a public street of not less than 50 feet.
§ 268-46 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-46
256:607

ARTICLE V
Improvement and Construction Requirements
§ 268-47. General provisions.
The subdivider or land developer shall provide all improvements required
by these regulations. The specifications for the improvements contained
herein shall apply.
§ 268-48. Monuments and markers.
§ 268-49. Streets.
A. Monuments and markers shall be made of such material size and length
as set forth in the engineering specifications.
B. Monuments and markers must be placed so that the scored or marked
point coincides exactly with the point of intersection of the lines being
monumented. They must be set so that the top of the monument or
marker is level with the finished grade of the surrounding ground.
Monuments must be marked on top with a copper or brass plate or
dowel set in concrete.
(1) Monuments must be set:
(a) At the intersections of all street right-of-way lines.
(b) At the intersection of lines forming angles in the boundaries of
the subdivision.
(c) At such intermediate points as may be required by the
Engineer.
(2) Markers must be set:
(a) At all corners except those monumented.
(b) By the time the property is offered for sale.
A. Pavements. Streets must be surfaced to the grades and dimensions
drawn on the plans, profiles and cross sections submitted by the
applicant and approved by the Township Commissioners. Before paving
the street surface, the applicant must install the required utilities and
provide, where necessary, adequate stormwater drainage for the street
acceptable to the Township Commissioners.
(1) The pavement base and wearing surface must be constructed
according to the applicable engineering specifications.
(2) All new streets or sections thereof shall be fully improved,
including any sections projecting to tract boundaries, except:
§ 268-47 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-49
256:609
(a) Street projections, extending the depth of one lot to the tract
boundary, shall be rough graded and reseeded in accordance
with erosion control specifications and dedicated to public use.
(b) No driveway connections shall be made to such unimproved
street.
(c) At such time as adjacent development occurs, the Township
shall be responsible for constructing the roadway in
accordance with Township specifications.
(d) Streets shall be graded and improved for the full width of the
street right-of-way in accordance with the engineering
specifications.
B. Arterial streets. For the construction of arterial roads or highways, the
subdivider shall consult the Township Commissioners and be governed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for the method of
construction to be used.
(1) The Township Commissioners, on the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, shall decide if a collector or arterial street is
required as a direct result of the construction of this subdivision.
C. Driveway entrances. Driveway entrances or aprons within the street
right-of-way shall be surfaced to their full width, and the type of surface
is to be the same as specified by the engineering specifications for the
streets. Where sidewalks are installed, the required driveway surfacing
shall end at the street side of the sidewalk.
(1) Driveway entrances along streets, where curbs are not required,
shall be constructed to provide proper drainage along the street
and from the streets by the continuation of gutters, swales or
ditches. Such continuation may be provided by having an approved
pipe of not less than 18 inches in diameter cross such driveway
entrance.
(2) Driveway entrance along streets, where curbs are not required,
shall be constructed so that the driveway meets the edge of the
cartway as a continuation of the slope from the crown of the street
for not less than five feet.
D. Curbs cuts at driveway entrance. The curb height at driveway
entrances may be reduced to a minimum of one inch for driveway
entrances along streets where curbs are required.
(1) The maximum width of reduced curb height shall be 20 feet for
residential driveways and 40 feet for commercial or industrial
driveways.
(2) Sidewalks, across driveway entrances, where required, shall be
constructed in accordance with the requirements in § 268-53.
§ 268-49 RIDLEY CODE § 268-50
256:610
§ 268-50. Sewers and water.
§ 268-51. Storm drainage.
A. Where a public sanitary sewer system is within 150 feet or where plans
approved by the municipality provide for the installation of such public
sanitary sewer facilities to within 150 feet of a proposed subdivision,
the subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary
sewer system if in accordance with the engineering specifications.
B. Sanitary sewers and sewage disposal systems shall not be combined
with stormwater sewers and shall not be constructed to receive
effluents from any stormwater collection or drainage system.
C. Where a water main supply system is within 150 feet or where plans
approved by the Township provide for the installation of such public
water facilities, the subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a
complete water main supply system to be connected to the existing or
proposed water main supply system in accordance with the engineering
specifications.
A. Whenever the evidence available to the Township Commissioners or
recommendation of the Planning Commission indicates that natural
surface drainage is inadequate, the subdivider shall install storm
sewers, culverts and related facilities as necessary in accordance with
approved plans and profiles and the applicable engineering
specifications.
B. Storm drainage facilities must be designed not only to handle the
anticipated peak discharge from the property being subdivided, but
also the anticipated increase in runoff that may occur when all the
property at a higher elevation in the same drainage basin is fully
developed.
(1) Existing facilities. Where adequate existing storm sewers are
readily accessible, the subdivider must connect his stormwater
facilities to these existing storm sewers.
(2) Abutting properties. In the design of storm drainage facilities,
special consideration must be given to preventing excess runoff
onto adjacent developed or undeveloped properties. In no case may
a change be made in the existing topography which would:
(a) Result in increasing any portion of the slope steeper than one
foot of vertical measurement for three feet of horizontal
measurement for fill, or one foot of vertical measurement for
two feet of horizontal measurement for cuts within a distance
of 20 feet from the property line unless an adequate retaining
wall or other structure is provided.
§ 268-50 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-51
256:611
§ 268-52. Curbs and gutters.
§ 268-53. Sidewalks.
(b) Result in a slope which exceeds the normal angle of slippage of
the material involved. All slopes must be protected against
erosion.
(c) Stormwater drainage and sewer systems shall not be combined
with sanitary sewers or sewage disposal system and shall not
be constructed to receive any effluents from, nor discharge any
effluents to, any sanitary sewer or sewage disposal system.
A. Wherever a proposed subdivision or land development shall average
three or more lots per gross acre included in the subdivision, or where
any subdivision is immediately adjacent to or within 1,000 feet of any
existing or recorded subdivision having curbs and gutters, curbs and
gutters shall be installed on each side of the street surface in
accordance with the engineering specifications. The Township
Commissioners on recommendation of the Planning Commission may
require installation of curbs and/or gutters in any subdivision where the
bulk of buildings, area of parking, roads and the gradient of such areas
or other evidence indicates that such improvements are necessary for
proper drainage.
B. Curbs and gutters shall be required to be installed in all cases where
the street grade exceeds 6%.
C. Curbs and gutters. Where the applicant proposes to subdivide a
previously developed property by purchasing the undeveloped portion
and the Township Commissioners require installations of curbs and/or
gutters on the newly subdivided development, the applicant shall be
required to: [Amended 6-17-1987 by Ord. No. 1612]
(1) Where the portion not purchased does not have curbs and/or
gutters, install curbs and/or gutters on the portion not purchased
so that it matches the installation of curbs and/or gutters in the
new subdivision; or
(2) Where the curbs and/or gutters in the portion not purchased are in
a state of disrepair, repair the curbs and/or gutters on the portion
not purchased so that it matches the installation of curbs and/or
gutters in the new subdivision.
A. Wherever a proposed subdivision shall average three or more lots per
gross acre included in the subdivision, where any subdivision is
immediately a subdivision having sidewalks, sidewalks shall be
installed on each side of the street in accordance with the engineering
specifications. Township Commissioners on recommendation of the
Planning Commission may require installation of sidewalks in any
§ 268-51 RIDLEY CODE § 268-53
256:612
subdivision where the evidence indicates that sidewalks are necessary
for public safety.
B. Sidewalks shall be within the right-of-way of the street and shall extend
in width from the right-of-way line toward the curbline.
C. Sidewalks must be at least four feet wide. In the vicinity of shopping
centers, schools, recreation areas and other such facilities, sidewalks
must be at least five feet wide and located within the street right-ofway.
D. The Township Commissioners may on recommendation of the Planning
Commission waive sidewalk requirements in low-density residential
subdivisions, where evidence is presented that, by virtue of the location
or design of the subdivision, the public safety would not be substantially
increased by the presence of sidewalks. No waivers shall be considered
within a one-half-mile radius of any public school.
E. Sidewalks. Where the applicant proposes to subdivide a previously
developed property by purchasing the undeveloped portion and the
Township Commissioners require installations of sidewalks on the
newly subdivided development, the applicant shall be required to:
[Amended 6-17-1987 by Ord. No. 1612]
(1) Where the portion not purchased does not have sidewalks, install
sidewalks on the portion not purchased so that it matches the
installation of sidewalks in the new subdivision; or
(2) Where the sidewalks in the portion not purchased are in a state of
disrepair, repair the sidewalks on the portion not purchased so that
it matches the installation of sidewalks in the new subdivision.
§ 268-53 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-53
256:613

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Costs
§ 268-54. Establishment of fees.
The Township Commissioners shall by resolution create a schedule of fees
to be paid by the subdivider or land developer to defray the cost of
administering and processing of plats. A fee shall be paid for the following.
§ 268-55. Filing of preliminary plats.
This fee defrays the costs of:
§ 268-56. Filing of final plats.
§ 268-57. Combined submissions.
The submission of a preliminary and a final plat of the same subdivision at
the same time is subject to required payment of both preliminary and final
plat fees.
A. Inspecting the site for conformance to survey and for other
requirements.
B. Reviewing the engineering details and other plat requirements.
C. Preparing the cost estimates of the required improvements and other
related costs.
A. This fee defrays the cost of:
(1) Reviewing the subdivision or land development plat engineering
details.
(2) Inspecting the site for conformance of survey.
(3) Preparing cost estimates of required improvements.
(4) Inspection of required improvements during installation of
required improvements.
(5) Administration and legal services necessary for the processing of
the proposed subdivision or land development plat.
B. Any engineering, legal and administrative costs in excess of the
amounts submitted prior to the approval of the final plat shall be paid
promptly by the subdivider or land developer upon being notified of
same by the Township Solicitor.
C. Any excess paid over the amount actually required to cover such costs
shall be returned to the subdivider upon the completion of the required
improvements.
§ 268-54 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-58
256:615
§ 268-58. Additional fees.
A. Fees shall also be established and collected for plats of land
developments which do not propose subdivision of the land into lots,
such as for multifamily dwelling complexes, commercial or industrial
development.
B. When new street sections, or other lands, are tendered to the Township
for public ownership, the subdivider or land developer shall pay the
costs of preparing and recording the land title deeds and advertising
the ordinance.
C. Costs related to a subdivision or land development, involved in the
opening of roads, connection to streets or highways, sewage or water
supply systems, shall be borne by the subdivider or land developer.
D. In lieu of provisions for the required improvements, the Township
Commissioners may accept a performance guaranty from the
subdivider or land developer to ensure construction and installation of
the required improvements following approval of the final plat.
(1) The performance guaranty must be approved by the Township
Commissioners with the advice of the Township Solicitor and
Township Engineer and shall:
(a) Be a bond, certified check or other satisfactory security.
(b) Be payable to Ridley Township.
(c) Be in an amount sufficient to complete the improvements in
compliance with these regulations.
(d) Specify a satisfactory completion date for the improvements.
(2) When the subdivider or land developer has completed all of the
necessary and appropriate improvements, the subdivider or land
developer shall notify the Township Commissioners in writing, by
certified or registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township
Engineer and Township Planning Commission. The Township
Engineer shall thereupon file a report, in writing, with the
Township Commissioners and shall promptly mail a copy of the
same to the subdivider by certified or registered mail. The report
shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Township Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the
Township Commissioners; said report shall be detailed and shall
indicate approval or rejection for said improvements, either in
whole or in part, and if said improvements, or any portion thereof,
shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Township
Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of reasons for such
nonapproval or rejection.
§ 268-58 RIDLEY CODE § 268-58
256:616
§ 268-59. Disapproval of plat based on nonpayment of fees.
Failure of the subdivider or land developer to provide the fees required in
this article may be the sole reason for disapproval of a plat, in which case
technical review of the plat for conformity with the provision of this and
other applicable ordinances and regulations shall not be required.
(a) The Township Commissioners shall notify the subdivider or
land developer, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of
the action of said municipal governing body with relation
thereto.
(b) If the Township Commissioners or the Township Engineer fails
to comply with the time limitation provisions contained herein,
all improvements will be deemed to have approval and the
subdivider or land developer shall be released from all liability,
pursuant to its performance guaranty bond.
(c) If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved
or shall be rejected by the Township Commissioners, the
subdivider or land developer shall proceed to complete the
same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
(d) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
subdivider's right to contest or question by legal procedures or
otherwise the determination of the Township Commissioners
or the Township Engineer.
(3) In the event that any improvements which may be required have
not been installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the
approved final plat, the Township Commissioners, are hereby
granted the power to enforce any corporate bond or other security
by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such
bonds or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing
or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered
by said security, the Township Commissioners may, at their option,
install such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land
development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable
action to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder
of the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from
the security or from any legal or equitable, or both, shall be used
solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such
security and not for any other municipal purpose.
§ 268-58 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-59
256:617

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)137
§ 268-60. through § 268-72. (Reserved)
137. Editor's Note: Former Art. VII, Floodplain Areas, adopted 12-22-1982 by Ord. No. 1543,
was repealed 12-19-2012 by Ord. No. 1996. For current provisions, see Ch. 138, Flood
Damage Prevention.
§ 268-60 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-60
256:619

ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement, Amendments and Penalties
§ 268-73. Administration and enforcement.
§ 268-74. Amendments.
Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice as defined herein and in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code of 1968, as amended,
Act 247, Article V, Section 505.138
§ 268-75. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-7-2000 by Ord. No.
1810]
A. The Planning Commission and the governing body shall have the duty
and authority for the administration and general enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, as specified or implied herein.
B. Officials of the Township having regulatory duties and authorities
connected with or appurtenant to the subdivision, use or development
of land shall have the duties and authorities for the controlling
enforcement of the provision of this chapter, as specified or implied
herein or in other ordinances of the Township.
C. Permits required by the Township, for the erection or alteration of
buildings, the installation of sewers or for other appurtenant
improvement to or use of the land, shall not be issued by any Township
official responsible for such issuance until he has ascertained that the
site for such building, alteration, improvement or use is located in a
subdivision approved and publicly recorded in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter regulating the subdivision of land.
D. Also, such permits shall be issued only after it has been determined that
the site for such building, alteration, improvement or use conforms to
the site description as indicated by the approved and recorded final plat
or other land description acceptable in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and that it is in compliance with all applicable provisions
of this chapter.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which, being owner or
agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land, shall lay out,
construct, open or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
water main or other improvements for public use, travel or other
purposes, or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting
thereon, or who sells, transfers or agrees or enters into an agreement
to sell any land in a subdivision or land development, whether by
reference to or by other use of a plat of such subdivision or land
development, before a final plat has been prepared in full compliance
138. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10505.
§ 268-73 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 268-75
256:621
with the provision of this chapter and of the regulations adopted
hereunder and has been recorded as provided herein, shall be guilty of
a violation.
B. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more that $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays not timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
District Justice determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership
or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was no
such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All
judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over the Zoning Officer, payable to
the Township of Ridley.
C. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
D. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township of Ridley the right
to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
E. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in instrument
of transfer, or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring, shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such
penalties or from the remedies herein provided. The Township may also
enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by action for injunction
brought in any court of equity jurisdiction, in addition to the penalty
herein provided.
§ 268-75 RIDLEY CODE § 268-75
256:622
Chapter 271
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Walls and fences — See Ch. 310. Zoning — See Ch. 325.
§ 271-1. Definitions.
§ 271-2. Permit required; fee.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, establish or
maintain, alter, remodel, reconstruct or operate a private swimming pool
without having obtained a permit therefor in the manner prescribed herein:
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall have the
meanings herein indicated:
FENCE — An enclosure. Such enclosure shall be at least four feet in
height constructed of masonry, wood or metal, with apertures no larger
than three inches, equipped with a self-closing gate and complete with
a key-operated lock.
FOOTING — The spreading at the base or bottom of a wall or other
construction.
PERSON — Any person, copartnership, association, firm or corporation.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any swimming pool designed, used and
maintained for swimming purposes by an individual for use by his
household and guests without fees and located on property owned,
leased or otherwise used and maintained by the owner of said
swimming pool.
SWIMMING POOL — A body of water in an artificial or semiartificial
receptacle or other container, whether located indoors or outdoors, inground
or aboveground, having a depth of water at any point of more
than two feet or a surface area of more than 100 square feet, used or
intended to be used for private swimming by adults or children, or by
both adults and children.
WADING POOL — An artificially constructed pool intended for use by
children, not designed or used for swimming, with a maximum area of
100 square feet or a maximum water depth at any point of less than two
feet.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
assigned to them in Chapter 325, Zoning: "accessory building," "front
yard" and "side yard."
§ 268-75 SWIMMING POOLS § 271-2
271:623
§ 271-3. Enclosure of pools.
A. The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer on forms supplied by the Township, together with
three sets of plans and specifications setting forth the details of the
construction, four sets of drainage plans acceptable to the Township
Engineer and four sets of plot plans showing:
(1) The location of the pool on the lot.
(2) The location of buildings on the lot.
(3) Fencing, existing and planned, and the height and aperture
dimensions thereof.
(4) Such other dimensions, descriptions and information as will
provide assurance of conformance with the intent and
requirements of this chapter, of Chapter 325, Zoning, and of all
other applicable regulations of the Township.
B. The fee for each permit shall be as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners.139
C. Upon approval of the plans and specifications, one set of each, so
marked, will be returned to the applicant and must be kept on the site
with the permit during construction, available to the Code Enforcement
Officer. No change in the same shall be made without written
notification to and approval, in writing, by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
D. In all cases where an in-ground pool is proposed, the swimming pool
contractor or, if none, the property owner shall deposit the sum of
$1,000 with the Township as an escrow fund prior to the issuance of a
building permit in order to guarantee the removal of the excavated dirt
from the premises upon completion of the work. The escrow agreement
shall provide for the Township to have the excavated dirt removed at
the contractor's expense by use of the escrow funds if the contractor
has not done so within 30 days after the pool is substantially completed.
[Added 9-27-1989 by Ord. No. 1651]
A. All swimming pools now existing or hereafter constructed, installed
established or maintained, with the exception of wading pools, shall be
completely and continuously enclosed by a permanent durable wall,
fence or barrier, which shall be not more than six feet nor less than four
feet in height above grade and shall be so constructed as to have no
opening, mesh, hole or gap larger than two inches in any dimension,
except for doors and gates; provided, however, that if a picket fence is
erected or maintained, the horizontal dimension of any gap or opening
shall not exceed three inches.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 271-2 RIDLEY CODE § 271-3
271:624
§ 271-4. Safety and sanitation requirements.
(1) No fence of any kind or material shall be constructed or maintained
which shall contain projections of any kind at any point on the outer
surface of said fence.
(2) A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as a part of
such enclosure.
(3) All gates used in conjunction with any of the above-described
enclosures shall conform to the specifications required above to the
height and dimensions of openings, mesh, holes or gaps in the case
of fences, and all gates and doors shall be equipped with selfclosing
and self-latching devices for keeping the gate or door
securely closed at all times when not in actual use, provided that
the door of any dwelling which forms part of the enclosure need not
be so equipped.
(4) Gates and doors shall be locked when the pool is not in use or is
unguarded or unattended.
(5) Nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the
construction of an additional wall, fence or barrier where in lieu
thereof, the entire premises or a part thereof wherein the pool is
contained shall be fully enclosed by a wall, fence or barrier which
meets the specifications set forth herein.
(6) Any mechanical equipment, such as pumps, filters or electrical
devices, which is part of a pool facility shall be within the enclosure
or shall be similarly enclosed so as to forestall persons from gaining
entry to the pool by climbing over the equipment.
B. Every outdoor wading pool shall be enclosed by a durable wall, barrier
or fence, as described in the preceding subsection, unless such outdoor
wading pool be:
(1) Emptied when not in use or unattended; or
(2) Covered with a suitable, strong, protective covering fastened or
locked in place when not in use or unattended. A cover shall be
considered to be of sufficient strength and securely fastened or
locked in place if, when fastened or locked in place, it will support a
minimum dead weight of 200 pounds.
A. Every swimming pool shall be equipped with life rings, life preservers
or other flotation devices readily available and functional for
emergency use.
B. Any mechanical equipment, such as pumps, filters and electrical
devices, shall be adequately enclosed so as to protect all persons from
electrical shock and physical injury.
§ 271-3 SWIMMING POOLS § 271-4
271:625
§ 271-5. Pool drainage and discharge.
§ 271-6. General regulations.
C. No exposed electrical wires shall be nearer than six feet to the water's
edge, nor shall any exposed and permanently installed electrical wire
within 25 feet from the water's edge of the pool be less than 10 feet
above the ground, nor shall wires of any kind cross or be over the water
surface. Any underwater lighting shall be accomplished by the use of
methods and materials approved for such purposes by the National
Board of Fire Underwriters or other nationally accredited agency.140
D. The buildings, grounds, dressing rooms and all other swimming pool
facilities shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition and maintained
free from garbage, trash and other refuse.
A. There shall be no discharge or drainage of water from a private
swimming pool until the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that
the method or manner of emptying the pool and the connections of such
drain to the storm sewer or open stream, or upon the land, is not
contrary to the public interest or maintenance of the storm sewer
system or to the interest of other property owners.
B. In matters pertaining to technical requirements for the discharge of
water from a swimming pool, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
obtain, as needed, the consultation of the Township Engineer.
A. Vacant residences. All private swimming pools shall be drained and
maintained free of water or safely covered during the period that the
property is vacant or unoccupied. This subsection shall not be
applicable during reasonable temporary absences by the owner or
operator of any swimming pool.
B. Polluted water. No body of water, whether it be a natural or artificial
body of water, in the Township shall be used for swimming or bathing
purposes, by any person or persons, which contains sewage, waste or
other contamination or polluting ingredients rendering the water
hazardous to the health, safety or welfare of such person or persons.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer may make modifications in individual
cases, upon good cause being shown, with respect to the height, nature
or location of fences, walls, gates or latches, or the necessity therefor,
provided that the protection sought hereunder is not reduced thereby.
The Code Enforcement Officer may permit other protective devices or
structures to be used so long as the degree of protection afforded by the
substitute devices or structures is not less than the protection afforded
by the wall, fence, gates and latches required herein.
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 271-4 RIDLEY CODE § 271-7
271:626
§ 271-7. Lighting.
No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with
private swimming pools in such a manner as to be a nuisance or an
annoyance to neighboring properties.
§ 271-8. Enforcement; right of entry for inspections.
§ 271-9. Appeals.
Whenever the owner of any swimming pool about to be, or in the course
of being, erected or altered takes exception to the decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer in refusing to approve the issuance of a permit or in
refusing to approve the manner of construction or the kinds of materials
to be used in the construction or alteration or to its decision as to the
pool's safety or its compliance with the provision of this chapter, such owner
or his duly authorized attorney or agent may, within 10 days after such
decision, appeal therefrom to the Committee on Building Regulations of
the Board of Township Commissioners. Such appeal shall be in writing,
shall state the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer and the reasons
for the exception taken thereto, shall be verified by affidavit and shall be
filed with the Township Secretary. The person appealing shall have the right
to appear and to be heard if he states his desire so to do in his written
appeal. A prompt decision of such appeal shall be made by the Board of
Commissioners and shall be duly recorded, and the decision shall be final.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The Code Enforcement Officer or his duly
authorized agent is hereby authorized to enter, at reasonable times,
with the knowledge of, and accompanied by the owner or operator,
upon the premises of private swimming pools to inspect the premises
for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Every private swimming pool constructed, installed, established or
maintained or to be constructed, installed, established or maintained in
the Township of Ridley shall at all times comply with the requirements
of the local Board of Health. Any nuisance or hazards to health which
may exist or develop in or in consequences of or in connection with any
such private swimming pool shall be abated and removed by the owner,
lessee or occupant of the premises on which said pool is located within
10 days of receipt of notice from the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Township of Ridley.
C. In case such order of abatement is not obeyed within the time specified
herein, the Code Enforcement Officer shall thereupon issue a written
order to remove or abate the same, which order shall be executed by
him and his subordinates and workmen, and the expense thereof shall
be recoverable from the owner of the premises upon which the
swimming pool is located, in the same manner as debts of like character
are now collected by law.
§ 271-7 SWIMMING POOLS § 271-10
271:627
§ 271-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any regulations
and specifications adopted hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof before
a District Justice of the Township or any other court of competent
jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 for each
offense, and costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of said fine
and costs, shall be imprisoned in the Delaware County Jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 275
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing of amusement devices — See Ch.
73.
Assessment of improvements — See Ch. 160.
§ 271-10 RIDLEY CODE § 271-10
271:628
ARTICLE I
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 9-27-2006 by Ord. No. 1914141]
§ 275-1. Imposition of tax.
The Township of Ridley adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax
Reform Code of 1971142 and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized
under that article subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed
under this section shall be at a rate of 1%.
§ 275-2. Administration.
The tax imposed under § 275-1 and all applicable interest and penalties
shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December
31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known as "The Local Tax
Enabling Act," provided that if the correct amount of the tax is not paid
by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Township of Ridley,
pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S.
§ 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax,
interest and penalties.
§ 275-3. Interest.
Any tax imposed under § 275-1 that is not paid by the date the tax is due
shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims
under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.),
as amended, known as "The Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
Commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929
(P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as "The Fiscal Code,"
or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 275-4. (Reserved)
§ 275-5. (Reserved)
§ 275-6. (Reserved)
§ 275-7. (Reserved)
§ 275-8. (Reserved)
§ 275-9. (Reserved)
141. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Realty Transfer Tax, adopted
12-16-1987 by Ord. No. 1622, as amended.
142. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 275-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-10
271:629
§ 275-10. (Reserved)
§ 275-11. (Reserved)
§ 275-12. (Reserved)
§ 275-13. (Reserved)
§ 275-14. (Reserved)
§ 275-15. (Reserved)
§ 275-16. (Reserved)
§ 275-17. (Reserved)
§ 275-10 RIDLEY CODE § 275-17
271:630
ARTICLE II
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 129, Art. II, of the 1975 Code143 ]
§ 275-18. Definitions.
A. Terms defined. The following words or phrases, when used in this
article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AMUSEMENT — All manner and forms of entertainment, including,
among others, theatrical or operatic performances, concerts, movingpicture
shows, vaudeville, all forms of entertainment at fairgrounds
and amusement parks, athletic contests, including wrestling matches,
boxing and sparring exhibitions, football, baseball and basketball
games, skating, golfing, tennis, hockey, bathing, swimming, archery,
shooting, riding, dancing, rowing, bowling, billiards, pool and other
forms of diversion, sport, recreation or pastime, shows, exhibitions,
contests, displays and games, and all other methods of obtaining
admission charges, donations, contributions or monetary charges of
any character from the general public or a limited or selected number
thereof, directly or indirectly, in return for other than tangible property
or special personal or professional services.
ASSOCIATION — Any partnership, limited partnership or other forms
of unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more persons.
BOARD — The Board of Township Commissioners of the Township of
Ridley.
ESTABLISHED PRICE — Regular monetary charges of any character
whatever, including donations, contributions and dues or membership
fees (periodical or otherwise), fixed and exacted or in any manner
received by producers, as herein defined, from the general public or
a limited or selected number thereof, directly or indirectly, for the
privilege to attend or engage in any entertainment or amusement, as
herein defined, provided that when such entertainment or amusement
is conducted at any place where the charge for admission is wholly
or in part included in the price paid for refreshments, service or
merchandise, the amounts paid for the admission to such amusement
shall be deemed to be 50% of the amount paid for refreshments, service
or merchandise.
PERSON — Every natural person, copartnership, association or
corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the term "person" as applied to copartnerships or associations
shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
143. Editor's Note: The ordaining clause of Ord. No. 1276, which originally adopted this tax,
provided for enactment under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 275-18 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-18
271:631
§ 275-19. Registration of places of amusement.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place, indoors or outdoors, within the
Township, where the general public or a limited or selected number
thereof may, upon payment of an established price, attend or engage in
any amusement, as herein defined, including, among others, theaters,
amusement parks, stadia, arenas, baseball parks, football playing fields,
basketball halls or courts, skating rinks, circus or carnival tents or
grounds, fairgrounds, social, sporting, athletic, riding, gun and country
clubs, riding academies, golf courses, golf driving ranges, miniature
golf courses, bathing and swimming places, dance halls, tennis courts,
archery, rifle or shotgun ranges, bowling alleys, pool and billiard
parlors, roof gardens, cabarets, nightclubs and other restaurants where
amusements or entertainment is provided, and other like places.
PRODUCER — Any person, as herein defined, conducting any place of
amusement, as herein defined, where the general public or a limited
or selected number thereof may, upon the payment of an established
price, attend or engage in any amusement, sport, recreation, bowling
or pastime.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Ridley.
TAX COLLECTOR — The Treasurer of the Township of Ridley, who is
hereby charged with the collection of the tax imposed by this article.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Ridley.
B. Word usage. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. On and after the effective date of this article, every producer who at any
time is conducting and every producer who thereafter begins to
conduct any form of amusement, as herein defined, at any permanent or
temporary place of amusement or any itinerant form of amusement
within the Township, shall register the same with the Secretary.
B. Such registrations shall be for permanent amusements (those
conducted at one location for a period in excess of one month) or
temporary or itinerant amusements (those conducted at one location
for a period of less than one month), as the case may be, and each shall
be made upon a form prescribed, prepared and furnished by the
Secretary and shall set forth the name under which the producer
conducts or intends to conduct an amusement, whether the producer
conducts or intends to conduct a permanent or temporary place or an
itinerant form of amusement, the location of the permanent or
temporary place of amusement and such other information as the
Secretary may require. If the producer has or intends to have more than
one place of amusement within the Township, he shall register each one
and shall state the location of each and, in the case of a temporary or
itinerant form of amusement, the date and length of time such
§ 275-18 RIDLEY CODE § 275-19
271:632
§ 275-20. Tax levied; rate; responsibility for collection.
amusement is to be conducted at each place. In the case of a
registration for a temporary place of amusement, the producer shall
state the name and address of the owner, lessee or custodian of the
premises upon which such amusement is to be conducted. If the
producer is an association or corporation, the registration shall state
the names and addresses of the principal officers thereof and any other
information prescribed by the Secretary for purposes of identification.
The registration shall be signed and verified by oath or affirmation by
the producer, if a natural person, and in the case of an association,
by a member or partner thereof, and in the case of a corporation, by
an executive officer thereof or some person specifically authorized by
the corporation to sign the registration, to which shall be attached the
written evidence of his authority.
C. Upon the filing of the registration forms, the Secretary shall issue to
each producer an annual or temporary registration certificate for each
of his places of amusement within the Township. Such registration
certificates shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for the
persons in whose names issued and for the conduct of amusement at
the place designated therein and shall at all times be conspicuously
displayed at the places for which issued. All registration certificates for
permanent places of amusement shall expire the last day of the fiscal
year beginning the first Monday of January next; registration
certificates for temporary places of amusement or for forms of itinerant
amusement shall expire at the time specified therein. The producer of
an itinerant form of amusement shall notify the Secretary promptly of
any change in the original contemplated itinerary, either as to date or
time of the conduct of the amusement at each place.
D. Producers conducting permanent places of amusement shall register
them annually with the Secretary before the first Monday of January
next.
E. Whenever any registration certificate issued under the provisions of
this article is defaced, destroyed or lost, the Secretary may issue a
duplicate certificate to the holder thereof.
A. A tax to provide revenue for general Township purposes is hereby
levied, assessed and imposed upon the admission fee or privilege
charged to a member of the general public or a limited or selected
group thereof to attend any amusement, as defined in § 275-18 of this
article, and upon the established price charged to a member of the
general public or a limited or selected group thereof for the privilege to
personally engage in any amusement, as defined in § 275-18 of this
article, at the rate of 4% (except for bowling alleys which will pay at the
rate of 10% of 40% due to legislation particular to them) of the
established price charged to a member of the general public or a
limited or selected group thereof by any producer for such privilege,
§ 275-19 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-20
271:633
§ 275-21. Reports; payment of tax; interest.
which shall be paid by the person acquiring such privilege. [Amended
2-22-1989 by Ord. No. 1646]
B. In case of persons (except bona fide employees of a producer or
municipal or state officers on official business) admitted free or at
reduced rates to any place of amusement at a time when and under
circumstances where an established price is charged to other persons,
the tax imposed by this article shall be computed on the established
price charged to such other persons of the same class for the same or
similar accommodations to be paid by the person so admitted.
C. Where temporary or itinerant forms of amusement are conducted by
persons who are not the owners, lessees or custodians of the places
where the amusements are to be conducted, or where the temporary or
itinerant form of amusement is, after the effective date of this article,
permitted by the owner, lessee or custodian of any place to be
conducted without it being registered with the Secretary as required by
this article, the collection of the tax imposed by this article shall be the
responsibility of the owner, lessee or custodian of such place where any
such temporary or itinerant form of amusement is held or conducted
and shall be collected and paid by him unless collected and paid by the
producer conducting this amusement.
D. Where producers may begin to conduct permanent amusements after
the effective date of this article and they are not the owners of the
places where the permanent amusements are to be conducted, or
where the owner of any place permits a producer to begin to conduct a
permanent amusement at that place after the effective date of this
article without it being registered with the Secretary as required by this
article, the collection of the tax imposed by this article shall be the
responsibility of the owner of such place where any such permanent
amusement is to be conducted and shall be collected and paid by him
unless collected and paid by the producer conducting the permanent
amusement.
A. For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax collected and payable
by the producer to the Township, it shall be the duty of:
(1) Every producer, except as hereinafter provided, conducting a place
of amusement, on or before the 10th of each month, after the first
Monday of January next, to transmit to the Secretary and Tax
Collector, on forms prescribed and prepared by the Secretary, a
report under oath or affirmation, of the amount of tax collected by
him during the preceding month.
(2) Every producer conducting a temporary place of amusement or
itinerant form of amusement to file reports with the Secretary and
the Tax Collector promptly after each performance.
§ 275-20 RIDLEY CODE § 275-21
271:634
§ 275-22. Failure to report.
§ 275-23. Right to examine records to verify reports.
If the Secretary is not satisfied with the report and payment of tax made
by a producer under the provision of this article, he is hereby authorized
and empowered to make determination of the tax due by such producer,
based upon the facts contained in the report or upon any information within
his possession or that shall come into his possession, and for this purpose
the Tax Collector and/or the Secretary are hereby authorized to examine
the books, papers, tickets, ticket stubs and records of any producer taxable
under this article to verify the accuracy of any report or payment made
under the provisions hereof or to ascertain whether the taxes imposed by
this article have been paid.
§ 275-24. Estimate of tax in certain cases.
If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any report and payment
of tax required by this article, or if, as a result of an investigation by the
Tax Collector and/or the Secretary, a report is found to be incorrect, the
Secretary shall estimate the tax due by such producer and determine the
amount due by him for taxes, penalties and interest thereon.
§ 275-25. Collection and disposition of taxes.
All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered under the
provisions of this article shall be paid into the treasury of the Township for
B. All reports required under this section shall show such information as
the Secretary shall prescribe. Every producer, at the time of making
every report required by this section, shall compute and pay to the Tax
Collector the taxes collected by him and due to the Township during the
period for which the report is made; provided, however, that such
producer may deduct therefrom a discount of 2% if the report is filed
and the tax paid on or before the due date thereof. The amount of all
taxes imposed under the provisions of this article shall, in the case of
places of permanent amusement, be due and payable on the 10th day of
the next succeeding month, and in the case of temporary or itinerant
forms of amusement, such taxes shall be due and payable on the date
the reports in such cases are required to be made under this section,
and all such taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per annum from
the date they are due and payable until paid. [Amended 2-2-1989 by
Ord. No. 1646]
A. If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any report and payment
as herein required, an additional 10% of the amount of the tax shall be
added and collected.
B. All such taxes shall be recoverable as other debts of like amount are
now by law recoverable.
§ 275-21 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-25
271:635
the use and benefits of the Township, in the same manner as other taxes
collected by the Tax Collector for said Township.
§ 275-26. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Secretary is authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining
to the administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of
the tax hereby imposed, subject to the approval of the Board.
§ 275-27. Exemptions.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to or be imposed upon
the privilege to attend any amusement, the proceeds of which, after
payment of reasonable expenses, inure exclusively to the benefit of
religious, educational and charitable institutions, societies or
organizations, provided that no part of the net earnings of the
institutions, societies or organizations inures to the benefit of any
private shareholder or person, and provided that the exemptions
allowed by this subsection shall not apply to athletic games or contests
between schools, universities or colleges nor to wrestling matches,
boxing, sparring or other pugilistic matches or exhibitions.
B. In no event shall any exemption be allowed under this section unless
the producer thereof shall comply with the provisions of this article and
the rules and regulations of the Township with respect to the
application for and the approval of exemptions.144
144. Editor's Note: Former § 129-23, Compensation of Tax Collector, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 2-22-1989 by Ord. No. 1646.
§ 275-25 RIDLEY CODE § 275-27
271:636
ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-29-2004 by Ord. No. 1873145; amended in its entirety
11-28-2007 by Ord. No. 1932]
§ 275-28. (Reserved)
§ 275-29. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS OR HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Township of Ridley.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 275-30 of this article.
145. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Occupational Privilege Tax,
adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 129, Art. III, of the 1975 Code, as amended.
§ 275-28 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-29
271:637
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 275-30. Levy of tax.
§ 275-31. Exemption and refunds.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the
Township of Ridley during the tax year. Each natural person who
exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall
pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52 assessed on a pro rata
basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. This tax may be used solely for the following purposes as the same may
be allocated by the Board of Commissioners from time to time:
(1) Emergency services which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion, in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F, (relating to homestead property exclusion).
C. The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services.
D. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by the political subdivision.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee, or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total, one-hundred-percent disability.
§ 275-29 RIDLEY CODE § 275-31
271:638
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
§ 275-31 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-31
271:639
§ 275-32. Duty of employers to collect.
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Township Manager, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Township Manager or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his employ, whether
said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission, and whether or
not all such services are performed within the political subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rate share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection 1. For purposes of this subsection
§ 275-31 RIDLEY CODE § 275-32
271:640
§ 275-33. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him to an
employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer shall be
responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been
originally levied against the employer.
§ 275-34. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
"combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of the tax levied
by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 275-31B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 275-32 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-35
271:641
§ 275-35. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 275-36. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 275-37. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his tax is not paid, the political subdivision shall
have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee for
the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 275-38. Administration and enforcement of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires that the
person work in more than one political subdivision during a payroll
period, the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in
the following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his
principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made a prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
§ 275-35 RIDLEY CODE § 275-38
271:642
§ 275-39. Suits for collection; interest and penalties on unpaid tax.
§ 275-40. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject
to this tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file
any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce the penalty
herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge of the
received by him from each employer of self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of
1998.146
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
146. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 275-38 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-40
271:643
business of any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to file a
return required by this article.
§ 275-41. Interpretation.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 275-40 RIDLEY CODE § 275-41
271:644
ARTICLE IV
Tax Discounts and Penalties
[Adopted 1-12-1977 by Ord. No. 1438]
§ 275-42. Discounts and penalties established.
Pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 126 of 1976 of the General Assembly,
effective January 12, 1977, all taxes levied by the Township of Ridley shall
have the following discounts and penalties:
§ 275-43. Scope.
This article shall apply to all taxes levied and assessed by the Township
of Ridley pursuant to the provisions of the First Class Township Code and
the Local Tax Collection Law, being the Act of May 25, 1945, P.L. 1050, as
amended.147
A. The discount of 2% from the amount of the taxes shall be accorded to
the taxpayer upon making payment of the whole tax within two months
after the date of the tax notice.
B. All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of the taxes charged
against them for a period of four months after the date of the tax notice
shall be charged a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the
tax by the Tax Collector and collected by him.
147. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S.§ 5511.1.
§ 275-42 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-43
271:645

ARTICLE V
Mercantile Tax
[Adopted 3-22-1978 by Ord. No. 1459]
§ 275-44. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Mercantile Tax
Ordinance."
§ 275-45. Definitions.148
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
COLLECTOR — The Township Secretary of the Township of Ridley or his
designated representative.
GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — Both cash and credit transactions and
trade-in transactions as provided by law.
LICENSE YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning the first day of
January 1978, and each calendar year thereafter.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association or
corporation, except such as are wholly exempt from taxation under the Act
of Assembly No. 511, as amended.
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer in or
vendor of goods, wares and merchandise who is not a wholesale dealer or
vendor or a wholesale and retail dealer or vendor as hereinafter defined.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar days.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL DEALER or WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
VENDOR — Any person who sells to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares
and merchandise and to other persons.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who sells
to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and to no other
persons.
§ 275-46. License required; fee; application.
A. For the license year beginning January 1, 1995, and each license year
thereafter, every person desiring to continue to engage in or hereafter
to begin to engage in the business of wholesale or retail or wholesale
148. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1459 also provided that the term(s) herein defined shall not
include nonprofit corporations or associations organized for religious, charitable or
educational purposes, agencies of the Government of the United States or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any person vending or disposing of articles of his own
manufacture for shipment or delivery away from the place of the manufacture thereof or
any farmer vending or disposing of his own produce, or other transactions exempted by
law.
§ 275-44 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-46
271:647
§ 275-47. Tax rate.
and retail vendor or dealer in goods, wares and merchandise, and any
person conducting a restaurant or other place where food, drink or
refreshments are sold in the Township shall, on or before the first day of
June, 1995, and on or before the first day of January of each license year
thereafter, or prior to commencing business in any such license year,
apply for and procure a mercantile license for his place of business or,
if more than one, for each of his places in business in the Township,
from the Collector, who shall issue the same upon payment of a fee as
set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for
a wholesale or retail license or for a wholesale and retail license for his
place of business, or if more than one, for each of his places of business
in the Township for such license year. [Amended 12-21-1994 by Ord.
No. 1733; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
B. Each application for a license shall be signed by the applicant, if a
natural person, and in the case of an association or partnership, by a
member or partner thereof, and in the case of a corporation, by an
officer thereof.
C. Such licenses shall not be assignable and shall be conspicuously posted
at the place of business or each of the places of business of every such
person at all times.
D. In the case of loss, defacement or destruction of any license, the person
to whom the license was issued shall apply to the Collector for a new
license, for which a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners shall be charged. [Amended 10-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 1808]
A. A tax to provide revenue for general Township purposes is hereby
levied, assessed and imposed upon every person engaging in any of the
following occupations or businesses in the Township at the rate
hereinafter set forth, and such persons shall pay a mercantile tax for
the year beginning January 1, 1978, and subsequent years at such rate
subject to the exemptions hereinafter set forth:
(1) Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise of
every kind, at the rate of one mill on each dollar of the gross volume
of business transacted by him during the license year.
(2) Retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise of every
kind and all persons engaged in conducting restaurants or other
places where food, drink or refreshments are sold, at the rate of
1 1/2 mills on each dollar of the gross volume of business
transacted by him during the license year.
(3) Wholesale and retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and
merchandise of every kind, at the rate of one mill on each dollar of
the gross volume of wholesale business transacted by him and 1 1/2
§ 275-46 RIDLEY CODE § 275-47
271:648
§ 275-48. Computation of gross volume of business.
The following subsections refer to the computation of the estimated gross
volume of business:
§ 275-49. Tax returns.
mills on each dollar of the gross volume of retail business
transacted by him during the license year.
(4) The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to the dollar volume
of annual business covering the resale of goods, wares or
merchandise taken by a dealer as a trade-in or as partial payment
for other goods, wares and merchandise, except to the extent that
the resale price exceeds the trade-in allowance.
(5) The first $50,000 of gross volume of business shall be exempt from
and not subject to the rates of taxation specified above and herein.
B. The tax for the year 1978 shall only be applied to the gross volume of
business occurring during the period beginning on the effective date of
the tax and extending to and including December 31, 1978.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced his business at least a full year prior to January 1, 1978,
shall compute the gross volume of business upon the actual gross
amount of business transacted by him during the 12 months preceding
January 1, 1978.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced his business less than one full year prior to January 1,
1978, shall compute the gross volume of business by multiplying by 12
the monthly average of the actual gross amount of business transacted
by him during the months he was engaged in business prior to January
1, 1978.
C. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
commences his business subsequent to January 1, 1978, shall compute
the gross volume of business for the license year upon the gross volume
of business transacted by him during the first month of his engaging in
business, multiplied by the number of months remaining in the license.
D. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature shall
compute the gross volume of business upon the actual gross amount of
business transacted by him during the license year.
A. Forms; information to be correct. Every return, as hereinafter required
by this subsection, shall be made upon a form furnished by the
Collector. Every person making such return shall furnish all information
requested therein and certify the correctness thereof under the
penalties of perjury.
§ 275-47 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-49
271:649
§ 275-50. Payment of tax.
B. First return.
(1) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business at least one full year prior to the
beginning of the license year shall, on or before the 31st day of
March following, file with the Collector a return setting forth his
name, his business and business address and such other
information as may be necessary to compute the actual gross
volume of business transacted by him during the license year and
the amount of tax estimated to be due. For the license year 1978
only, the return shall be filed by June 30, 1978.
(2) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who
commences business subsequent to the beginning of the license
year shall, within 60 days from the date of commencing such
business, file a return with the Collector setting forth his name, his
business and business address and such information as may be
necessary to compute the actual gross volume of business
transacted by him during the license year and the amount of tax
estimated to be due.
(3) Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this
article who engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant
by its nature shall, within seven days from the date he completes
such business, file a return with the Collector setting forth his
name, his business and business address and such information as
may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount of business
transacted by him during such period and the amount of the tax
due.
C. Final return.
(1) On or before March 31 of each year, beginning in 1979, every
person subject to the tax hereby imposed shall make a final return
to the Collector showing the actual volume of business transacted
by the taxpayer during the preceding license year. Such final return
shall state the amount of the gross volume of business as set forth
in the first tax return, the amount of tax paid at the time of filing the
first tax return and the amount of tax due upon the final
computation.
(2) Any person ceasing to do business during the license year shall,
within 14 days from the date of ceasing to do business, file a final
return showing the actual gross volume of business conducted
during that portion of the license year in which said person was
actually in business and pay the tax due as computed thereon.
A. At the time of the first tax return, the person making same shall pay the
amount of the tax estimated to be due.
§ 275-49 RIDLEY CODE § 275-50
271:650
§ 275-51. Duties of Collector.
B. At the time of the filing of the final tax return, if the full amount of the
tax due by the taxpayer for the license year has not been paid, the
taxpayer shall pay the remaining balance of the tax, which will be the
difference between the amount of the tax paid at the time of making the
first return on the estimated computation and the amount of the tax
finally shown to be due.
A. It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the fees, taxes,
fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to
keep a record showing the amount of the tax received by him and the
date of payment.
B. If the Collector is not satisfied with the return and Payment of tax made
by any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer under the provisions of this
article, he is hereby authorized and empowered to make a
determination of the tax due by such person, based upon the facts
contained in the return or upon any information within his possession
or that shall come into his possession, and for this purpose the Collector
or his authorized agent is authorized to examine the books, papers and
records of any person to verify the accuracy of any return or payment
made under the provisions thereof or to ascertain whether the taxes
imposed by this article have been paid. The Collector is hereby
authorized and directed to make and keep such records, prepare such
forms and take such other measures as may be necessary or convenient
to carry this article into effect and may, in his discretion, require
reasonable deposits to be made by licensees who engage in a business
temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature.
C. If any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make
any return and payment of tax required by this article or if, as a result of
an investigation by the Collector, a return is found to be incorrect, the
Collector shall estimate the tax due by such person and determine the
amount due by him for taxes, penalties and interest thereon.
D. The burden is hereby imposed upon any person, firm or corporation
claiming an exemption from the payment of the tax hereby imposed to
convince the Collector of his legal right to such exemption.
E. If the final return of the taxpayer shows an overpayment of the tax by
reason of the fact that the gross volume of business as stated in the
estimated computation was less than the actual volume of business for
the year or by reason of the fact that the taxpayer did not continue to
engage in business throughout the year, the Collector shall refund to
the taxpayer, without interest, the amount of such overpayment, which
shall be the difference between the amount of tax paid upon the filing of
the first return and the amount of the tax finally shown to be due.
§ 275-50 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-52
271:651
§ 275-52. Information to be confidential.
Any information gained by the Collector or any other Township employee
or official from the administration of this tax shall be confidential, except in
accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, and
divulgence of any information so gained is hereby declared to be a violation
of this article.
§ 275-53. Recovery of unpaid taxes.
All taxes due and unpaid under this article shall be recoverable by the
Township Solicitor as other debts due the Township are now by law
recoverable.
§ 275-54. Regulations to clarify applicability.
The Township shall provide tax regulations for the purpose of clarifying
applicability of the mercantile tax.
§ 275-55. Interest and penalty.
All taxes due under this article shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per
month or fractional part of a month from the day they are due and shall
be payable until paid. If any taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make any
return or payment as herein required, an additional 10% of the amount of
the tax shall be added by the Collector and collected.
§ 275-56. Receipts to be paid into treasury.
All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered under the
provisions of this article shall be paid into the treasury of the Township of
Ridley for the use and benefit of the Township of Ridley.
§ 275-57. Construction.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of its provisions or
exemptions shall be held to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional or invalid
or unconstitutional as to any part of the period designated herein as the
license year, the decisions of any court shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions of this article or affect or impair its application upon
any other part of said license year, and the requirements as to the license
shall operate as of the effective date of this article, and the computation of
tax and payment thereof shall be applied and adjusted accordingly.
§ 275-58. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1639; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
Any person, as defined in this article, or any officer, agent servant or
employee thereof who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the
terms or provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more
§ 275-52 RIDLEY CODE § 275-58
271:652
than $600, and costs of prosecution, for each offense, to be collected as
other fines and costs are by law collectible, and in default of payment of said
fine and costs, shall be imprisoned in the Delaware County Jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days. The fines imposed by this section shall be in addition
to any other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
§ 275-59. Effect on other regulations.
It is the intent of the Board of Commissioners that any ordinance now in
effect which imposes a special license fee or tax on specific types or kinds
of business not covered by the provisions of this article shall be and remain
in full force and effect.
§ 275-58 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-59
271:653

ARTICLE VI
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance (LERTA)
[Adopted 6-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1939149]
§ 275-60. Area designated as deteriorated.
The Board of Commissioners, after a public hearing held on May 8, 2008,
hereby designates the property zoned "I" Industrial, containing
approximately 4.06 acres, more or less, as deteriorated, taking into account
the criteria set forth and incorporated in the Act.150 It is determined that
said property will not be improved unless a tax exemption is granted for
any improvement made to said land. The area designated as deteriorated, in
accordance with said Act No. 76, is more fully described in Exhibit A, which
is attached hereto and herein incorporated by reference.151
§ 275-61. Exemption granted.
Subject to the schedule hereinafter set forth, there is hereby exempted
from all real property taxation that portion of the additional assessment
attributable to the actual costs of improvements to the designated
deteriorated property.
§ 275-62. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IMPROVEMENTS — Repair, new construction or reconstruction, including
alterations or additions, having the effect of rehabilitating the deteriorated
property so that it becomes habitable, usable, and attains higher standards
of safety, health, economic use or amenity, and is brought into compliance
with laws, ordinances, or regulations governing such standards.
§ 275-63. Schedule of exemptions.
A. The schedule of real estate taxes to be exempted shall be in accordance
with the following percentage of improvements to be exempted each
year. [Amended 11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1946]
Year Portion to be Exempt
First year 67%
Second year 60%
Third year 53%
Fourth year 47%
149. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. VI, Local Economic
Revitalization Tax Assistance (LERTA), adopted 12-23-1998 by Ord. No. 1795.
150. Editor's Note: Refers to P.L. 237, Act No. 76 of 1977, 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq.
151. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 275-60 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-63
271:655
§ 275-64. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
Year Portion to be Exempt
Fifth year 40%
Sixth year and thereafter 0%
B. The exemption from taxes granted under this article shall be upon the
property and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of the
property.
C. If an eligible property is granted tax exemption pursuant to the article,
the improvement shall not, during the exemption period, be considered
a factor in assessing other properties.
A. Any person desiring tax exemption pursuant to this article shall apply to
the Secretary of the Township within 30 days of the time a building
permit is issued for construction of the improvement, or new
construction, as the case may be. The application must be in writing,
and shall set forth the following information:
(1) The date the building permit was issued for said improvement;
(2) The location of the property to be improved;
(3) The nature of the property to be improved;
(4) The type of improvement;
(5) The summary of the plan of improvement;
(6) The cost of the improvement;
(7) Whether the property has been condemned or cited by any
governmental body for noncompliance with laws or ordinances;
(8) That the property has been inspected and examined by the
Township Engineer;
(9) Such additional information as the Township may require.
B. The application for tax exemption shall be considered by the Township
Board of Commissioners. The Board shall approve or deny the
application at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided that the
application is received at least 15 days prior to said meeting.
C. After its consideration, the Township Board of Commissioners shall
forward a copy of the exemption application to the Delaware County
Board of Assessment Appeals. Within 60 days the said Board of
Assessment Appeals shall determine whether the exemption shall be
granted and shall, upon completion of the improvements, or new
construction, and notification from the Township of Ridley that
improvements comply with all of the applicable building codes, assess
separately the improvement and calculate the amount of the
§ 275-63 RIDLEY CODE § 275-64
271:656
§ 275-65. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon adoption by the Ridley School
District and the County of Delaware of resolutions exempting from real
property taxation, improvements to properties in accordance with the terms
of this article.
assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance with the limits
established by this article, and shall notify the taxpayer and the local
taxing authorities of the reassessment and the amount of the
assessment eligible for exemption. In the case of new construction, the
Board of Assessment Appeals shall assess separately the improvement
and the land upon which the new construction stands, and shall
otherwise perform its duties as above provided for construction of
improvements. The exemption provided for hereunder shall commence
in the tax year immediately following the year in which the building
permit is issued.
D. The costs of improvements and new construction to be exempted and
the schedule of taxes exempted existing at the time of the initial request
for tax exemption shall be applicable to that request, and subsequent
amendment(s) to this article, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated
prior to their adoption.
E. Appeals from the reassessment and the amount eligible for the
exemption may be taken by the tax authorities or the taxpayer as
provided by law.
§ 275-64 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-65
271:657

ARTICLE VII
Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 4-28-1999 by Ord. No. 1799]
§ 275-66. Approval and adoption of schedules.152
§ 275-67. Administrative appeals.
The governing body hereby determines that administrative appeal
procedures relating to petitions for appeal and refund submitted by
taxpayers in connection with the assessment, determination or refund of
an eligible tax under the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights (LTBR) shall be
undertaken by the Ridley Township Board of Commissioners in Executive
Session.
§ 275-68. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to eligible taxes as of January 1, 1999.
A. The Rules and Regulations attached hereto as Schedule 1 and
incorporated herein are hereby approved and adopted.
B. The Disclosure Statement, substantially in the form set forth in
Schedule 2 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby
approved and adopted.
C. The form of Petition for Appeal and Refund, substantially in the form set
forth in Schedule 3 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby
approved and adopted.
D. The form of Taxpayer Notice, substantially in the form set forth in
Schedule 4 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby
approved and adopted.
E. The form of Request for Extension of Time to Provide Information,
substantially in the form set forth in Schedule 5 attached hereto and
incorporated herein, is hereby approved and adopted.
F. The form of Initial Refund Claim Form, substantially in the form set
forth in Schedule 6 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby
approved and adopted.
G. The Administrative Appeal Procedures set forth in the Rules and
Regulations and substantially in the form set forth in Schedule 7,
attached hereto and incorporated herein, are hereby approved and
adopted.
152. Editor's Note: Schedules 1 through 7 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 275-66 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-68
271:659

ARTICLE VIII
Tax on Parking Service Revenues
[Adopted 11-23-1999 by Ord. No. 1801]
§ 275-69. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to authority granted by the Local Tax
Enabling Act, P.L. 1257, No. 511, December 31, 1965, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,
as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 275-70. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context therein.
AMOUNT OF REVENUES ATTRIBUTED TO PARKING SERVICES — For
purposes of computing any tax hereunder, the amount of revenue attributed
to parking services shall be computed by calculating, each month, the total
revenues derived by the operator for any and all services provided to its
patrons and multiplying that sum by 50% in order to determine the amount
of such revenues attributed to parking services.
OPERATOR — Any person who conducts a business wherein a fee or charge
is collected from its patrons in return for parking services or for a range of
services a portion of which are parking services.
PARKING SERVICES — Those services or that portion of the range of
services provided to patrons of any business that consists of the parking or
storing of an automobile or motor vehicle upon a nonresidential lot or parcel
of land.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
firm, or corporation. Whenever used in any provision prescribing a penalty,
the term "person" as applied to a partnership shall mean the partners
thereof, and as applied to corporations and associations, shall mean the
officers thereof, and if there are no officers, the shareholders thereof.
REVENUES ATTRIBUTED TO PARKING SERVICES — That portion of the
total fee or charge, whether or not separately identified, collected from
patrons of a business by an operator for parking services.
§ 275-71. Imposition of tax.
On or after the effective date of this article, a tax of 6% shall be imposed
upon those revenues attributed to parking services collected from its
patrons by any operator doing business within the Township of Ridley,
as provided herein, and shall be due to the Township of Ridley by such
operator.
§ 275-69 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-72
271:661
§ 275-72. Permit required.
Any operator desiring to provide parking services to patrons for a fee, as
defined herein, shall file with the Township Secretary, not less than 30
days prior to the commencement of business operations, an application for
permit on such forms as are provided for that purpose by the Township.
§ 275-73. Filing return and payment of tax.
Every operator to whom a permit is issued hereunder shall, on or before
the 15th day of each month, prepare and file a tax return with the Township
Treasurer setting forth the total revenues derived by the operator for
any and all services provided to its patrons by said business during the
preceding month and computing the tax due hereunder for said month in
accordance with the provisions of this article; and concurrently therewith,
each such person shall remit monthly, on the 15th day of each month, the
entire amount of the tax due.
§ 275-74. Examination of books.
Upon good cause shown, the Township Secretary or the Township
Treasurer, or their designated agents, are hereby authorized to examine or
cause to be examined the books and business records of any operator filing
a tax return hereunder in order to verify the accuracy of the tax return or,
if no return has been filed, to ascertain the amount of any tax that may be
due hereunder.
§ 275-75. Late payment penalty.
If the tax levied pursuant to this article is not paid when due, a penalty of
10% of the amount of the tax due and unpaid may be added thereto.
§ 275-76. Use of tax collected.
All taxes, interest and penalties collected or recovered shall be paid into
the Township Treasury as general revenue to be used for general revenue
purposes.
§ 275-77. Violations and penalties.
Any operator violating or failing to comply with the provisions and
requirements of this article, or failing or refusing to furnish complete and
accurate tax returns or to remit any tax levied by this article in timely
manner, or knowingly and intentionally making an incomplete, false or
fraudulent return, or doing or attempting to do any act in avoidance of
the payment of the tax levied hereunder, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, and in default of payment
of said fine, any person responsible for the default in payment may be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each
and every day in which any pers on shall be in violation of this article shall
constitute a separate offense, punishable by a like fine, or penalty. Any fine
§ 275-72 RIDLEY CODE § 275-77
271:662
or penalty hereunder shall be in addition to the ten-percent penalty on the
unpaid tax, and any other fine or penalty levied hereunder or under any
other applicable law. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due and
a citation, complaint, or action is brought for the recovery of any tax, or
the failure to furnish tax returns, or to comply with the requests of this
article, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs
of collection, litigation, including reasonable attorney fees, and interest and
penalties herein imposed.
§ 275-78. Effective date; continuation.
This article shall be effective on the 1st day of January 2000 and shall
remain in effect unless modified hereinafter.
§ 275-77 SWIMMING POOLS § 275-78
271:663
Chapter 278
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 299.
§ 278-1. License required; term.
Pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 326 of 1968 of the General
Assembly,153 in any case where the principal place of business of any taxicab
company is located in the Township of Ridley, no person shall engage in
the business of driving a taxicab or other passenger motor vehicle for hire
within the said Township without first having secured from the Captain of
Police of the Township a license so to do. Such license shall be for a period
of three months from the date of issuance.
§ 278-2. Application for license; investigation of applicant.
Any person desiring to secure such license shall make application to the
Captain of Police of the Township of Ridley upon forms prescribed and
furnished by such Captain of Police, which said forms shall be of such
nature and contents as to disclose the necessary information to enable the
Captain of Police to determine the moral character and general fitness of
the applicant to engage in such occupation. It shall be the duty of the
Captain of Police to make diligent and careful inquiry to determine whether
or not said applicant is of good character and fitness to engage in such
occupation.
§ 278-3. Qualifications.
No person shall be licensed to engage in such business unless he shows, to
the satisfaction of the Captain of Police of the Township of Ridley, that he is
of good moral character and general fitness to engage in such occupation
and that he has not been convicted of any felony at all or of any
misdemeanor of such nature and character as to render him unfit to engage
in such occupation.
§ 278-4. Identification card.
Every applicant for such license shall furnish with his application two
photographs, being fair likenesses, upon which shall be endorsed such
information prescribed by the Captain of Police as may be necessary for
the identification of the said applicant. One of said photographs shall be
retained by the Captain of Police and one shall be attached to a card of
identification included in or issued with the license hereinabove provided
153. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 25291 et seq.
§ 275-78 RIDLEY CODE § 278-4
278:664
for, which license and card of identification shall be produced upon request
of the Captain of Police or any other police officer of the commonwealth.
Said identification card shall have space provided thereon upon which, in
case the holder thereof is arrested for any offense, it shall be the duty of
any District Justice before whom said holder shall appear to write the date
of such arrest, the charge upon which said arrest shall have been made and
the disposition made of the case by said District Justice, which notation on
said card shall be signed by such District Justice.
§ 278-5. Revocation of license.
Upon the third conviction for any offense of the holder of any such license
and identification card, it shall be the duty of the Captain of Police issuing
the same, upon information thereof coming to his attention, immediately to
revoke the said license and to require the surrender of the same and the
identification card in connection therewith for cancellation.
§ 278-6. License fee; bond.154
Every applicant for a license shall submit with his application a certified
check or money order made payable to the Township of Ridley in the sum
as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners,
together with a corporate surety bond in the sum as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners having as surety thereon
a company legally authorized to do business in this commonwealth,
conditioned for the payment of any damages accruing to any person by
reason of any act of such licensed driver becoming unfit to engage in such
occupation.
§ 278-7. Effect on existing provisions.
This chapter shall in no manner alter, change or affect any existing
requirement of the law with reference to securing certificates of public
convenience from the Public Utility Commission or otherwise; nor shall this
chapter in any manner whatsoever be construed to affect any provision of
any existing law governing the licensing of motor vehicles.
§ 278-8. Violations and penalties.155
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default
of payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
155. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 278-4 TAXICABS § 278-8
278:665
Chapter 282
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Telecommunications Committee — See Ch. 9,
Art. VIII.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 264.
Utility lines — See Ch. 294.
Zoning regulation of wireless
telecommunications towers and
antennas — See Ch. 325, § 325-95.
§ 278-8 RIDLEY CODE § 278-8
282:666
ARTICLE I
Facilities
[Adopted 3-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1772]
§ 282-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — A tower or antenna as defined in
Chapter 325, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Ridley, Article XIII,
Supplementary Regulations, § 325-95B.
§ 282-2. Facility license required; applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, erect, alter or
relocate a tower, antennae or other telecommunications facilities in the
Township of Ridley without first having obtained a license therefor, as
hereinafter provided. All such licenses must be renewed annually. The
provisions of this article shall not apply to satellite dish antennae used
solely for residential purposes.
§ 282-3. Application for license; fee.
A. The application for a facility license required under § 282-2 shall be
made upon a form provided by the Township of Ridley. A separate
application must be filed for each tower or antenna, even if more than
one tower or antenna is located at the same site.
B. In the case of an antenna, the application fee shall be as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. In the case of a
tower, the application fee shall be as set from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Commissioners.156
C. The application shall include the following:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the license applicant.
(2) A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be
offered or provided by the licensee over its telecommunications
facilities.
(3) The location of the proposed tower or antennae.
(4) In the case of a tower, the name and address of the owner of the lot
on which the tower is to be erected. ln the case of an antenna, the
name and address of the owner of the structure, whether it be a
tower, building or other structure, on which the antenna will be
located.
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 282-1 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 282-3
282:667
§ 282-4. Issuance of licenses.
All applications for a facility license shall be considered by the Township
Board of Commissioners at a regular meeting thereof. Applications for
licenses shall be denied for failure to provide any information requested
in the license application. Applications must be submitted at least 10 days
prior to the regular Board of Commissioners meeting in order to be
considered at that month's meeting. The denial of any license shall be in
writing and shall be mailed to the applicant within 10 days of the decision.
§ 282-5. Bond.157
The applicant shall file, upon approval of the application, a bond running
to the benefit of the Township, conditioned for the faithful observance of
all provisions of this article, and all other applicable regulations, during the
continuance of such license, and any renewal thereof for not more than one
year. The bond shall be in the sums as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners for an antenna and for a tower. A copy of said
bond shall be provided to the Township with the license application.
§ 282-6. License to be nonexclusive.
No license granted under this article shall confer any exclusive right,
privilege, license or franchise to operate a telecommunications facility in
the Township of Ridley.
§ 282-7. Compensation to Township.
Each license granted under this article is subject to the Township's right,
which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the lease of any property rights granted to the
licensee.
§ 282-8. Renewal applications.
(5) The name, address and phone number of the person to be
contacted regarding any issue related to the tower or antenna.
(6) Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the
facilities and to also provide the telecommunications services, and
that the proposed tower or antenna is in compliance with § 325-95
of Chapter 325, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Ridley.
(7) Such other and further information which may be requested by the
Township.
A. A grantee that desires to renew its license under this article shall not
more than 180 days nor less than 90 days before expiration of the
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 282-3 RIDLEY CODE § 282-8
282:668
§ 282-9. Inspections.
The Township Code Enforcement Officer may conduct periodic inspections
of any telecommunications facility for the purpose of determining whether
or not said facility is in compliance with all applicable ordinances of the
Township of Ridley. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully prevent
or restrain the Code Enforcement Officer from entering the property on
which a tower or antenna is in existence for the purpose of inspecting said
facilities, after proper identification is presented.
§ 282-10. Violations and penalties.159
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
current license file an application with the Township for renewal of
its license, which shall include the information required pursuant to
§ 282-3 of this article.
B. The fee for a renewal license for either an antenna or for a tower shall
be as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.158
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
159. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 282-8 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 282-10
282:669

ARTICLE II
Use of Rights-of-Way
[Adopted 6-24-1998 by Ord. No. 1786]
§ 282-11. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is:
§ 282-12. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article and any license in accordance herewith,
the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given herein unless otherwise specifically provided in this article:
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission or its legally appointed
successor.
LICENSE — The privilege granted by the Township authorizing a person
to erect, construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle, test, use and maintain
a private communications system that occupies the streets, public ways
or public places within the Township. Any license issued in accordance
herewith shall be a nonexclusive license.
PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — Any communications equipment
or facilities, not part of the communications system franchised by the
Township, that in any manner is connected with the streets, public ways or
public places within the corporate limits of the Township, as now or in the
future may exist.
STREET — Any area established for vehicular or public access use or the
entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained
when any part thereof is open for public purposes. "Street" includes, but
is not limited to, highway, avenue, road, alley, right-of-way, lane, boulevard,
concourse, bridge, tunnel, parks, parkways, waterways, docks, overheads,
wharves and piers.
TOTAL LOCAL GROSS REVENUES — All cash, credits, or property of any
kind or nature reported as revenue items on licensee's audited income
statements arising from or attributable to the sale or exchange of private
communications services by the licensee within the Township or in any way
A. To regulate the erection, construction, reconstruction, installation,
operation, maintenance, dismantling, testing, repair and use of private
communications systems in, upon, along, across, above, over, under or
in any manner connected with the streets, public ways or public places
within the boundaries of the Township; and
B. To provide the Township with compensation for occupation and use of
the Township's rights-of-way for private communications systems; and
C. To provide the Township with compensation for acquisition and
maintenance of the Township's rights-of-way when used for commercial
purposes.
§ 282-11 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 282-12
282:671
derived from the operation of its private communications system, including,
but not limited to, any interconnection between its system in the Township
and any system whatsoever. This sum shall be the basis for computing
the fee imposed pursuant to this article. Such sum shall not include any
bad debts, deposits, promotional or vendor discounts or credits nor sales,
service, occupation or other excise tax to the extent that such taxes are
charged separately from normal service charges and are remitted by the
licensee directly to the taxing authority.
§ 282-13. License required.
No person shall construct, operate or continue to operate a private
communications system which occupies the streets, public ways and public
places within the Township without having been issued a license or licenses
by the Township. Said license shall be in addition to any other licenses,
permits, leases or permission required by the Township or any other
government body.
§ 282-14. Term of license.
§ 282-15. License restrictions.
§ 282-16. Technical standards.
A. Any annual license issued by the Township in accordance herewith shall
be a nonexclusive license for the use of the streets, public ways or
public places within the Township as specified in the license for the
erection, construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance,
dismantling, testing and use of a private communications system.
B. Any license issued by the Township is renewable annually upon
establishment by the licensee to the satisfaction of the Township that
the licensee is in compliance with this article and and all applicable
federal, state and local ordinances and regulations and the space
occupied is not needed for a public purpose.
A. Any license issued for the use of a right-of-way for a private
communications system in accordance herewith shall apply only to the
location or locations stated on the license or licenses.
B. Nothing in this article shall be construed as a representation, promise
or guaranty by the Township that any permit or other authorization
required under any Township law for the construction or installation of
a private communications system shall be issued.
A. All technical standards governing construction, reconstruction,
installation, operation, testing, use, maintenance and dismantling of a
private communications system provided for herein shall be in
accordance with all applicable FCC and other federal, state and local
laws and regulations, including but not limited to the most recent
§ 282-12 RIDLEY CODE § 282-16
282:672
§ 282-17. Bonds.
§ 282-18. Compensation for license.
It shall be a term and condition of any license issued in accordance herewith
that as a part of the consideration supporting the issuance of such license
and the Township's permission thereby to occupy and use the streets of
the Township, that the licensee shall pay each year to the Township the
following compensation and license fees:
editions of the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical
Safety Code.
B. The Township Engineer and the Code Enforcement Office of the
Township of Ridley shall review all applications for licenses under this
article and monitor all work completed thereunder for compliance with
all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and codes.
A. All persons submitting a request for a license to construct a private
communications system in accordance herewith shall file with their
request bonds solely for the protection of the Township with a surety
company or trust company or companies as surety or sureties in an
amount determined by the Township to protect the Township from any
and all damages or costs suffered or incurred by the Township as a
result thereof, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees and costs of
any action or proceeding, and including the full amount of
compensation, indemnification, cost of removal or abandonment of any
property or other costs which may be in default, up to the full principal
amount of such bond; and the condition shall be a continuing obligation
during the entire term of any license issued in accordance herewith and
thereafter until the licensee shall have satisfied in full any and all
obligations to the Township which arise out of or pertain to the license
for a private communications system.
B. None of the provisions of this section nor any bond accepted by the
Township pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the Township
thereunder, shall be construed to excuse the faithful performance by or
limit the liability of the licensee under this article or any license issued
in accordance herewith or for damages either to the full amount of such
bond or otherwise.
A. Any private communications system which serves no customers other
than itself shall pay compensation and license fees in the amount as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners per
linear foot for each diameter inch or less of underground conduit or
wire or each .250 diameter inch or less of aerial wire per annum. In no
event shall the fee be less per annum than that set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners.160
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 282-16 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 282-18
282:673
§ 282-19. Payment and audit of compensation and license fees.
B. Any private communication system that serves customers within the
Township shall pay annually 5% of the annual total local gross revenues
from such customers to be calculated on the basis of all revenues
derived from transmissions that pass through the Township. Revenues
derived from transmissions that enter a private communications system
through the Township shall not be part of the total local gross revenues
for purposes of calculating compensation and license fees.
A. The annual compensation and license fee provided for in § 282-18A
shall be payable annually on the anniversary of the issuance of the
license.
B. The annual compensation and license fee provided for in § 282-18B
shall be assessed quarterly for the preceding quarter, as of March 31,
June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year.
(1) Each quarterly payment shall be payable and reportable no less
than 30 days after the relevant assessment date.
(2) Each payment shall be accompanied by a report from the licensee
in a form approved by the Township showing the basis for the
computation and such other relevant data as may be required by
the Township.
(3) Each of such reports shall contain a notarized verification by the
chief financial officer of the licensee and such reports shall be
verified annually, within 90 days of the close of business of the last
day of the calendar year, by a certified public accountant selected
by the Township at the expense of the licensee.
(4) Failure to comply strictly with this section shall be deemed to be a
violation of this article and shall subject the licensee to all penalties
and remedies, both legal and equitable, which are available to the
Township.
C. The acceptance of any payment required hereunder by the Township
shall not be construed as an acknowledgment that the amount paid is
the correct amount due, nor shall such acceptance of payment be
construed as a release of any claim which the Township may have for
additional sums due and payable.
(1) All fee payments shall be subject to audit by the Township and
assessment or refund if the payment is found to be in error.
(2) In the event that such audit results in an assessment by and an
additional payment to the Township, such additional payment shall
be subject to interest at the rate of 6% per year and to a penalty of
6% per year, which shall be due and payable immediately.
§ 282-18 RIDLEY CODE § 282-19
282:674
§ 282-20. Indemnity and insurance.
§ 282-21. Use of streets and pole attachments.
D. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the liability of the
licensee for all applicable federal, state and local taxes.
A. The Township shall not at any time be liable for any injury or damage
occurring to any person or property from any cause whatsoever,
including damages from the Township's negligent omissions, if any,
arising from the use, operation or condition of the licensee's private
communications system.
B. The licensee shall indemnify, save and hold harmless and defend the
Township from all liens; charges; claims, including but not limited to
libel, slander, Invasion of privacy and unauthorized use of any
trademark, trade name or service mark; demands; suits; actions; fines;
penalties; losses; costs, including but not limited to reasonable legal
fees and court costs; judgments; injuries; liabilities or damages, in law
or in equity, of any and every kind and nature whatsoever, including
damages caused by or arising out of any act of negligent omission of the
Township, its officers, servants, agents, employees or contractors, or
otherwise, arising out of or in any way connected with the installation,
operation, maintenance or condition of the licensee's private
communications system.
C. The Township Engineer, in consultation with the Township Solicitor,
shall set the type and coverage of insurance required. In setting the
amount, the Township shall take into consideration the size and location
of the private communications system, the financial resources of the
licensee, risk involved to the Township and to the general public, as well
as other salient factors.
A. Any person who submits a request for a license in accordance herewith
shall include therein proposed agreements for the use of existing utility
poles and conduits, if applicable, with the owner(s) of such facilities to
be used or affected by the construction of the proposed private
communications system, which agreements shall become effective on
the date of execution of the license issued in accordance herewith in the
event that such person is issued a license.
B. It shall be unlawful for the licensee or any other person to open or
otherwise disturb the surface of any street, sidewalk, driveway, public
way or other public place for any purpose whatsoever without obtaining
approval to do so after proceeding in the manner prescribed herein.
Violation of this section shall subject the licensee to all penalties and
remedies prescribed therein and to all other remedies, legal or
equitable, which are available to the Township.
C. The licensee shall restore any street or sidewalk it has disturbed and
shall, at its own cost and expense, restore and replace any other
§ 282-19 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 282-21
282:675
property disturbed, damaged or in any way injured by or on account
of its activities to as good as the condition such property was in
immediately prior to the disturbance, damage or injury or pay the fair
market value of such property to its owner.
D. The licensee shall, at its own cost and expense, protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public
place, or remove from such street or other public place, any of its
property when required to do so by the Township because of street or
other public excavation, construction, repair, regrading, or grading;
traffic conditions; installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, Townshipowned
power or signal lines, tracks; vacation or relocation of streets or
any other type of structure or improvement of a public agency, or any
other type of improvement necessary for the public health, safety or
welfare.
E. Nothing in this article or any license issued in accordance herewith
shall be construed as authorizing the licensee to erect and maintain
new poles in areas serviced by existing poles.
F. The licensee shall maintain all wires, conduits, cables, and other real
and personal property and facilities in good condition, order and repair.
G. The licensee shall keep accurate, complete and current maps and
records of its system and facilities which occupy the streets, public
ways and public places within the Township and shall furnish as soon as
they are available two complete copies of such maps and records to the
Township.
H. The licensee shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the
Township governing the construction and installation of private
communications systems. In addition:
(1) All aerial cables and wires shall be installed parallel with existing
telephone and electric utility wires; and
(2) Multiple aerial configurations shall be in parallel arrangement and
bundled, in accordance with engineering and safety
considerations; and
(3) All underground installations shall be in the appropriate size and
type conduit or other enclosures approved by the Superintendent;
and
(4) All installations shall be underground in those areas of the
township where both telephone and electric utilities' facilities are
underground at the time of the installation of the licensee's private
communications system.
(a) In areas where both telephone and electric utilities' facilities
are above ground at the time of the installation of the
licensee's private communications system, the licensee may
§ 282-21 RIDLEY CODE § 282-21
282:676
§ 282-22. Transfers and assignments.
§ 282-23. Violations and penalties.Editor's Note: Added at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
install its system above ground on existing utility poles only,
upon the condition that at such time as those facilities are
placed underground by the telephone and electric utility
companies, the licensee shall likewise place its facilities
underground at its sole cost and expense.
(5) The licensee upon reasonable notice by the Township shall
temporarily or permanently remove, adjust, raise or lower its
facilities within the right-of-way when the Township determines
that such action is needed for public use of the right-of-way,
including but not limited to the passage of nonstandard vehicles.
(6) The licensee shall obtain the written permission of the owner,
including the Township, of any tree or other vegetation before it
trims or prunes the same.
A. The licensee shall not transfer or assign its interest in any license
issued in accordance herewith without the prior written authorization
of the Township. For purposes of this section, a merger or consolidation
shall be deemed a transfer or assignment.
B. Nothing in this approval by the Director or Township authorizing any
transfer or assignment of any license issued in accordance herewith
shall be construed to waive or release any rights of the Township in and
to the streets, public ways and public places of the Township or as a
release of any of the Township's police powers.
§ 282-21 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 282-23
282:677
Chapter 285
TENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Seasonal sales — See Ch. 228. Shows and special events — See Ch. 245.
§ 285-1. Use for commercial purposes prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, maintain, operate or use any
tent in the Township of Ridley for any commercial purposes involving the
sale, display for sale or the demonstration of the use of any real or personal
property.
§ 285-2. Size of tents for noncommercial purposes limited.
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, maintain, operate or use any tent
for any noncommercial purpose in the Township of Ridley where such tent
exceeds an area of 120 square feet.
§ 285-3. Construction and use standards.
Any tent that is permitted under the provisions of § 285-2 of this chapter
must comply with the following requirements:
A. It shall withstand a wind pressure of 10 pounds per square foot.
B. It shall not be erected within 25 feet of any other structure, building or
other tent.
C. All canvas, curtains, cloth, rope, netting and decorative material must
be flameproof and fireproof.
D. It shall have a sitting or standing capacity for not more than 20 persons.
E. All artificial illumination shall be only by electricity, with fixtures and
wires sufficiently guarded to prevent ignition by radiation.
F. It shall have a minimum of two exits, plainly marked, and the immediate
area outside the exits shall be adequately illuminated by electricity at
night.
G. No hay, straw or other combustible material shall be used within any
tent.
H. No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe in any
tent, and signs prohibiting smoking shall be prominently displayed at
all entrances and other locations within the tent clearly visible to all
occupants.
§ 282-23 RIDLEY CODE § 285-3
285:678
§ 285-4. Noncomplying tents deemed nuisance.
Any tent erected, maintained, operated or used contrary to the provisions
of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and abatable as
such.
§ 285-5. Violations and penalties.161
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default
of payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Chapter 290
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 88.
Landscaping — See Ch. 168.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 224.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 237.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 264.
I. No motion-picture film shall be used, stored or exhibited within any
tent.
J. No flammable liquids shall be received, stored or displayed within 100
feet of an tent.
K. Where applicable, the regulations of the Industrial Board of the
Department of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania must be complied with.
161. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 285-3 TREES § 285-5
290:679

ARTICLE I
Interference of Trees With Sewer and Drainage Systems
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 137, Art. I, of the 1975 Code]
§ 290-1. Interference with sewer and drainage systems prohibited.
No owner of real estate nor the occupier of any such real estate shall permit
the growing of any trees on any land which is owned or occupied by him,
which said trees interfere with any sewer or drain which is part of the sewer
or drainage system of the Township of Ridley.
§ 290-2. Notice to owner.
Where any tree is growing on any land in the Township of Ridley which
interferes with the sewer or drainage system of the Township, upon
complaint thereof by the Sewer Committee of the said Township, the
Township Secretary shall forthwith send a notice to the owner or occupier
of such land to remove such tree within 30 days from the date of the sending
of such notice. Such notice shall be given either by mail or by posting the
premises.
§ 290-3. Failure to comply; removal by Township.
Upon the failure of the owner or occupier of any lands, who has been
sent such notice to remove such tree or trees within the time specified,
the Township of Ridley may cause the removal of such tree or trees and
collect the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of such costs, in the
manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims or by action
of assumpsit without the filing of such a claim.
§ 290-4. Violations and penalties.162
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
162. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-1 TREES § 290-4
290:681

ARTICLE II
Obstructions by Trees and Branches
[Adopted 10-1-1975 by Ord. No. 1422]
§ 290-5. Obstruction of streets and sidewalks prohibited.
In order to improve and render the sidewalks and streets of the Township
safe and convenient for travelers, it is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and unlawful for the owner of any real estate that abuts any tree
to permit such tree or its branches:
§ 290-6. Notice to remove obstructions.
The Township Secretary is hereby directed to notify the owners of any such
real estate to trim or remove the branches of such tree, in accordance with
the height restrictions herein set forth, within 30 days, which said notice
may be sent by certified mail or delivered personally to such owner.
§ 290-7. Failure to comply; removal by Township.
Upon default of such owner to comply with said notice, the Township may
cause the same to be done and collect the cost thereof, together with a
penalty of 10% of such cost, in the manner provided by law for the collection
of municipal claims or by action in assumpsit without the of a claim, or may
seek relief by complaint in equity.
§ 290-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord. No.
1639163]
Any such owner who fails to comply with such notice shall, upon conviction
before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment thereof, be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
A. To hang less than eight feet above the sidewalk or 11 feet above the
roadway.
B. Irrespective of height, to interfere with or obstruct the illumination of
any public streetlight or traffic signal, whether such signal be
illuminated or not.
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-5 TREES § 290-8
290:683
Chapter 294
UTILITY LINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Utility installations in improved streets — See
Ch. 264, Art. VI.
Use of rights-of-way by private
communications systems — See Ch. 282, Art.
II.
§ 294-1. Installer to obtain street grades.
Hereafter before any pipelines or conduits for the transportation of
petroleum, petroleum products, gas, mineral products, water or electrical
current are laid and installed in the Township of Ridley, it shall be the
duty of such pipeline or utility company to determine from the Township
Engineer the grades which have been established in all streets contiguous
to the lands where such pipelines or waterlines and electrical conduits are
to be laid. In the event that no grades have been established for any such
streets, it shall be the duty of such pipeline company or utility company,
at its own cost and expense, to obtain the grades from the Township
Engineer, which grades shall then be approved by the Board of Township
Commissioners.
§ 294-2. Minimum depth of installation.
After the determination of any such grade for streets as hereinbefore set
forth, no pipeline, waterline or electrical conduit may hereafter be installed
at any depth less than 30 inches from the top of the pipeline in said line to
the lowest established grade of any contiguous street or streets.
§ 294-3. Permission required for installation.
Before any installation shall be permitted as hereinbefore set forth, such
pipeline, waterline or utility company shall first make application in writing
to the Secretary of the Township to obtain its consent or permission, which
shall be given by ordinance only and upon such conditions, stipulations and
regulations as the Township Commissioners may deem proper.
§ 294-4. Severability and conflict of provisions.
A. It is hereby declared that the provisions of this chapter are severable
one from another and severable as to the public utilities, persons or
corporations subject thereto and the subject matters respectively dealt
with thereby; and if for any reason one or more of such provisions is
judicially held to be unconstitutional or invalid as applicable to any
particular public utility, person or corporation or any particular subject
matter dealt with by such provision, or held to be unconstitutional or
invalid in any wise for any reason, such holding or decision shall not
§ 290-8 RIDLEY CODE § 294-4
294:684
Chapter 299
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades and processions — See Ch. 199.
Off-street parking — See Ch. 202.
Speed-timing devices — See Ch. 256.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 264.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 275.
Storage of vehicles on private property — See
Ch. 303.
Towing and storage of vehicles — See Ch. 306.
affect the validity of such provision or provisions as applicable to other
public utilities, persons, corporations or subject matters dealt with
thereby, or the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter. It
is hereby declared that such provision and the remaining provisions
would have been ordained notwithstanding such judicial determination
of the invalidity of any such particular provision or provisions in any
respect.
B. It is further declared that if it shall be determined that the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission has exclusive jurisdiction to determine any
rights herein regulated, after the issuance of a certificate of public
convenience and upon due notice to the Township of Ridley of
application therefor, the powers of the said Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission are not hereby intended to be curtailed, restricted or
infringed upon in any manner whatsoever.
§ 294-4 UTILITY LINES § 294-4
294:685

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 299-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 299-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of the
Township of Ridley.
§ 299-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 299-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force,
or as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas, or
days celebrated as such.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. The Police Department shall have the following powers to regulate
traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Board of Commissioners and the Police Department in the same manner
as permanent regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a
vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulation, or who shall move,
remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted
or made to give notice of any such regulation, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this
chapter for a violation of such nature.
A. The Board of Commissioners may, from time to time, designate places
upon and along the highways in the Township where, for a period of not
§ 299-1 UTILITY LINES § 299-4
294:687
§ 299-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the police officers of the Township of
Ridley, who are hereby given authority to direct traffic on the highways
and intersections of the Township in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 299-5.1. Littering at certain locations. [Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1924]
No littering shall be permitted at the following locations:
more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall
designate such locations by proper signs and markings. Such
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective just as if
they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall operate or park
a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or
restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any
sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
A. In the Seventh Avenue Circle lot across from 713 Seventh Avenue
Circle.
§ 299-4 RIDLEY CODE § 299-5.1
294:688
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 299-6. Use of motor-driven vehicles or devices. [Amended
9-24-2003 by Ord. No. 1843]
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle, motorcycle or tractor upon any
sidewalk in the Township, nor shall any person operate a motor vehicle,
tractor or motorcycle upon or across any sidewalk, except in order to
gain access to or egress from a driveway or alley at such location where
the curb, if such sidewalk is curbed, shall have been properly cut down
for the said purpose.
B. No person shall operate any motor-driven vehicle or devices, including
but not limited to all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, minibikes, scooters,
skateboards, power-wheels, pedalcycles, or motorized go-carts, upon
any sidewalk located in the Township.
C. No person shall operate a motor-driven vehicle or device, including but
not limited to all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, minibikes, scooters,
power wheels, pedalcycles or motorized go-carts, upon any street, way,
alley or highway located in the Township of Ridley or upon any
Township-owned or -leased property, including parks. This section does
not apply to any passenger motor vehicle, tractor or motorcycle which
is a properly registered motor vehicle, provided said vehicle is
operating by a properly licensed driver. While the vehicles listed in the
above sentence can operate on streets, ways, alleys or highways in the
Township, they cannot be operated in Township-owned or -leased parks.
[Amended 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 2000]
D. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
E. This section shall not apply to any person who is physically
handicapped, physically disabled, or is physically challenged and is
operating a motorized device as a result of said handicap, disability or
physical challenge, which device is recognized by the Americans with
Disabilities Act as a proper mode of conveyance.
F. Impoundment. [Added 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 2000]
(1) When a law enforcement officer issues a citation for a violation
under this chapter, the officer may impound the ATV, dirt bike or
other motorized recreational vehicle, as defined by this chapter,
operated by a person who received the citation if, in the judgment
of the officer, the operator will continue to operate the vehicle in
violation of this chapter and such operation may be a hazard to the
safety of persons or property. That officer may impound an ATV, dirt
bike or other motorized recreational vehicle, as defined by this
§ 299-6 UTILITY LINES § 299-6
294:689
§ 299-7. Speed limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the highways or parts
thereof described below is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
Name of Highway
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Academy Avenue 25 mph From Kedron Avenue to South
Avenue
Acres Drive 25 mph From Chester Pike to Darby Road
Amosland Road 25 mph From Holmes Road to Franklin
Avenue
Arlington Avenue 25 mph From MacDade Boulevard to
Harding Avenue
Armstrong Avenue
[Added 9-26-2001 by
Ord. No. 1817]
25 mph Between Amosland Avenue and
Wendy Road
Armstrong Avenue 25 mph From Amosland Road to South
Avenue
Belmont Avenue [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
25 mph From Arlington Avenue to
Milmont Avenue
Blackrock Road 25 mph Entire length
Bridge Road 25 mph From Stonebrook Drive to South
Swarthmore Avenue
Brook Circle 25 mph Entire length
Bullens Lane 25 mph Entire length
Bullens Lane [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
45 mph From Chester Pike to Toth Drive
Chester Pike 35 mph Entire length
Colwell Road 15 mph From Parklane Road to Colwell
Circle
Conway Drive 25 mph From Blackrock Road to Parklane
Road
chapter, for the purpose of establishing ownership, if such
ownership is not evident by any registration or other document on
the person or the operator.
(2) The owner may reclaim his vehicle at any time subsequent to 24
hours after the issuance of the citation upon proof of ownership and
payment of costs of impoundment to the towing agency impounding
the vehicle.
§ 299-6 RIDLEY CODE § 299-7
294:690
Name of Highway
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Crum Creek Drive 25 mph Entire length
Darby Road 25 mph From Hoffman Road to the
Prospect Park Borough line
Derwood Drive Eighth
Avenue
25 mph 15
mph
Entire length From Edgewood
Avenue to Evergreen Avenue
Evergreen Avenue
[Added 3-24-1999 by
Ord. No. 1798]
25 mph From Eighth Avenue to 11th
Avenue
Fairmount Avenue 25 mph From Sellers Avenue to South
Swarthmore Avenue
Fairview Road 35 mph Entire length
Fourth Avenue 25 mph Entire length
Frances Way 25 mph From Milmont Avenue to Manor
Circle
Franklin Avenue
[Amended 10-1-1975 by
Ord. No. 1418]
25 mph From Kedron Avenue to South
Avenue
Garfield Avenue 25 mph Entire length
Grace Road 25 mph From Fairview Road to Blackrock
Road
Green Street 25 mph From Baldwin Avenue to
MacDade Boulevard
Greenway Road 25 mph From Hood Road to Blackrock
Road
Haller Road 25 mph From Acres Drive to Darby Road
Harding Avenue 25 mph From Milmont Avenue to
Arlington Avenue
Haverford Road 25 mph Entire length
Hazel Avenue [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
15 mph From Seventh Avenue to Eighth
Avenue
Hoffman Road 25 mph From Acres Drive to Darby Road
Holmes Road 25 mph Entire length
Hood Road 25 mph From Seventh Avenue to
Parklane Road
Jefferson Avenue 25 mph Entire length
Kedron Avenue 35 mph Entire length
Lynn Road 25 mph From Acres Drive to Darby Road
§ 299-7 UTILITY LINES § 299-7
294:691
Name of Highway
Speed limit
(mph) Location
MacDade Boulevard 35 mph Entire length
Manor Circle 25 mph From Arlington Avenue to
Harding Avenue
Marlin Avenue 25 mph From Morton Avenue to
Edgewood Avenue
McKinley Avenue 25 mph From Manor Circle to Arlington
Avenue
Michigan Avenue 25 mph Entire length
Milmont Avenue 25 mph From Hancock Avenue to
Michigan Avenue
Mole Road [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
25 mph Between Quince Lane and
Wyndom Terrace
Morris Avenue 25 mph Entire length
Morton Avenue 35 mph Entire length
Muhlenberg Avenue
[Added 1-4-1978 by
Ord. No. 1453]
25 mph From Swarthmore Avenue to
Michigan Avenue
Orchard Road 25 mph From Willard Drive to South
Swarthmore Avenue
Parklane Road 25 mph Entire length
Pershing Avenue 25 mph Entire length
Plymouth Drive 25 mph Entire length
Providence Road 25 mph Entire length
Quince Lane 25 mph From Armstrong Avenue to
Franklin Avenue
Raymond Road 25 mph From Kendall Avenue to
Michigan Avenue
Rodney Road 25 mph From Chester Pike to Darby Road
Roosevelt Avenue 25 mph From Manor Circle to Arlington
Avenue
Schiavello Drive 25 mph From Conway Drive to Blackrock
Road
Secane Road 25 mph Entire length
Second Street 25 mph Entire length
Seventh Avenue 25 mph Entire length
Sixth Avenue 25 mph From Swarthmore Avenue to
Morton Avenue
§ 299-7 RIDLEY CODE § 299-7
294:692
Name of Highway
Speed limit
(mph) Location
South Avenue 35 mph From Academy Avenue to the
Upper Darby Township line
Stanbridge Road [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
25 mph Between Sixth Avenue and
Armstrong Avenue
Stoneybrook Drive 25 mph From South Swarthmore Avenue
to Bridge Road
Stoney Hill Road [Added
11-10-1976 by Ord. No.
1433]
15 mph From Bridge Road to Hoffman
Road
Stoney Hill Road 25 mph From Darby Road to the cul-desac
on Stoney Hill Road
Sutton Avenue 25 mph From the Rutledge Borough line
to MacDade Boulevard
Swarthmore Avenue 25 mph From MacDade Boulevard to the
Rutledge Borough line
Swarthmore Avenue,
South
25 mph From Orchard Road to Chester
Pike
Swarthmore Avenue,
South [Added 3-24-2004
by Ord. No. 1854]
25 mph From Chester Pike to Fairmount
Avenue
Swarthmorewood Lane,
cul-de-sac
25 mph Entire length
Sylvania Avenue 25 mph From Sixth Avenue to Snyder
Avenue
Toth Drive 25 mph Entire length
Tyler Avenue 25 mph Entire length
Valley Road 25 mph Entire length
Washington Avenue 25 mph Entire length
Wilson Avenue 25 mph Entire length
Winona Avenue 25 mph From Baldwin Avenue to
MacDade Boulevard
§ 299-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those highways described below:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 299-7 UTILITY LINES § 299-9
294:693
§ 299-9. Traffic control devices. [Added 9-16-1987 by Ord. No. 1617]
The following traffic control devices shall be installed at the locations
described below:
§ 299-10. Avoidance of signals and signs prohibited. [Added
7-28-1999 by Ord. No. 1800]
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use private property as a
thoroughfare to avoid a traffic sign or signal.164
§ 299-11. One-way highways established.
The highways or parts of highways described below are hereby designated
as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
A. A "Slow - Dangerous Curve" sign in the 500 Block of Perry Street.
B. A "Deaf Child at Play" sign on Ridley Mill Lane [Added 3-24-1999 by
Ord. No. 1798]
C. A "No Outlet" sign on Hannum Avenue at Brighton Terrace [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1798]
D. A "Do Not Enter Local Traffic Only" sign on Wakefield Drive going east
at South Avenue [Added 3-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1798]
E. A truck weight limit sign limiting the weight of all motor vehicles to
55,000 pounds on Edgewood Avenue at Second Avenue in both the
north and south directions [Added 9-26-2001 by Ord. No. 1817]
F. Two flashing warning devices indicating a pedestrian crosswalk at
Greenhouse Drive and Franklin Avenue [Added 9-26-2001 by Ord.
No. 1817]
G. A "No Outlet" sign on Cooper Beech Lane at South Avenue [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No. 1817]
H. A "No Outlet" sign on Arbor Lane at Bullens Lane [Added 9-26-2001
by Ord. No. 1817]
I. A "No Outlet" sign on Willard Drive at Sellers Avenue [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No. 1817]
J. A "No Home Depot Delivery Truck Entrance" sign on MacDade
Boulevard at the entrance to the Ridley Shopping Center next to
Wendy's [Added 5-22-2002 by Ord. No. 1828]
164. Editor's Note: See also § 299-24, Operation of vehicles on private roadways.
§ 299-9 RIDLEY CODE § 299-11
294:694
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Amosland Road South From Spruce Street to
Academy Avenue
Arlington Avenue [Amended
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North From Belmont Avenue to
MacDade Boulevard
Belmont Avenue South From MacDade Boulevard to
Arlington Avenue
Cedar Avenue [Amended
3-26-2008 by Ord. No.
1937]
North From Forrester Avenue to
Academy Avenue
Chester Pike (the street
which is north of the main
Chester Pike)
West From Morris Avenue to
Hollis Avenue
Derwood Drive South From MacDade Boulevard to
Dorsett Street
Dorsett Street West From Bullens Lane to Crum
Creek Drive
Grant Avenue West From a point 200 feet east of
Fairview Road to Taylor
Avenue
Green Street [Amended
11-16-1988 by Ord No.
1641]
North From Baldwin Avenue to
MacDade Boulevard
Haverford Road South From Morton Avenue to
Arlington Avenue
Holland Avenue West From Fairview Road to
Angelo
Holmes Road [Added
9-23-1992 by Ord. No.
1695]
South In the 400 Block between
Grand Avenue and Academy
Avenue
Howard Road [Repealed 3-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1798]
Howard Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North From Franklin Road to
Secane Road
Hutchinson Terrace (300
Block) [Added 5-5-1976 by
Ord. No. 1426]
South From Hannum Avenue to
Academy Avenue
Norwood Avenue North From MacDade Boulevard to
Amosland Road
Randall Avenue North From Holland Street to
Worrall Street
§ 299-11 UTILITY LINES § 299-11
294:695
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Secane Road East From Howard Road to South
Avenue
Sixth Avenue East From Ardsley Road to
Fairview Road
Spruce Avenue Southwest From Amosland Road to
MacDade Boulevard
Wendy Road [Added
6-4-1975 by Ord. No.
1413]
North From Sixth Avenue to
Armstrong Avenue
Winona Avenue South Entire length
Worrall Street East From Randall Avenue to
Fairview Road
Youngs Avenue South From Jefferson Avenue to
Essex Avenue
§ 299-12. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle or tractor to make a
U-turn on any of the highways or parts thereof described below:
Name of Highway Location
(Reserved)
§ 299-13. Turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right all) during
the times indicated at any of the intersections described below:
Name of
Highway
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At
Intersection
of
Bullens Lane
[Added 6-4-1975
by Ord. No.
1413]
North Right 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Harfman
Drive
Bullens Lane
[Added 6-4-1975
by Ord. No.
1413]
North Right 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Toth Drive
Bullens Lane
[Added
5-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 1828]
South Left 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Valley Road
§ 299-11 RIDLEY CODE § 299-13
294:696
Name of
Highway
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At
Intersection
of
Fairview Road
[Added
10-1-1975 by
Ord. No. 1418]
South Left 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Holland
Street
Kedron Avenue
[Added
12-19-1990 by
Ord. No. 1669]
North Left 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Fifth Avenue
Kedron Avenue
[Added
12-19-1990 by
Ord. No. 1669]
South Right 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Fifth Avenue
MacDade
Boulevard [Added
12-19-1990 by
Ord. No. 1669]
East Right 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Cedar Avenue
MacDade
Boulevard [Added
12-19-1990 by
Ord. No. 1669]
West Left 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Cedar Avenue
MacDade
Boulevard, 1307
[Added
3-24-2004 by
Ord. No. 1854]
Exiting the
parking lot
Right All Valley Road
MacDade
Boulevard [Added
1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
West Left or
straight
(from right
lane)
All Woodlyn
Shopping
Center
Parker Avenue
[Added
12-18-1991 by
Ord. No. 1680]
-- Left All Kedron
Avenue
Parker Avenue
[Added
9-23-1992 by
Ord. No. 1695]
West Left -- Route 420
Route 420 [Added
6-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 1884]
South Left All Parker
Avenue
§ 299-13 UTILITY LINES § 299-13
294:697
Name of
Highway
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At
Intersection
of
South Avenue
[Added
1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
Both All 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.,
and 4:00
p.m. to 6:00
p.m.,
except
Saturdays
and
Sundays
Wakefield
Drive
Sycamore Avenue
[Added
1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
North Left All Second
Avenue
§ 299-14. Prohibited right turn on red signal. [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on
Red Signal Onto
Chester Pike South Fairview Road
Fairview Road165 Both Jefferson Avenue
Fairview Road Both MacDade Boulevard
Fairview Road166 Both Parklane Road
Franklin Avenue East Kedron Avenue
Holmes Road Both MacDade Boulevard
Jefferson Avenue167 Both Fairview Road
MacDade Boulevard Both Fairview Road
MacDade Boulevard Both Milmont Avenue
MacDade Boulevard Both Morton Avenue
Michigan Avenue East Fairview Road
Milmont Avenue Both MacDade Boulevard
Morton Avenue Both MacDade Boulevard
Parklane Road168 Both Fairview Road
165. Editor's Note: This regulation is in effect between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except
Saturday and Sunday.
166. Editor's Note: This regulation is in effect between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
167. Editor's Note: This regulation is in effect between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
168. Editor's Note: This regulation is in effect between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
§ 299-13 RIDLEY CODE § 299-14
294:698
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on
Red Signal Onto
South Swarthmore Avenue
[Added 9-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 1617]
North Chester Pike
§ 299-15. Center structures at intersections.
All vehicular traffic shall keep to the right of the following structures or
barriers located in the center of the specified intersections:
Structure on
(Nameof Highway) At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 299-16. Through highways.
The highways described below are hereby established as through highways,
and the operator of every vehicle or tractor upon approaching any such
highway at any intersection thereof (except for such intersections where
there are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals) shall
come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering any such
through highway:
Name of Highway Limits
(Reserved)
§ 299-17. Stop intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the named highway as to face traffic approaching the second-named
highway in the direction or directions indicated. All vehicles and tractors
approaching any such intersection upon the first-named highway, in the
direction or directions indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop,
within a reasonable distance, before entering any such intersection.
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
*Academy Avenue Both Amosland Road
*Academy Avenue Both Holmes Road
Acer Drive [Added
5-22-2002 by Ord. No.
1828]
East Shasta Circle
§ 299-14 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:699
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Acres Drive [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord.
No. 1729]
Both Haller Road
Acres Drive Both Hoffman Road
*Acres Drive Both Lynn Road
Acres Drive [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Darby Road
Adair Road [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord.
No. 1729]
East Academy Avenue
Adams Street [Added
9-7-1977 by Ord. No.
1448]
Both Maddock Street
Adams Street [Added
8-1-1979 by Ord. No.
1483]
North Smiley Street
*Agnes Avenue Both Melrose Terrace
*Agnes Avenue Both Unity Terrace
*Agnes Avenue Both Waverly Terrace
Amherst Avenue [Added
3-24-2004 by Ord. No.
1854]
Both Lehigh Circle
Amherst Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Muhlenberg Avenue
Amherst Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East Morton Avenue
Amherst Avenue [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1884]
West Lehigh Avenue
*Amherst Street Both Villanova Avenue
*Amosland Road Both Academy Avenue
*Amosland Road Both Armstrong Avenue
Amosland Road [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1884]
Both Elder Avenue
Amosland Road Both Forrester Avenue
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:700
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Amosland Road Both Haig Avenue
Amosland Road [Added
9-16-1987 by Ord. No.
1617]
Both Holmes Road
Amosland Road [Added
9-23-1992 by Ord. No.
1695]
Both Norwood Avenue
Amosland Road Both Pine Avenue
*Arlington Avenue Both Belmont Avenue
*Arlington Avenue Both Haverford Road
Arlington Avenue Both MacDade Boulevard
*Arlington Avenue Both Manor Circle
Arlington Avenue
[Added 9-26-2001 by
Ord. No. 1817]
Both McKinley Avenue
*Arlington Avenue
[Added 8-1-1979 by
Ord. No. 1483]
Both Roosevelt Avenue
*Armstrong Avenue Both Amosland Road
Armstrong Avenue
[Added 9-26-2001 by
Ord. No. 1817]
Both Hutchinson Terrace
Armstrong Avenue Both Lawnton Terrace
*Armstrong Avenue Both Quince Lane
Armstrong Avenue Both South Avenue
Armstrong Avenue
[Added 9-26-2001 by
Ord. No. 1817]
Both Stanbridge Road
*Armstrong Avenue Both Wyndom Terrace
Armstrong Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
West Kedron Avenue
Baldwin Avenue [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
East Glenside Avenue
Baldwin Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West Holmes Road
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:701
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Balignac Avenue [Added
9-23-1992 by Ord. No.
1695]
Both Essex Avenue
Baltimore Avenue Both Belmont Avenue
Baltimore Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. 1592]
Both MacDade Boulevard
*Baltimore Avenue
[Added 1-4-1978 by
Ord. No. 1453]
Both Reese Avenue
Baltimore Avenue
[Added 9-26-2001 by
Ord. No. 1817]
South Haverford Road
*Belmont Avenue Both Arlington Avenue
Belmont Avenue [Added
7-28-1999 by Ord. No.
1800]
Both Baltimore Avenue
Belmont Avenue [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
Both Chester Avenue
Belmont Avenue Both Garfield Avenue
*Belmont Avenue Both Milmont Avenue
Belmont Avenue [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798; amended
10-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 1955]
Both Virginia Avenue
Belmont Avenue [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
Both Washington Avenue
Belmont Avenue [Added
12-19-1990 by Ord.
No. 1669]
East Jackson Avenue
Belmont Avenue [Added
12-19-1990 by Ord.
No. 1669]
West Buchanan Avenue
*Blackrock Road [Added
8-20-1980 by Ord. No.
1497]
Both Conway Drive
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:702
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Blackrock Road
[Amended 1-15-1986
by Ord. No. 1592]
Both Michigan Avenue
Blackrock Road Both Parklane Road
Braxton Road Both Clymer Road
*Braxton Road Both Rodney Road
*Bridge Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord.
1592]
Both Hoffman Road
*Bridge Road Both South Swarthmore Avenue
*Bridge Road [Added
11-10-1976 by Ord.
No. 1433]
Both Stoney Hill Road
Bridge Road [Added
12-19-1990 by Ord.
No. 1669]
Both Willard Drive
Brighton Terrace [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord.
1592]
Both Academy Avenue
Brighton Terrace [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord.
1592]
Both Grand Avenue
Brighton Terrace [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
North Armstrong Avenue
Brighton Terrace [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South MacDade Boulevard
*Brooke Avenue [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1924]
Both Highland Avenue
Brooke Avenue [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 1955]
South Elder Avenue
Brooke Avenue [Added
11-17-1982 by Ord.
No. 1538]
South Pershing Avenue
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:703
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Brooke Circle (700
Block) [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
East Brooke Avenue
Brookside Avenue South Seventh Avenue
*Brookside Street North Milmont Avenue
*Broomall Avenue Both Monta Vista Avenue
Broomall Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Linda Vista Street
Broomall Street East Edgewood Avenue
Broomall Street West Morton Avenue
Buchanan Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
Both MacDade Boulevard
Buchanan Avenue North Vauclain Avenue
Buchanan Avenue South Belmont Avenue
*Bullens Lane Both Dorsett Street
Bullens Lane Both Fairview Road
*Bullens Lane Both Plymouth Drive
Bullens Lane [Added
6-18-1986 by Ord. No.
1595]
Both Valley Road
*Buse Street Both Michell Street
Catherine Avenue East Eisenhower Avenue
Cedar Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Academy Avenue
Cedar Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both MacDade Boulevard
*Cedar Avenue North Grand Avenue
Cedar Lane [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
North Springhill Road
Chester Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Belmont Avenue
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:704
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Chester Avenue [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1884]
South Hancock Avenue
Chestnut Avenue [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 1955]
East Amosland Road
*Chipmunk Lane Both Quaint Street
Chipmunk Lane [Added
11-18-1981 by Ord.
No. 1525]
East Lawnton Terrace
Chipmunk Lane West Quince Lane
Clayton Road East Holmes Road
Clayton Road West Stanbridge Road
*Clymer Lane Both West Ross Place
Conway Drive [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East Parklane Road
Cornell Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North University Avenue
Cornell Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Morton Avenue
Cottonwood Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
East Yates Avenue
*Cottonwood Street
[Added 11-10-1976 by
Ord. No. 1433]
Both Randall Street
*Cottonwood Street
[Added 11-10-1976 by
Ord. No. 1433]
Both Youngs Avenue
Creghan Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West Colwell Road
Cypress Lane [Added
5-22-2002 by Ord. No.
1828]
North Acer Avenue
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:705
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Dale Road [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
North Secane Road
Darby Road [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord.
No. 1729]
Both Rodney Road
Dellacamera Avenue
[Added 3-24-1999 by
Ord. No. 1798]
-- Hunter Lane
Derwood Drive [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
Both Dorrett Street
Dorrett Street [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
East Crum Creek Drive
Edgewood Avenue Both Fourth Avenue
Edgewood Avenue
[Added 6-27-2012 by
Ord. No. 1987]
North Fifth Avenue, Folsom
Edgewood Avenue North Morton Avenue
Edgewood Avenue
[Added 3-24-1999 by
Ord. No. 1798]
North Second Avenue
Edgewood Avenue North Sixth Avenue
Edgewood Avenue
[Added 6-27-2012 by
Ord. No. 1987]
South Gilmore Street
Eighth Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Hazel Avenue
Eighth Avenue Both Sylvania Avenue
Eighth Avenue East Swarthmore Avenue
Eisenhower Avenue North Kelly Avenue
Elder Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East Amosland Road
Elder Avenue [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
East Brooke Avenue
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:706
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Elder Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West Kedron Avenue
*Elder Avenue West Pearl Avenue
Eleventh Avenue Both Sylvania Avenue
Eleventh Avenue East Swarthmore Avenue
*Emlen Street [Added
5-5-1976 by Ord. No.
1426]
Both Randall Avenue
Essex Avenue Both Fairview Road
*Essex Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Randall Avenue
Essex Avenue Both Youngs Avenue
Essex Avenue East Taylor Avenue
Essex Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West Balignac Avenue
*Evergreen Avenue Both Eighth Avenue
Evergreen Avenue Both Fifth Avenue
Evergreen Avenue Both Fourth Avenue
Evergreen Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
Both MacDade Boulevard
Evergreen Avenue Both Sixth Avenue
Evergreen Avenue Both Seventh Avenue
*Fairmount Avenue Both South Swarthmore Avenue
Fairmount Avenue West Sellers Avenue
*Fernwood Avenue
[Added 3-24-1999 by
Ord. No. 1798]
Both Fourth Avenue
Fernwood Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986
Both MacDade Boulevard
Fernwood Avenue North Sixth Avenue
Fifth Avenue Both Fernwood Avenue
Fifth Avenue Both Folsom Avenue
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:707
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Fifth Avenue [Added
7-26-1995 by Ord. No.
1739]
Both Ridley Avenue
*Fifth Avenue [Added
12-18-1991 by Ord.
No. 1680; amended
9-23-1992 by Ord. No.
1695]
Both Rutledge Avenue
Fifth Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Springfield Avenue
*Fifth Avenue Both Sutton Avenue
Fifth Avenue [Amended
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
Both Swarthmore Avenue
Fifth Avenue Both Sycamore Avenue
Fifth Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Kedron Avenue
Fifth Avenue [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
East and West Tasker Avenue
Fifth Avenue West Edgewood Avenue
Fifth Avenue, West East Kelly Avenue
Fifth Avenue, West West Fairview Road
*Folsom Avenue
[Amended 3-24-2004
by Ord. No. 1854]
Both Fourth Avenue
Folsom Avenue Both Sixth Avenue
Folsom Avenue [Added
11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1641]
North Melrose Terrace
Forest Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both MacDade Boulevard
Forest Avenue Both Belmont Avenue
Forest Avenue [Added
10-1-1975 by Ord. No.
1418]
South Hancock Street
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:708
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Forrest Avenue [Added
2-26-1997 by Ord. No.
1757; amended
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
Both Reese Street
Forrester Avenue Both Norwood Avenue
Forrester Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
East Holmes Road
Forrester Avenue
[Added 6-27-2012 by
Ord. No. 1987]
West Amosland Road
*Fourth Avenue [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
Both Fernwood Avenue
*Fourth Avenue [Added
3-24-2004 by Ord. No.
1854]
Both Folsom Avenue
Fourth Avenue [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 1955]
Both Ridley Avenue
Fourth Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Rutledge Avenue
*Fourth Avenue [Added
3-24-2004 by Ord. No.
1854]
Both Springfield Avenue
*Fourth Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Sutton Avenue
*Fourth Avenue Both Swarthmore Avenue
Fourth Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Sylvania Avenue
Fourth Avenue [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 1955]
Both Tasker Avenue
Fourth Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West Edgewood Avenue
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:709
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Foxglove Drive [Added
5-22-2002 by Ord. No.
1828; amended
9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1924]
East Acer Avenue
*Frances Way West Milmont Avenue
*Franklin Avenue Both Mitchell Avenue
Franklin Avenue [Added
3-24-2004 by Ord. No.
1854]
Both Quaint Street
Franklin Avenue [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
Both Quince Lane
*Fulmer Circle North Seventh Avenue
*Garfield Avenue Both Jefferson Avenue
Garfield Avenue North Grant Avenue
Garfield Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Haverford Road
*Georgetown Road Both Michigan Avenue
Georgetown Road
[Added 12-18-1991 by
Ord. No. 1680]
Both Rosemont Avenue
Gilmore Avenue East Edgewood Avenue
*Gilmore Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Linda Vista Street
Gilmore Street Both Monta Vista Avenue
Gilmore Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West Morton Avenue
Girard Avenue [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1924]
Both In front of 902 Girard Avenue
Girard Avenue [Added
9-16-1987 by Ord. No.
1617]
Both Rolling Creek Road
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:710
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Girard Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North Michigan Avenue
Glenside Avenue [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
South Baldwin Avenue
Gorsuch Avenue [Added
11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1641]
Both Linda Vista Street
Gorsuch Avenue Both Monta Vista Avenue
Gorsuch Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Rio Vista Street
Gorsuch Avenue East Edgewood Avenue
Gorsuch Avenue West Morton Avenue
Grace Road East Fairview Road
Grace Road North Blackrock Road
Grand Avenue Both Amosland Road
*Grand Avenue Both Cedar Avenue
*Grand Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Highland Terrace
*Grand Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Holmes Road
*Grand Avenue [Added
5-5-1976 by Ord. No.
1426]
Both Hutchinson Terrace
Grand Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East South Avenue
Grand Avenue [Added
12-19-1990 by Ord.
No. 1669]
South Seventh Avenue
A street spur to the east
of a traffic island dividing
Grand Avenue and
Academy Avenue
Academy Avenue
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:711
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
A street spur to the east
of a traffic island dividing
Grand Avenue and
Academy Avenue
Grand Avenue
Grant Avenue Both Fairview Road
Grant Avenue [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
Both Yates Avenue
Grant Avenue [Added
11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1641]
Both Youngs Avenue
Grant Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West Taylor Drive
Green Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North MacDade Boulevard
Greenhouse Drive
[Added 12-19-1990 by
Ord. No. 1669]
East South Avenue
Greenhouse Lane
[Added 12-19-1990 by
Ord. No. 1669]
North Franklin Avenue
Greenway Road North Blackrock Road
Greenway Road [Added
11-18-1981 by Ord.
No. 1525]
South Hood Road
Haller Road Both Acres Drive
*Haller Road Both West Ross Place
Haller Road South Darby Road
Hancock Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West Jackson Avenue
Hannum Avenue [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
Both Lawnton Terrace
Harding Avenue [Added
8-1-1979 by Ord. No.
1483]
Both Manor Circle
Harding Avenue West Milmont Avenue
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:712
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Harfman Drive [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
East Crum Creek Drive
Harfman Drive West Bullens Lane
Harper Avenue [Added
7-26-1995 by Ord. No.
1739]
East Morris Avenue
Harper Avenue West Fairview Road
*Haverford Road Both Arlington Avenue
Haverford Road Both Hollis Avenue
Haverford Road Both South Morris Avenue
Haverford Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Virginia Avenue
Haverford Road Both West Road
Haverford Road West Fairview Road
Haverford Road [Added
3-24-1982 by Ord. No.
1532]
West 146 feet west of Garfield Avenue
Hazel Avenue [Amended
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Fifth Avenue
Hazel Avenue Both Fourth Avenue
Hazel Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both MacDade Boulevard
Hazel Avenue [Added
6-18-1986 by Ord. No.
1595]
Both Second Avenue
Hazel Avenue Both Seventh Avenue
Hazel Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Sixth Avenue
Hazel Avenue North Eighth Avenue
Hickory Road [Amended
10-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 1955]
East Quaint Street
*Hickory Road Both Quince Lane
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:713
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Highland Avenue [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1884]
Both Pearl Avenue
*Highland Avenue
[Added 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1924]
South Brooke Avenue
Highland Avenue West Amosland Road
Highland Terrace Both Academy Avenue
Highland Terrace
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
South MacDade Boulevard
*Hoffman Road Both Bridge Road
*Hoffman Road [Added
11-10-1976 by Ord.
No. 1433]
Both Stoney Hill Road
*Hoffman Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Darby Road
Hoffman Road South Stoney Hill Road
Holland Street Both Hollis Avenue
Holland Street Both South Morris Avenue
Holland Street [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1884]
East Sloan Street
Holland Street West Fairview Road
Hollis Avenue North Chester Pike
Hollis Avenue South Haverford Road
*Holmes Road Both Academy Avenue
Holmes Road North Sixth Avenue
Hood Road Both Grace Road
Hood Road [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord.
No. 1729]
Both Greenway Road
*Hood Road East Parklane Road
Hood Road East Seventh Avenue
Howard Road [Added
3-26-2008 by Ord. No.
1937]
East Secane Road
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:714
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Hunter Lane [Added
9-16-1987 by Ord. No.
1617]
North Michigan Avenue
Hutchinson Terrace
[Added 11-10-1976 by
Ord. No. 1433;
amended 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
Both Academy Avenue
*Hutchinson Terrace Both Grand Avenue
Hutchinson Terrace North Armstrong Avenue
Irving Lane Both Bullens Lane
Jackson Avenue Both Belmont Avenue
Jackson Avenue [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
Both Hancock Street
Jackson Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Haverford Road
*Jefferson Avenue Both Garfield Avenue
Jefferson Avenue Both Taylor Avenue
*Jefferson Avenue
[Added 11-10-1976 by
Ord. No. 1433]
Both Yates Avenue
*Jefferson Avenue
[Added 11-10-1976 by
Ord. No. 1433]
Both Youngs Avenue
Jefferson Avenue North MacDade Boulevard
Jenks Avenue North Seventh Avenue
Jenks Avenue South Sixth Avenue
Kelly Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Catherine Avenue
Kelly Avenue [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
Both Eisenhower Avenue
Kelly Avenue (500 Block)
[Added 6-27-2012 by
Ord. No. 1987]
Both Eisenhower Avenue
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:715
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Kelly Avenue [Added
7-26-1995 by Ord. No.
1739]
Both Fifth Avenue
Kelly Avenue East Milmont Avenue
Kelly Avenue South Vauclain Avenue
Kossuth Avenue Both Belmont Avenue
Kossuth Avenue Both MacDade Boulevard
Kossuth Avenue [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1924]
Both Vauclain Avenue
Kossuth Avenue North Eisenhower Avenue
*Lakeview Drive Both Parkview Circle
Lakeview Drive [Added
9-16-1987 by Ord. No.
1617]
Both Perry Street
*Lakeview Drive [Added
11-17-1982 by Ord.
No. 1538]
North Michell Street
*Lakeview Drive South Terra Villa Lane
*Lakeview Drive, South Both Michell Street
Laurel Lane [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
East Muhlenberg Avenue
Lawnton Terrace [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Academy Avenue
Lawnton Terrace [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Grand Avenue
Leedom Fire Company
Entrance [Added
2-26-1997 by Ord. No.
1757]
Both Darby Road
Lincoln Avenue Both Linda Vista Avenue
Lincoln Avenue Both Monta Vista Avenue
Lincoln Avenue East Edgewood Avenue
Lincoln Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Rio Vista Street
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:716
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Linda Vista Avenue Both Broomall Street
Linda Vista Avenue Both Gilmore Street
Linda Vista Avenue Both Gorsuch Street
*Linda Vista Avenue
[Added 4-15-1981 by
Ord. No. 1518]
Both Marlin Avenue
Linda Vista Avenue North Sixth Avenue
Linda Vista Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
South MacDade Boulevard
Locust Road East Holmes Road
Locust Road West Stanbridge Road
Lukens Avenue East Taylor Avenue
Lukens Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West Fairview Road
*Lynn Road Both Acres Drive
*Lynn Road Both Darby Road
Maddock Street Both Miller Street
*Manor Circle Both Arlington Avenue
Manor Circle [Amended
10-26-1994 by Ord.
No. 1729]
Both Francis Way
Manor Circle [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
North Its northeast corner at Harding
Avenue
Maple Avenue Both MacDade Boulevard
*Maple Avenue Both Parker Avenue
Maple Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North Academy Avenue
Maple Avenue North Spruce Street
Maple Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North Walnut Street
Maple Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Plant Terrace
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:717
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
*Marlin Avenue [Added
4-15-1981 by Ord. No.
1518]
Both Linda Vista Avenue
Marlin Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Monta Vista Street
*Marlin Avenue Both Rio Vista Avenue
Marlin Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East Edgewood Avenue
McKinley Avenue East Arlington Avenue
McKinley Avenue West Manor Circle
Meadow Road [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1884]
West Woodcrest Avenue
*Melrose Terrace Both Agnes Avenue
*Melrose Terrace Both Mitchell Avenue
Melrose Terrace [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East Folsom Avenue
Melrose Terrace [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord.
No. 1729]
East Kedron Avenue
Melrose Terrace [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East Sutton Avenue
*Michell Street Both Buse Avenue
*Michell Street [Added
11-17-1982 by Ord.
No. 1538]
Both Lakeview Drive
*Michell Street Both South Lakeview Drive
Michell Street Both Terra Villa Avenue
Michigan Avenue
[Added 7-26-1995 by
Ord. No. 1739]
Both Blackrock Road
*Michigan Avenue Both Georgetown Road
*Michigan Avenue Both Parklane Road
Mildred Avenue West Fairview Road
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:718
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
*Miller Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Maddock Street
*Miller Street West Smiley Street
*Milmont Avenue Both Belmont Avenue
*Milmont Avenue Both Brookside Street
*Milmont Avenue Both Frances Way
*Milmont Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
Both Harding Avenue
Milmont Avenue Both Michigan Avenue
*Milmont Avenue Both Seventh Avenue
*Milmont Avenue Both Woodland Avenue
*Mitchell Avenue Both Franklin Avenue
*Mitchell Avenue Both Melrose Terrace
*Mitchell Avenue Both Unity Terrace
*Mitchell Avenue Both Waverly Terrace
Mole Road [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
Both Cricket Road
*Mole Road Both Quaint Street
Mole Road East Wyndom Terrace
Mole Road West Quince Lane
*Monta Vista Avenue Both Broomall Avenue
Monta Vista Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
Both Gilmore Avenue
Monta Vista Avenue
[Added 7-28-1999 by
Ord. No. 1800]
Both Gorsuch Street
Monta Vista Avenue
[Added 2-26-1997 by
Ord. No. 1757;
amended 7-28-1999 by
Ord. No. 1800]
Both Lincoln Avenue
Monta Vista Avenue Both Marlin Street
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:719
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Monta Vista Avenue
[Amended 7-28-1999
by Ord. No. 1800]
Both Sixth Avenue
Monta Vista Avenue
[Added 7-23-2014 by
Ord. No. 2006]
North and
South
Gorsuch Avenue
Monta Vista Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
South MacDade Boulevard
Morris Avenue Both The center of the 200 Block
Morris Avenue Both Tyler Avenue
*Morris Avenue Both Washington Avenue
Morris Avenue North Jefferson Avenue
Morris Avenue North MacDade Boulevard
Morris Avenue North Vauclain Avenue
Morris Avenue South Garfield Avenue
Morris Avenue, South North Fairview Road
Mount Vernon Avenue Both Baltimore Avenue
Mount Vernon Avenue Both Buchanan Avenue
Mount Vernon Avenue Both Milmont Avenue
Mount Vernon Avenue Both Virginia Avenue
Mount Vernon Avenue East Arlington Avenue
Mount Vernon Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
West Forest Avenue
Mount Vernon Avenue West Kossuth Avenue
Muhlenberg Avenue Both Amherst Avenue
Muhlenberg Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
North Swarthmore Avenue
Muhlenberg Avenue West Michigan Avenue
Ninth Avenue [Added
7-28-1999 by Ord. No.
1800]
Both Swarthmore Avenue
Ninth Avenue, Folsom
[Added 6-27-2012 by
Ord. No. 1987]
Both Village Road
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:720
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Ninth Street [Amended
6-6-1979 by Ord. No.
1481]
Both Edgewood Avenue
North Lane North Orchard Road
Norwood Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North MacDade Boulevard
Oak Leaf Lane [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
West Kedron Avenue
Ohio Avenue Both Belmont Avenue
Ohio Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both MacDade Boulevard
Ohio Avenue Both Mount Vernon Avenue
Ohio Avenue [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1924]
East Reese Avenue
*Ohio Avenue [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 1955]
North Vauclain Avenue
Old Bullens Lane [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
Both Toth Drive
Orchard Avenue [Added
2-26-1997 by Ord. No.
1757]
Both Sutton Avenue
Orchard Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East Kedron Avenue
Orchard Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North South Swarthmore Avenue
Orchard Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West Sutton Avenue
Orchard Road [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord.
No. 1729]
North Bridge Road
*Parker Avenue Both Maple Avenue
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:721
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Parker Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East MacDade Boulevard
*Parklane Road
[Repealed 11-1-1978
by Ord. No. 1470]
Parklane Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Blackrock Road (1400 Block)
*Parklane Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Blackrock Road (1600 Block)
*Parklane Road Both Hood Road
*Parklane Road Both Michigan Avenue
*Parklane Road South Seventh Avenue
*Parkview Circle Both Lakeview Drive
*Pearl Avenue Both Elder Avenue
Pearl Avenue Both Highland Avenue
Pearl Avenue Both Pershing Avenue
Perry Street East Lakeview Drive
Pershing Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Amosland Road
Pershing Avenue
(Hickory Road)
Both Quince Lane
Plant Terrace West Kedron Avenue
Platt Avenue East Swarthmore Avenue
Platt Avenue West Sylvania Avenue
*Plymouth Drive West Bullens Lane
*Poe Road West Cricket Road
Poe Street [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1884]
North Quaint Street
Price Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Pine Street
*Quaint Street Both Chipmunk Lane
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:722
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Quaint Street [Added
7-26-1995 by Ord. No.
1739]
Both Wyndom Terrace
Quaint Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East South Avenue
*Quaint Street North Hickory Road
*Quaint Street North Mole Road
*Quaint Street North Secane Road
Quaint Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Franklin Avenue
Quaint Street [Added
11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1641]
South Poe Road
*Quince Lane [Added
8-20-1980 by Ord. No.
1497]
Both Franklin Avenue
*Quince Lane Both Hickory Road
Quince Lane [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
North Mole Road
*Quince Lane South Armstrong Avenue
Randall Avenue Both Essex Avenue
Randall Avenue [Added
9-16-1987 by Ord. No.
1617]
Both Sherman Avenue
Randall Avenue North Cottonwood Avenue
*Randall Avenue [Added
5-5-1976 by Ord. No.
1426]
North Emlen Street
*Randall Street [Added
11-10-1976 by Ord.
No. 1433]
Both Cottonwood Street
Raymond Drive South Michigan Avenue
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:723
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Redwood Avenue
[Added 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1924;
amended 10-28-2009
by Ord. No. 1955]
South Snyder Avenue
Redwood Avenue North Morton Avenue
*Reese Avenue Both Baltimore Avenue
Reese Avenue Both Buchanan Avenue
Reese Avenue Both Forest Avenue
Reese Avenue Both Milmont Avenue
Reese Avenue Both Ohio Avenue
Reese Avenue Both Virginia Avenue
Reese Avenue East Arlington Avenue
Reese Avenue West Kossuth Avenue
Ridley Avenue Both Fifth Avenue
Ridley Avenue Both Fourth Avenue
Ridley Avenue North Second Avenue
Ridley Avenue North Sixth Avenue
Rio Vista Avenue Both Lincoln Street
*Rio Vista Avenue Both Marlin Street
Rio Vista Avenue [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
North Broomall Street
Rio Vista Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South MacDade Boulevard
*Rodney Road
[Amended 12-19-1990
by Ord. No. 1669]
Both Braxton Road
*Rodney Road Both Stockton Circle
*Rodney Road [Added
8-1-1979 by Ord. No.
1483]
West Darby Road
Roosevelt Avenue East Arlington Avenue
Rose Avenue Both Highland Avenue
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:724
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Rosemont Avenue
[Added 7-23-2014 by
Ord. No. 2006]
West Georgetown Road
Ross Place, East [Added
11-1-1978 by Ord. No.
1470]
Both Braxton Road
Ross Place, East [Added
11-1-1978 by Ord. No.
1470]
West Stockton Circle
*Ross Place, West Both Clymer Lane
Ross Place, West East Stockton Circle
*Ross Place, West West Haller Road
*Rutledge Avenue
[Amended 9-23-1992
by Ord. No. 1695]
Both Fifth Avenue
Rutledge Avenue Both Fourth Avenue
Rutledge Avenue Both Second Avenue
*Rutledge Avenue Both Sixth Avenue
Rutledge Avenue North Melrose Avenue
Scenic Drive [Added
5-22-2002 by Ord. No.
1828]
North Willowbend Drive
Scenic Drive [Added
5-22-2002 by Ord. No.
1828]
West Willowbend Drive
Schiavello Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North Blackrock Road
Schiavello Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Conway Avenue
School Lane North MacDade Boulevard
*Secane Road Both Quaint Street
Secane Road [Added
12-18-1991 by Ord.
No. 1680]
Both Dale Road
Secane Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Franklin Avenue
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:725
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Second Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Edgewood Avenue
Second Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Evergreen Avenue
*Second Avenue Both Folsom Avenue
*Second Avenue [Added
3-24-1982 by Ord. No.
1532]
Both Ridley Avenue
*Second Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Springfield Avenue
*Second Avenue Both Sutton Avenue
*Second Avenue Both Swarthmore Avenue
*Second Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Sycamore Avenue
*Second Avenue Both Tasker Street
Second Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East Kedron Avenue
Second Avenue [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
East and West Ridley Avenue
*Seventh Avenue Both Colwell Road
*Seventh Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Evergreen Avenue
Seventh Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Fairview Road
*Seventh Avenue Both Fulmer Circle
Seventh Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Hazel Avenue
*Seventh Avenue Both Jenks Avenue
*Seventh Avenue Both Milmont Avenue
Seventh Avenue Both Parklane Road
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:726
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
*Seventh Avenue Both Sylvania Avenue
Seventh Avenue [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
East Girard Avenue
*Seventh Avenue East Swarthmore Avenue
Seventh Avenue North Schoolside Lane
Seventh Avenue West Exit of Grace Park School
Seventh Avenue West Morton Avenue
Sherman Avenue [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
Both Randall Avenue
Sherman Avenue East Fairview Road
Sixth Avenue [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1884]
Both Circle Terrace
*Sixth Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Donna Street
*Sixth Avenue
[Amended 12-19-1990
by Ord. No. 1669]
Both Rutledge Avenue
Sixth Avenue [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 1955]
Both Springfield Avenue
Sixth Avenue [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
Both Stanbridge Road
*Sixth Avenue
[Amended 9-26-2001
by Ord. No. 1817]
Both Swarthmore Avenue
*Sixth Avenue [Added
11-1-1978 by Ord. No.
1470]
Both Sylvania Avenue
Sixth Avenue [Added
2-26-1997 by Ord. No.
1757]
Both Tasker Avenue
Sixth Avenue East Fairview Road
*Sixth Avenue East Sutton Avenue
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:727
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Sixth Avenue [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
East and West Tasker Avenue
Sixth Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North Linda Vista Avenue
Sixth Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West Amosland Road
Sixth Avenue West Morton Avenue
Sloan Avenue South Chester Pike
Smiley Street Both Gibbons Street
*Smiley Street Both Miller Street
Smiley Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Adams Street
Snyder Avenue [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 1955]
West Sylvania Avenue
South Morris Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
Both Haverford Road
South Morris Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
South Chester Pike
South Swarthmore
Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Orchard Avenue
Springfield Avenue Both Fifth Avenue
*Springfield Avenue
[Amended 3-24-2004
by Ord. No. 1854]
Both Fourth Avenue
Springfield Avenue Both Sixth Avenue
Springfield Avenue North Melrose Avenue
Spruce Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West MacDade Boulevard
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:728
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Stanbridge Road [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
North Armstrong Avenue
Stanbridge Road North Holmes Road
Stanbridge Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North MacDade Boulevard
Stanbridge Road South Grand Avenue
*Stockton Circle Both Rodney Road
*Stoney Hill Road
[Amended 11-10-1976
by Ord. No. 1433]
Both Bridge Road
*Stoney Hill Road
[Added 11-10-1976 by
Ord. No. 1433]
Both Hoffman Road
*Sutton Avenue Both Fifth Avenue
*Sutton Avenue Both Second Avenue
*Sutton Avenue Both Sixth Avenue
Sutton Avenue [Added
3-2-1977 by Ord. No.
1440]
North Melrose Terrace
Swarthmore Avenue
[Added 12-19-1990 by
Ord. No. 1669]
Both Fifth Avenue
*Swarthmore Avenue Both Fourth Avenue
*Swarthmore Avenue Both Sixth Avenue
*Swarthmore Avenue
[Added 3-2-1977 by
Ord. No. 1440]
Both Seventh Avenue
*Swarthmore Avenue South Second Avenue
*Swarthmore Avenue,
South
Both Bridge Road
*Swarthmore Avenue,
South
Both Fairmount Avenue
Sycamore Avenue Both Fourth Avenue
Sycamore Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
Both MacDade Boulevard
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:729
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Sycamore Avenue Both Second Avenue
Sycamore Avenue North Sixth Avenue
Sylvan Avenue, West
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
South Morton Avenue
Sylvania Avenue [Added
11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1641]
Both Eleventh Avenue
Sylvania Avenue Both Fifth Avenue
Sylvania Avenue Both Fourth Avenue
Sylvania Avenue Both Eighth Avenue
*Sylvania Avenue Both Seventh Avenue
Sylvania Avenue Both Platt Avenue
*Sylvania Avenue Both Sixth Avenue
Sylvania Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Second Avenue
Talbot Street [Added
11-1-1978 by Ord. No.
1470]
North Pine Street
Tasker Avenue Both Fifth Avenue
Tasker Avenue Both Fourth Avenue
*Tasker Avenue Both Second Avenue
Tasker Avenue Both Sixth Avenue
Taylor Avenue [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord.
No. 1729]
Both Essex Avenue
Taylor Avenue Both Jefferson Avenue
Taylor Avenue [Added
3-24-2004 by Ord. No.
1854]
Both Lakens Avenue
Taylor Avenue, [Added
11-18-1981 by Ord.
No. 1525]
South South Chester Pike
Tenth Avenue East Swarthmore Avenue
*Terra Villa Lane Both Lakeview Drive
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:730
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Terra Villa Lane [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North Michell Street
Toth Drive Both Bullens Lane
Tyler Avenue North Morris Avenue
Tyler Avenue South Haverford Road
Tyler Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Wilson Avenue
*Unity Terrace Both Agnes Avenue
*Unity Terrace Both Mitchell Avenue
Unity Terrace [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East Kedron Avenue
*University Avenue Both Cornell Avenue
University Avenue
[Added 3-24-1982 by
Ord. No. 1532]
East Sylvan Avenue
Valley Road North Bullens Lane
Valley Road South MacDade Boulevard
Vauclain Avenue West Fairview Road
Vauclain Avenue [Added
12-19-1990 by Ord.
No. 1669]
Both Kelly Avenue
Vauclain Avenue Both Kossuth Avenue
Vauclain Avenue [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 1955]
Both Ohio Avenue
Village Road South Ninth Avenue
*Villanova Avenue Both Amherst Street
Villanova Avenue Both Michigan Avenue
Villanova Avenue Both Overbrook Avenue
Villanova Avenue Both Rosemont Avenue
Villanova Avenue Both Swarthmore Avenue
Villanova Avenue [Added
11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1641]
North Cornell Avenue
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:731
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Virginia Avenue Both Belmont Avenue
Virginia Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Reese Street
Virginia Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both MacDade Boulevard
Virginia Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Haverford Road
Wakefield Drive [Added
9-7-1977 by Ord. No.
1448]
Both Adair Road
Wakefield Drive [Added
9-7-1977 by Ord. No.
1448]
Both Post Road
Wakefield Drive [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Academy Avenue
Wakefield Drive [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West South Avenue
Walnut Street [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 1955]
East Amosland Road
Walter Street East Fairview Road
Walter Street East Randall Avenue
Washington Avenue Both Belmont Avenue
Washington Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
South Haverford Road
*Washington Avenue
[Added 12-4-1974 by
Ord. No. 1399]
West Morris Avenue
*Waverly Terrace Both Agnes Avenue
*Waverly Terrace Both Mitchell Avenue
Waverly Terrace [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East Kedron Avenue
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-17
294:732
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
Wendy Road [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
North Armstrong Avenue
West Circle South Haverford Road
*West Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North Haverford Road
Willowbend Drive
[Added 5-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 1828]
East Milmont Avenue
Willowbend Drive
[Added 5-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 1828]
South Scenic Drive
Willowbrook Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
North MacDade Boulevard
Wilson Avenue East Haverford Road
Wilson Avenue West Morris Avenue
Woodcrest Road North MacDade Boulevard
Woodcrest Road [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1884]
South Colson Avenue
*Woodland Avenue East Milmont Avenue
Worrall Street East Fairview Road
*Wyndom Terrace
[Added 4-15-1981 by
Ord. No. 1518]
Both Armstrong Avenue
Wyndom Terrace Both Grand Avenue
Wyndom Terrace Both Quaint Street
Wyndom Terrace [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North Franklin Avenue
Wyndom Terrace [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Academy Avenue
*Yates Avenue [Added
11-10-1976 by Ord.
No. 1433]
Both Jefferson Avenue
§ 299-17 UTILITY LINES § 299-17
294:733
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
[* Indicates three- or four-way stop intersection]
*Youngs Avenue [Added
11-10-1976 by Ord.
No. 1433]
Both Cottonwood Street
*Youngs Avenue [Added
11-10-1976 by Ord.
No. 1433]
Both Jefferson Avenue
Youngs Avenue [Added
12-19-1990 by Ord.
No. 1669]
Both Sherman Avenue
Youngs Avenue [Added
11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1641]
North Melrose Terrace
§ 299-18. Yield-right-of-way intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby established as yield-right-ofway
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the first-named highway as to face traffic approaching the secondnamed
highway in the direction or directions indicated. All vehicles and
tractors approaching any such intersection upon the first-named highway,
in the direction or directions indicated, shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on the second-named highway
so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time that the
operator of such vehicle or tractor is moving across or within such
intersection.
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 299-19. No-passing zones.
The zones described below are hereby established as no-passing zones and
it shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to pass any other vehicle
which is proceeding in the same direction:
Name of Highway Limits
Route 420 [Added 6-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 1884]
On the northbound side of Route
420 at Second Avenue
§ 299-20. Closing of certain highways to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor, except
a passenger vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any
traffic or towing any other vehicle) upon any of the portions of the highways
described below; provided, however, that nothing herein shall prohibit the
§ 299-17 RIDLEY CODE § 299-20
294:734
operation of any commercial vehicle or tractor upon any highway or portion
thereof listed below where such operation thereon shall be necessary in
order to pick up or deliver any goods, wares, merchandise or material from
or to any premises located upon any such highway or portion thereof.
Name of Highway Limits
Academy Avenue Between Amosland Road and
Muckinapates Creek
Amherst Avenue [Added 1-4-1978 by
Ord. No. 1453]
From Morton Avenue to Lehigh
Circle
Amosland Road [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
The 300 Block
Amosland Road [Added 3-24-1999 by
Ord. No. 1798]
Between MacDade Boulevard
and Forrester Avenue
Armstrong Avenue Between Quince Lane and
Amosland Road
Belmont Avenue [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
The 100 Block
Blackrock Road Entire length
Brighton Terrace Between MacDade Boulevard
and Armstrong Avenue
Cedar Avenue Between MacDade Boulevard
and Grand Avenue
Colson Road [Added 12-19-1990 by
Ord. No. 1669]
From Fairview Road to School
Lane
Conway Court Entire length
Conway Drive Between Blackrock Road and
Parklane Road
Edgewood Avenue [Added 1-15-1986
by Ord. No. 1592]
The 400 and 500 Blocks
Eighth Avenue [Added 1-4-1978 by
Ord. No. 1453]
From Swarthmore Avenue to
Ninth Avenue
Essex Avenue [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
The 1200 Block
Evergreen Avenue Between MacDade Boulevard
and Second Avenue
Fairmount Avenue [Added 6-22-2005
by Ord. No. 1884]
At Sellers Avenue, local traffic
only
Fifth Avenue [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
The 1700 Block and 1800 Block
Fourth Avenue [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
Between Kedron Avenue and
Sutton Avenue
§ 299-20 UTILITY LINES § 299-20
294:735
Name of Highway Limits
Francis Way [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
Between Milmont Avenue and
Manor Circle
Grace Road Between Fairview Road and
Blackrock Road
Greenway Road Between Hood Road and
Blackrock Road
Harding Avenue [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
The 300 Block
Hazel Avenue [Added 11-16-1988 by
Ord. 1641]
The 200 Block
Highland Terrace Between MacDade Boulevard
and Armstrong Avenue
Holmes Road Between MacDade Boulevard
and Academy Avenue
Hood Road Between Seventh Avenue and
Parklane Road
Jefferson Avenue [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
From MacDade Boulevard
Kelly Avenue [Added 9-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 1617]
Between Vauclain Avenue and
Milmont Avenue
Kendall Road Entire length
Lukens Avenue [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
The 1200 Block
Michigan Avenue Between Blackrock Road and
Parklane Road
Michigan Avenue [Added 3-24-1999
by Ord. No. 1798]
Westbound from Fairview Road
Milmont Avenue [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
From Mount Vernon Avenue to
Michigan Avenue
Mitchell Avenue [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
The 700 Block through 900
Block
Muhlenberg Avenue [Added 1-15-1986
by Ord. No. 1592]
Between Michigan Avenue and
Swarthmore Avenue
Ninth Avenue [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
At Edgewood Avenue
Norwood Avenue [Added 10-26-1994
by Ord. No. 1729]
In the 200 Block from MacDade
Boulevard to Baldwin Avenue
Orchard Avenue [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
Between Kedron Avenue and
Sutton Avenue
Raymond Circle Entire length
§ 299-20 RIDLEY CODE § 299-20
294:736
Name of Highway Limits
Raymond Road Entire length
Ridley Avenue Between MacDade Boulevard
and Second Avenue
Rosemont Lane [Added 3-24-1999 by
Ord. No. 1798]
On the 200 Block
Schiavello Drive Between Conway Road and
Blackrock Road
Second Avenue Between Sycamore Avenue and
Edgewood Avenue
Sherman Avenue [Added 12-19-1990
by Ord. No. 1669]
From Randall Avenue to Youngs
Avenue
Smiley Street [Added 10-26-1994 by
Ord. No. 1729]
From Chester Pike to Adams
Street
Smiley Street [Added 3-24-1999 by
Ord. No. 1798]
Southbound from Chester Pike
Sutton Avenue [Added 9-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 1617]
Between MacDade Boulevard
and Second Avenue
Sylvan Avenue [Added 9-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 1617]
Between Morton Avenue and
University Avenue
Waverly Terrace [Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
Between Kedron Avenue and the
Rutledge Borough line
Woodcrest Road [Added 12-19-1990
by Ord. No. 1669]
From MacDade Boulevard to
Colson Road
Youngs Avenue [Added 12-19-1990 by
Ord. No. 1669]
From Essex Avenue to the
railroad
§ 299-20.1. Bus traffic restricted on Valley Road. [Added 9-24-2003
by Ord. No. 1844]
A. Purpose and intent. Valley Road is a winding Township street that is
situated in close proximity to I-476 and, as such, is used as a shortcut to
I-476. Because of this, and in order to promote and protect the public
health, safety and general welfare, it is necessary to restriction bus
traffic on Valley Road.
B. Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any bus to travel on Valley Road in
either direction from Bullens Lane to MacDade Boulevard or from
MacDade Boulevard to Bullens Lane.
C. Exceptions. There shall be two exceptions to Subsection B of this
section:
(1) Buses shall be permitted to enter Valley Road from MacDade
Boulevard only if they turn right into the driveway of the premises
of 1307 MacDade Boulevard.
§ 299-20 UTILITY LINES § 299-20.1
294:737
§ 299-20.2. Traffic restricted under certain conditions. [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1924]
No motor vehicles shall enter under the following conditions at the
following locations:
Street Side Location Condition
Grant
Avenue
Both 1200 block at the
southwest corner from
Taylor Avenue to the
dead end at the Woodlyn
Elementary School
No traffic shall enter from
8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
from 2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m.
Haig
Avenue
Both 1900 block at Kedron
Avenue
Local traffic only from 3:00
p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Highland
Terrace
Both 300 block at MacDade
Boulevard
Local traffic only from 3:00
p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Orchard
Avenue
[Added
10-28-2009
by Ord.
No. 1955]
-- From Kedron Avenue No traffic shall enter from
3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Reese
Avenue
South 400 block at Baltimore
Avenue
Local traffic only
§ 299-21. Vehicle weight and class restrictions.
(2) Ridley School District buses that serve students that reside on
Valley Road or East and West Woodlyn Circle.
D. The Superintendent of Highways of the Township of Ridley is hereby
directed to erect official signs warning of the limitations imposed under
this section.
E. This section shall be enforced by the police officers of the Township of
Ridley in accordance with the provisions of the general Code of the
Township and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Weight over 55,000 pounds prohibited on all Township streets. [Added
6-27-1990 by Ord. No. 1657]
(1) Purpose. Pursuant to the authority granted it in the Motor Vehicle
Code 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902, the Township has determined, after
review and inspection by its Engineer, that Township streets, based
upon their construction specifications, may be damaged or
destroyed unless the permissible weight of vehicles is reduced to a
maximum weight of 55,000 pounds.
§ 299-20.1 RIDLEY CODE § 299-21
294:738
§ 299-22. Operation of vehicles on closed highways.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor upon
any highway in the Township that is under construction, resurfacing or
repair, in disregard of any official sign, barricade or notice that the same is
closed to vehicular traffic.
(2) Restriction. It should be unlawful for any person to operate a motor
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of 55,000 pounds on any
Township street.
(3) Posting. When conditions warrant it, in the judgment of the
Township Manager, restriction signs shall be erected and
maintained by the Superintendent of Highways at each end of a
designated street.
(4) Penalties. Any person operating a motor vehicle in violation of this
Subsection A is guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $75, except that any
person convicted of operating a vehicle with a gross weight in
excess of a posted weight shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of $150 plus $150 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in
excess of 3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable weight.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, traffic or tractor-trailer combination, having a gross
weight in excess of that herein respectively prescribed, upon any of the
highways or portions thereof described below, except for the purpose of
making local deliveries on that highway:
Name of Highway
Max. Gross
Weight
(tons) Location
Irving Lane Bridge [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
10 --
Michigan Avenue Bridge
[Added 1-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 1592]
12 Between Georgetown
Road and Girard Avenue
South Swarthmore Avenue
Bridge [Added 9-17-1986
Ord. No. 1604; amended
9-16-1987 by Ord. No.
1617]
5 --
C. All trucks of a Class 3 or higher classification are prohibited from
entering the following: [Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1924]
(1) Dolan's Alley at Hollis Street.
§ 299-21 UTILITY LINES § 299-23
294:739
§ 299-23. Play highways.
§ 299-24. Operation of vehicles on private roadways.169
§ 299-25. Accident reports.
The operator of any motor vehicle involved in an accident in the Township
and required by law to report such accident to any department or agency of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any other person required to make
such report, shall, at the time of making such report to the commonwealth,
A. The Board of Commissioners is hereby authorized to designate as play
highways, whenever it shall deem such action advisable, and for
whatever period of time directed by it, any portion of any highway in
the Township, whereon sledding and coasting shall be permitted. Such
highway shall be set apart for the purpose under the direction of the
Chairman of the Recreation Commission.
B. No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any play
highway at any time when such highway shall be so designated, except
in case of emergency, with special permission of the Board of
Commissioners or of the police officer in charge, who shall first clear
such play highway of all persons using such highway for the purpose for
which it was set aside.
C. The portions of highways described below are hereby established as
play highways during the times designated:
Name of Highway Side Hours Location
(Reserved)
A. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or tractor on any roadway or
driveway upon the grounds owned by any private person, firm or
corporation, for the purpose of through vehicular travel, without the
consent of the owner or other person in control or possession of said
property.
B. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or tractor on the driveways of
the Municipal Building of the Township of Ridley for the purpose of
through vehicular travel.
C. The Board of Township Commissioners, by resolution duly adopted,
shall designate such restricted private roadways or driveways and shall
erect, at the entrance of such roadways or driveways, an official sign
informing the public of said traffic regulation, which sign shall read,
"NO HIGHWAY - PARKING ENTRANCE ONLY." The cost of such official
signs and the cost of installing the same shall be borne by said property
owner.
169. Editor's Note: See also § 299-10, Avoidance of signals and signs prohibited.
§ 299-23 RIDLEY CODE § 299-25
294:740
make a written report to the Captain of Police of the Township containing
the same information.
§ 299-25 UTILITY LINES § 299-25
294:741

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 299-26. Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the Township of Ridley are hereby established as a
zone in which motor vehicles may remain standing without lights, and all
highways within such boundary limits are hereby designated as highways
where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 299-27. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space shall be marked off on any highway for the parking of
an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the
lines bounding such space.
§ 299-28. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the highways or parts thereof
described below except at the angle designated and only within the painted
stall lines. On all highways or portions thereof where angle parking is now
or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked
with the front thereof nearest the curb.
Name of Highway Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
Chester Pike South 60° From the easterly
curbline of Rodney Road
to a point 285 feet
easterly thereof
§ 299-29. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the highways or parts
thereof described below:
Name of Highway Side Location
Academy Avenue Both From Amosland Road to
Kedron Avenue
Acres Drive Both From the southerly curbline of
Chester Pike to a point 330
feet south thereof
Acres Drive East From Hoffman Road to Darby
Road
Adair Road [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
Southeast
and
Southwest
Here to corner at Academy
Avenue
§ 299-26 UTILITY LINES § 299-29
294:743
Name of Highway Side Location
Adams Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Both the 1200 Block and 1300
Block
Agnes Avenue [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1924]
East Across from 937 Agnes Avenue
north to the dead end
Amosland Road East From a point 230 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Haig
Avenue to a point 30 feet north
thereof
Amosland Road East From a point 143 feet north of
the northerly curbline of
Highland Avenue to a point 250
feet north thereof
Amosland Road East From the southerly curbline of
Franklin Avenue to a point 150
feet south thereof
Amosland Road [Added
2-26-1997 by Ord. No.
1757]
West From Academy Avenue to
Franklin Avenue
Amosland Road West From Forrester Avenue to Haig
Avenue
Amosland Road [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No.
1729]
West From MacDade Boulevard to
Academy Avenue
Anderson Avenue [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No.
1729]
East The 500 Block from Gilmore
Street to dead-end
Anderson Avenue East From the northerly curbline of
Gilmore Street to a point 125
feet north thereof
Arlington Avenue [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
-- Between signs, 300 Block
Arlington Avenue [Added
12-19-1990 by Ord. No.
1669]
Both On the 300 Block
Arlington Avenue West From MacDade Boulevard to
Reese Street
Armstrong Avenue North From Amosland Road to
Quince Lane
§ 299-29 RIDLEY CODE § 299-29
294:744
Name of Highway Side Location
Armstrong Avenue, 1900
block [Added 7-23-2014
by Ord. No. 2006]
Northeast Here to corner at Amosland
Road
Armstrong Avenue, 2100
block [Added 7-23-2014
by Ord. No. 2006]
Northwest
and
Southwest
Here to corner at Amosland
Road
Baldwin Avenue [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
South 82.5 feet east of Holmes Road
Balignac Avenue East From the southerly curbline of
Jefferson Avenue to a point 35
feet south thereof
Belmont Avenue Name of
Highway
South Side From the westerly curbline of
Arlington Avenue to a point
100 feet west thereof Location
Belmont Avenue West From Arlington Avenue to
MacDade Boulevard
Belmont Avenue [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
North In front of Milmont Fire House
Blackrock Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Between Michigan Avenue and
Conway Drive
Braxton Road East From Clymer Lane to Rodney
Road
Bridge Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Between Hoffman Road and
Stoney Hill Road
Brighton Terrace [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No.
1729]
East The 300 Block from MacDade
Boulevard to Academy Avenue
Brook Avenue [Added
9-7-1977 by Ord. No.
1448]
East 800 Block, from Pershing
Avenue to Highland Avenue
Broomall Street Both From Morton Avenue to Monta
Vista Avenue
Buchanan Avenue West From MacDade Boulevard for a
distance of 50 feet south
Buchanan Avenue [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
West 30 feet from the corner of
MacDade Boulevard
§ 299-29 UTILITY LINES § 299-29
294:745
Name of Highway Side Location
Bullens Lane [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
-- In the 1300 Block, 30 feet from
its intersection with Fairview
Road
Bullens Lane Both From Chester Pike to the
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad
right-of-way line
Cedar Avenue Both From the northerly curbline of
MacDade Boulevard to a point
260 feet north thereof
Cherry Lane [Added
3-24-2004 by Ord. No.
1854]
South Here to corner at Morton
Avenue
Chester Pike [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
-- At 120 Chester Pike
Chester Pike [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1884]
East In the crosswalk at Rodney
Road
Chester Pike [Added
7-28-1999 by Ord. No.
1800]
North/South From Fairview Road to Ridley
Creek
Chester Pike North From Ridley Creek to Bullens
Lane
Chester Pike North From the easterly curbline of
Angelo Avenue to a point 50
feet east thereof
Chester Pike South From Stoney Creek to the
Borough of Ridley Park line
Chester Pike South From a point 200 feet west of
westerly curbline of Rodney
Road to a point 540 feet west
thereof
Circle Terrace [Added
3-2-1977 by Ord. No.
1440]
East From Sixth Avenue for a
distance of 150 feet
Clayton Road [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1924]
North Between signs at corner of
Holmes Road
Clayton Road South From Stanbridge Road to
Holmes Road
Clymer Lane East From Rodney Road to Darby
Road
§ 299-29 RIDLEY CODE § 299-29
294:746
Name of Highway Side Location
Colson Road South From Fairview Road to School
Lane
Colson Road [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1884]
West From Woodcrest Road to
School Lane
Colwell Road East From Fifth Avenue to the
Colwell Circle cul-de-sac
Constitution Avenue Both Entire length
Cornell Avenue [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
South Morton Avenue, no parking
here to corner
Crum Creek Drive West Entire length
Dale Road [Added
1-4-1978 by Ord. No.
1453]
West From a point 100 feet north of
Franklin Avenue to a point 100
feet south of Franklin Avenue
Darby Road North From the Prospect Park
Borough line to Acres Drive
Darby Road [Added
3-24-2004 by Ord. No.
1854]
-- Between signs in front of 543
Darby Road
Dartmouth Circle [Added
11-10-1976 by Ord. No.
1433]
Both From Morton Avenue for 15
feet
Leedom Community Center
Driveway [Added
9-16-1987 by Ord. No.
1617]
North Off of Darby Road
Dean Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East Between the B&O Railroad and
East Rodgers Street
Dellacamera Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 1592]
North Between Fairview Road and
Hunter Lane
Dolan's Alley [Added
5-22-2002 by Ord. No.
1828]
Both Entire length
East Lane [Added
6-18-1986 by Ord. No.
1595]
South From North Lane to its end at
Darby Creek
Edgewood Avenue [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
North In the 900 Block
§ 299-29 UTILITY LINES § 299-29
294:747
Name of Highway Side Location
Edgewood Avenue [Added
3-26-2008 by Ord. No.
1937]
East The 200 block from MacDade
Boulevard 100 feet south to
and including a driveway, no
parking here to corner
Edgewood Avenue [Added
1-15-1986
West Between Lincoln Street and
Second Avenue
Edgewood Avenue [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1924]
West At the driveway in the 200
block to corner at MacDade
Boulevard
Eighth Avenue North From Edgewood Avenue to
Evergreen Avenue
Elder Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North The 1900 Block
Eleventh Avenue [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1884]
Both Here to corner at Swarthmore
Avenue
Emlen Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Between Randall Street and
Youngs Avenue
Essex Avenue [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
Both Between signs, 1300 Block of
Essex Avenue at Fairview Road
Evergreen [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
Northeast Here to corner at Eleventh
Avenue
Fairview Road Both From MacDade Boulevard to
Fifth Avenue
Fairview Road East From Chester Pike to MacDade
Boulevard
Fairview Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592; amended
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
East From Fifth Avenue to Michigan
Avenue
Fairview Road [Added
11-17-1982 by Ord. No.
1538]
East From its intersection with
Holland Street to a point 125
feet south thereof
Fairview Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West Between Kendall Road and
Michigan Avenue
§ 299-29 RIDLEY CODE § 299-29
294:748
Name of Highway Side Location
Fairview Road [Added
6-18-1986 by Ord. No.
1595]
West For a distance of 60 feet north
of Grace Road
Fairview Road West From Chester Pike to Holland
Street
Fairview Road West From the southerly curbline of
Grant Avenue to a point 85 feet
south thereof
Fairview Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West In front of 823 Fairview Road
Fairview Road [Added
7-28-1999 by Ord. No.
1800]
West From Seventh Avenue to
Fairview Court
Fairview Road [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No.
1729]
West North of Seventh Avenue
within 30 feet of the corner
Fifth Avenue [Added
9-23-1992 by Ord. No.
1695]
South East of Fairview Road within
30 feet of the corner
Fizzano Alley East From a point 82 feet south of
the southerly curbline of
Holland Street to a point 165
feet south thereof
Fourth Avenue South From Kedron Avenue to Sutton
Avenue
Foxglove Drive [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1924]
-- In front of 616 and 620
Foxglove Drive
Franklin Avenue North From Amosland Road to South
Avenue
Franklin Avenue North From Kedron Avenue to
Amosland Road
Franklin Avenue North From Kedron Avenue to
Mitchell Avenue
Franklin Avenue [Added
1-4-1978 by Ord. No.
1453]
South For a distance of 90 feet at its
intersection with Kedron
Avenue
Franklin Avenue South From South Avenue to Dale
Road
§ 299-29 UTILITY LINES § 299-29
294:749
Name of Highway Side Location
Franklin Avenue South From the easterly curbline of
Amosland Road to a point 125
feet east thereof
Franklin Avenue South From the easterly curbline of
Kedron Avenue to a point 50
feet east thereof
Garfield Avenue [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
Southeast
and
Southwest
Here to corner at Haverford
Road
Gilmore Street North From Morton Avenue to Monta
Vista Avenue
Grand Avenue [Added
9-23-1992 by Ord. No.
1695]
North East of Wyndom Terrace within
30 feet of the corner
Grand Avenue [Added
9-23-1992 by Ord. No.
1695]
North West of South Avenue within
30 feet of the corner
Grant Avenue [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
-- Starting 30 feet west of its
intersection with Fairview
Road for a distance of 100 feet
west thereof
Grant Avenue North From School Lane to Fairview
Road
Green Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
West Between signs to the rear of
the firehouse
Haller Road West/ South From Acres Drive to Darby
Road
Haller Road [Added
12-18-1991 by Ord. No.
1680]
-- Entrance to alleyway
Hannum Avenue Both From Holmes Road to
Hutchinson Terrace
Harper Avenue [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
North 30 feet from the corner of
Fairview Road
Haverford Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East Between Arlington Avenue and
MacDade Boulevard
Haverford Road [Added
6-4-1975 by Ord. No.
1413]
North From the east curbline of
South Morris Avenue to a point
232 feet west thereof
§ 299-29 RIDLEY CODE § 299-29
294:750
Name of Highway Side Location
Haverford Road North From the easterly curbline of
Fairview Road to a point 50
feet east thereof
Haverford Road South From Arlington Avenue to
Virginia Avenue
Hazel Avenue [Added
4-15-1981 by Ord. No.
1518]
East From MacDade Boulevard to a
point 142 feet south thereof
Hazel Avenue [Added
4-15-1981 by Ord. No.
1518]
West From MacDade Boulevard to a
point 68 feet south thereof
Highland Terrace [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Between MacDade Boulevard
and Hannum Avenue
Highland Terrace [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord. No.
1955]
East From MacDade Boulevard to
Academy Avenue
Hoffman Road East From Acres Drive to Darby
Road
Holland Street Both From South Morris Avenue to
Hollis Avenue
Holland Street North From Angelo Avenue to
Fairview Road
Holland Street [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No.
1729]
North From Morris Avenue to Sloan
Street
Holland Street North From the easterly curbline of
South Morris Avenue to the
Ridley Park Borough line
Holland Street South From the easterly curbline of
Fairview Road to a point 50
feet east thereof
Holland Street [Added
5-5-1976 by Ord. No.
1426]
South From the southeasterly
curbline of South Morris
Avenue to a point 100 feet east
thereof
Holland Street South From a point 100 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Taylor
Avenue to a point 100 feet east
of the easterly curbline of
Taylor Avenue
§ 299-29 UTILITY LINES § 299-29
294:751
Name of Highway Side Location
Holland Street [Added
2-26-1997 by Ord. No.
1757]
-- At corner of Randall Street
Hollis Street [Added
5-22-2002 by Ord. No.
1828]
North In private drieway behind the
Laundry Basket
Holmes Road [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1924]
East The 300 block from Academy
Avenue to MacDade Boulevard
Holmes Road East From a point 35 feet north of
the northerly curbline of
Baldwin Avenue to a point 35
feet south of the southerly
curbline of Baldwin Avenue
Holmes Road East From MacDade Boulevard to
Sixth Avenue
Holmes Road East From the Baltimore and Ohio
Railroad to Hannum Avenue
Holmes Road [Added
8-20-1980 by Ord. No.
1497]
West From the intersection of
MacDade Boulevard in the 200
Block
Howard Road [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No.
1729]
West South of Secane Road within
30 feet of the corner
Hunter Lane [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
East Entire length
Jefferson Avenue Both From the easterly curbline of
Fairview Road to a point 100
feet east thereof
Kedron Avenue East Entire length
Kedron Avenue [Added
1-4-1978 by Ord. No.
1453]
East For a distance of 90 feet at its
intersection with Franklin
Avenue
Kedron Avenue [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1924]
West In front of 505 Kedron Avenue
Kedron Avenue West From a point 200 feet south of
the southerly curbline of
Melrose Avenue to a point 200
feet north of the northerly
curbline of Melrose Avenue
§ 299-29 RIDLEY CODE § 299-29
294:752
Name of Highway Side Location
Kossuth Avenue Both From Reese Street to MacDade
Boulevard
Kossuth Avenue [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1884]
West For a distance 100 feet south
from MacDade Boulevard
Lakeview Circle [Added
2-26-1997 by Ord. No.
1757]
-- Anywhere on Lakeview Circle
Lakeview Drive [Added
5-22-2002 by Ord. No.
1828]
Both Perry Street, no parking here
to corner
Lakeview Drive Inside
perimeter
Entire length of circle of said
street
Lakeview Drive [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
-- 500 Block, no parking here to
corner
Larkspur Lane Both From the easterly curbline of
South Avenue to a point 35 feet
east thereof
Lehigh Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South 75 feet east of Milmont Avenue
Liberty Road Both Entire length
Linda Vista Avenue East From the northerly curbline of
MacDade Boulevard to a point
50 feet north thereof
Locust Road [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1924]
North Between signs at corner of
Holmes Road
Locust Road North From Stanbridge Road to
Holmes Road
Lynn Road West/ South From Acres Drive to Darby
Road
Lombard Avenue [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
North Between Amosland Road and
Price Street
Lukens Avenue [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord. No.
1955]
Both From the 1200 block to the
corner of Fairview Road
Lynn Road [Added
12-18-1991 by Ord. No.
1680]
-- Entrance to alleyway
§ 299-29 UTILITY LINES § 299-29
294:753
Name of Highway Side Location
MacDade Boulevard Both From Fairview Road west to
Jefferson Avenue
MacDade Boulevard Both From Kedron Avenue east to
the Glenolden Borough line
MacDade Boulevard
[Added 1-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 1592]
South Between Jefferson Avenue and
Bullens Lane
MacDade Boulevard
[Added 1-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 1592]
South Between School Lane and
Wood crest Road
MacDade Boulevard South From a point 35 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Green
Street to a point 35 feet west
of the westerly curbline of
Green Street
Maddock Street [Added
6-4-1975 by Ord. No.
1413]
East Entire length
Maple Avenue Both From Academy Avenue to
MacDade Boulevard
Marlin Street Both From the easterly curbline of
Morton Avenue to a point 25
feet east thereof
Melrose Terrace [Added
11-16-1988 by Ord. No.
1641]
North The 1880 Block
Melrose Terrace South From Mitchell Avenue to
Kedron Avenue
Mitchell Avenue [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
-- Between signs, in front of 861
Mitchell Avenue
Michell Street Inside
perimeter
Entire length of circle of said
street
Michigan Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both Between Raymond Road and
Fairview Road
Michigan Avenue Both From Morton Avenue to
Villanova Avenue
Michigan Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Between Fairview Road and
Dougherty Drive
§ 299-29 RIDLEY CODE § 299-29
294:754
Name of Highway Side Location
Mildred Avenue South From Taylor Avenue to
Fairview Road
Miller Street [Added
6-18-1986 by Ord. No.
1595]
North For a distance of 75 feet east of
the intersection with Maddock
Street
Miller Street South From Smiley Street to
Maddock Street
Milmont Avenue Both From MacDade Boulevard to
Mount Vernon Avenue
Milmont Avenue [Added
9-23-1992 by Ord. No.
1695]
East South of MacDade Boulevard
within 30 feet of the corner
Milmont Avenue [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1884]
East 800 block
Milmont Avenue [Added
6-6-1979 by Ord. No.
1481; amended
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
West From Woodlawn Avenue to
Michigan Avenue
Monta Vista Avenue [Added
7-28-1999 by Ord. No.
1800]
East 300 Block, no parking here to
corner
Monta Vista Avenue [Added
7-28-1999 by Ord. No.
1800]
West From MacDade Boulevard to
Lincoln Street
Morris Avenue, South
[Added 2-26-1997 by Ord.
No. 1757]
-- At corner of Haverford Road
Morris Avenue, South
[Added 2-26-1997 by Ord.
No. 1757]
-- At corner of Holland Street
Morris Avenue, South West From Holland Street to
Chester Pike
Morris Circle [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East Up to 200 feet from Haverford
Road
Morton Avenue [Added
5-5-1976 by Ord. No.
1426]
Both From MacDade Boulevard to
Ridley Park Borough line
Morton Avenue West From MacDade Boulevard to
Lincoln Avenue
§ 299-29 UTILITY LINES § 299-29
294:755
Name of Highway Side Location
Morton Avenue West From Swarthmore Avenue to
Amherst Avenue
Mount Vernon Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 1592]
Both Between Baltimore Avenue and
Milmont Avenue
Mount Vernon Avenue
[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1924]
Both Milmont Avenue, no parking
here to corner
Mount Vernon Avenue
[Added 9-26-2001 by Ord.
No. 1817]
-- Ohio Avenue, no parking here
to corner
Mount Vernon Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 1592]
North The 600 Block
Nall Lane [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1924]
East Between signs at 310 Seventh
Avenue
Ninth Avenue North From Edgewood Avenue to
Morton Avenue
North Lane [Amended
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East From Darby Creek to Orchard
Avenue
Parklane Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
East Between Seventh Avenue and
Fairview Road
Pearl Circle [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
South Pearl Avenue, no parking here
to corner
Perry Street Inside
perimeter
Entire length of the circle of
said street
Pershing Avenue North From Amosland Road to
Quince Lane
Pine Street [Added
2-26-1997 by Ord. No.
1757]
North From Amosland Road to Price
Street
Price Street [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
-- Corner of Lombard Avenue
Princeton Avenue [Added
6-4-1975 by Ord. No.
1413]
East Entire length
§ 299-29 RIDLEY CODE § 299-29
294:756
Name of Highway Side Location
Princeton Avenue [Added
12-19-1990 by Ord. No.
1669]
West On the 100 Block
Private Road [Added
3-26-2008 by Ord. No.
1937]
Both The north side of Bullens Lane
for a distance of 30 feet in each
direction, no parking here to
corner
Randall Avenue [Added
11-18-1981 by Ord. No.
1525]
Both In the 100 Block, from
Sherman Avenue to Essex
Avenue
Randall Avenue East From Holland Street to Worrall
Street
Randall Avenue West From Sherman Avenue to
Essex Avenue
Reese Street [Added
12-19-1990 by Ord. No.
1669]
South On the 500 Block
Ridley Avenue [Amended
9-7-1977 by Ord. No.
1448]
Both From the northerly curbline of
MacDade Boulevard to a point
150 feet north thereof
Ridley Avenue [Amended
9-7-1977 by Ord. No.
1448]
Both From the southerly curbline of
MacDade Boulevard to a point
150 feet south thereof
Rio Vista Avenue West From the northerly curbline of
MacDade Boulevard to a point
60 feet north thereof
Rodney Road [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1924]
Both Entrance to Leedom Fire
Company driveway and
bordering Leedom Little
League Field (north side) (fire
lane)
Rodney Road East From Braxton Road to Darby
Road
Rodney Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Inside
perimeter
A grass plot between Chester
Pike and Clymer Lane
Ross Place, West North From Haller Road to Clymer
Lane
Rutledge Avenue [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
-- In front of 310 Rutledge
Avenue
§ 299-29 UTILITY LINES § 299-29
294:757
Name of Highway Side Location
Rutledge Avenue [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
Southwest Between signs, 300 Block of
Rutledge Avenue at MacDade
Boulevard
School Lane East From Colson Road to Grant
Avenue
Schoolside Lane [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
West Entire length
Secane Avenue Both From South Avenue to Whitney
Road
Second Avenue South From Kedron Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
Seventh Avenue North From the westerly curbline of
Swarthmore Avenue to a point
40 feet west thereof
Seventh Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North The 1100 Block between
Colwell Road and Parklane
Road
Seventh Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by by Ord. No.
1592]
North The 1200 Block between
Colwell Road and Fairview
Road
Seventh Avenue South From the westerly curbline of
Swarthmore Avenue to a point
65 feet west thereof
Seventh Avenue [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
South Swarthmore Avenue, no
parking here to corner
Seventh Avenue Circle
[Repealed 9-26-2001 by
Ord. No. 1817]
Sherman Avenue [Added
6-18-1986 by Ord. No.
1595]
North From Fairview Road to Youngs
Avenue
Sherman Avenue [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
North Here to corner west of Youngs
Avenue
Sherman Avenue [Added
9-16-1987 by Ord. No.
1617]
North Between Youngs Avenue and
Randall Avenue
Sixth Avenue [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord. No.
1955]
North From the corner of Jenks
Avenue to a point 15 feet west
thereof
§ 299-29 RIDLEY CODE § 299-29
294:758
Name of Highway Side Location
Sixth Avenue [Amended
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
North From the easterly curbline of
Swarthmore Avenue to a point
100 feet east thereof
Smiley Street Both From the southerly curbline of
Chester Pike to a point 50 feet
south thereof
Smiley Street East From Chester Pike to Adams
Street
Smiley Street [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592; amended
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
West Between Chester Pike and
Gibbons Street
South Avenue Both From the Upper Darby
Township line to a point 1,000
feet south thereof
Stanbridge Road East From Grant Avenue to Holmes
Road
Stewart Avenue [Added
5-22-2002 by Ord. No.
1828]
Both From Route 291 to Interstate
95
Stockton Circle Inside
perimeter
Entire length
Stoney Hill Road East Entire length
Stoney Hill Road [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No.
1729]
West South of Bridge Road within 30
feet of the corner
Sutton Avenue [Added
3-26-2008 by Ord. No.
1937]
Both The 200 block at MacDade
Boulevard, no parking here to
corner
Sutton Avenue East From the northerly curbline of
MacDade Boulevard to a point
150 feet north thereof
Swarthmore Avenue Both From the northerly curbline of
MacDade Boulevard to a point
100 feet north thereof
Swarthmore Avenue East From Sixth Avenue to Seventh
Avenue
Swarthmore Avenue
[Added 9-26-2001 by Ord.
No. 1817]
East 300 Block
§ 299-29 UTILITY LINES § 299-29
294:759
Name of Highway Side Location
Swarthmore Avenue
[Added 7-23-2014 by Ord.
No. 2006]
Northeast
and
Southeast
Here to corner
Swarthmore Avenue West From the northerly curbline of
Sixth Avenue to a point 100
feet north thereof
Swarthmore Avenue, South
[Added 10-26-1994 by
Ord. No. 1729]
East From Chester Pike to 500 feet
south of Chester Pike
Swarthmore Avenue, South
[Added 3-24-1999 by Ord.
No. 1798]
-- In front of No. 1, South
Swarthmore Avenue
Swarthmore Avenue, South
[Added 3-24-1999 by Ord.
No. 1798]
-- In front of No. 4, South
Swarthmore Avenue
Swarthmore Avenue, South
[Added 3-24-1999 by Ord.
No. 1798]
-- In front of No. 5, South
Swarthmore Avenue
Sycamore Avenue East From the northerly curbline of
MacDade Boulevard to a point
68 feet north thereof
Terra Villa Lane Inside
perimeter
Entire length of the circle of
said street
Unity Terrace [Added
9-23-1992 by Ord. No.
1695]
South West of Agnes Avenue to the
Rutledge Borough line
University Avenue [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
East Sylvan Avenue, no parking
here to corner
Valley Road Both From MacDade Boulevard to
East Woodlyn Circle
Valley Road [Added
2-26-1997 by Ord. No.
1757]
-- At corner of Bullens Lane
Valley Road [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
East 30 feet from the intersection of
Bullens Lane
Valley Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
North Between Woodlyn Circle and
MacDade Boulevard
Valley Road [Added
5-22-2002 by Ord. No.
1828]
West Bullens Lane, no parking here
to corner
§ 299-29 RIDLEY CODE § 299-29
294:760
Name of Highway Side Location
Villanova Avenue [Added
8-1-1979 by Ord. No.
1483]
East From Rosemont Lane to the
dead-end
Wakefield Drive [Added
11-1-1978 by Ord. No.
1470]
North From South Avenue to a point
85 feet west thereof
West Ross Place [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592; amended
11-16-1988 by Ord. No.
1641]
South Between Haller Road and
Stockton Circle
West Ross Place [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No.
1729]
South East of Haller Road within 30
feet of the corner
Whitney Road Both From Franklin Avenue to
Secane Road
Whitney Road [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No.
1729]
East South of Secane Road within
30 feet of the corner
Whitney Road [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
West 100 feet south from the
intersection of Secane Road
Willard Drive [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord. No.
1955]
-- In front of 250 Willard Drive
Willard Drive [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord. No.
1955]
-- In front of 253 Willlard Drive
Willow Way [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
Both No parking here to corner
Wilson Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
South Between Morris Avenue and
Haverford Road
Worrall Street [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1798]
South 30 feet from the corner of
Fairview Road
Worrell Street [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No.
1817]
West No parking here to corner
Wyndom Terrace [Added
9-23-1992 by Ord. No.
1695]
East North of Grand Avenue within
30 feet of the corner
§ 299-29 UTILITY LINES § 299-29
294:761
Name of Highway Side Location
Youngs Avenue [Amended
9-16-1987 by Ord. No.
1617]
East Between Essex Avenue and
Sherman Avenue
Youngs Avenue East From a point 41 feet north of
the northerly curbline of
Sherman Avenue to a point 12
feet north thereof
§ 299-30. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified below of any
day, except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, upon any of the highways or
parts of highways described below:
Name of Highway Side Hours Location
Academy Avenue
[Added 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1924]
North 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From South Avenue to
Wyndom Terrace
Holland Street North 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From Fairview Road to
Angelo Avenue
MacDade Boulevard Both 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.;
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Entire length
Morton Avenue
[Added 9-26-2001 by
Ord. No. 1817]
Both 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
From Sixth Avenue to
Ninth Avenue
Randall Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Sunday
Between Sherman
Avenue and Essex
Avenue
Rio Vista Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.;
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Broomall Street
to Marlin Street
Secane Road [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 1955]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
From South Avenue to
Dale Road
Secane Road [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord.
No. 1798]
Both 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Between Whitney Road
and South Avenue
§ 299-29 RIDLEY CODE § 299-30
294:762
Name of Highway Side Hours Location
Seventh Avenue
[Added 7-28-1999 by
Ord. No. 1800]
South 6:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
From Fairview Road to
Donna Avenue
Seventh Avenue
[Added 5-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 1828]
South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
At Morton Avenue
Sixth Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 1592]
North 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Monta Vista
Avenue to Morton
Avenue
Sixth Avenue [Added
7-28-1999 by Ord.
No. 1800]
South 6:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
From Fairview Road to
Donna Avenue
South Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 1592]
Both All, except
Sunday
In front of 640 and 603
Springfield Avenue
[Added 10-26-1994
by Ord. No. 1729]
West 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
except
Sunday
On the 200 Block from
MacDade Boulevard to
Second Avenue
Swarthmore Avenue
[Added 3-24-2004 by
Ord. No. 1854]
South 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Up to 300 feet south of
Chester Pike
Valley Road East 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Virginia Avenue
[Added 11-16-1988
by Ord. No. 1641]
East 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 am.
The 400 Block
Woodland Avenue
[Added 3-24-2004 by
Ord. No. 1854]
North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Entire length
§ 299-31. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked at any
time upon any of the highways or parts of highways described below for
longer than the time indicated:
Name of Highway Side
Time
Limit Location
Academy Avenue North 2 hrs. From Wakefield Drive to
Muckinapates Creek
Chester Pike [Repealed 11-1-1978 by Ord. No. 1470]
§ 299-30 UTILITY LINES § 299-31
294:763
Name of Highway Side
Time
Limit Location
Chester Pike [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 1592]
South 15 min. In front of the Crum Lynn
Post Office
Dale Road Both 2 hrs. From Franklin Avenue to
Secane Road
Fairview Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 1592]
South 30 min. At southwest corner of
Jefferson Avenue
Fairview Road [Added
3-24-1982 by Ord.
No. 1532]
West 15 min. From Holland Street to
Chester Pike
Forrest Avenue North 2 hrs. From Kedron Avenue to
Amosland Road
Franklin Avenue North 1 hr. From the westerly
curbline of South Avenue
to a point 51 feet west
thereof
Franklin Avenue North 2 hrs. From Mitchell Avenue to
Agnes Avenue
Franklin Avenue South 2 hrs. From Amosland Road to
Agnes Avenue
Howard Road [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 1592]
Both 2 hrs. Between Secane Road
and Franklin Avenue
Howard Road [Added
3-24-2004 by Ord.
No. 1854]
Both 2 hrs.
between
9:00 a.m.
and 5:00
p.m.
At Secane Road
Kedron Avenue Both 2 hrs. From the Morton Borough
line to Sixth Avenue
MacDade Boulevard Both 15 min. From Stanbridge Road to
Amosland Road
Mitchell Avenue Both 2 hrs. From the Morton Borough
line to Unity Terrace
Morton Avenue170 East 15 min. From MacDade Boulevard
to Lincoln Avenue
170. Note: Parking is limited in this location only from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m. of any day
§ 299-31 RIDLEY CODE § 299-31
294:764
Name of Highway Side
Time
Limit Location
Providence Road Both 2 hrs. From the Upper Darby
Township line to the
Springfield Township line
Rio Vista Avenue
[Added 1-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1592]
West 2 hrs. Between MacDade
Boulevard and Lincoln
Street
Rodney Road [Added
5-22-2002 by Ord.
No. 1828]
West 15 min. From Chester Pike to
driveway behind Davis'
Trading Post
Rutledge Avenue
[Added 6-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 1884]
Both 1 hr. 200 block of Rutledge
Avenue
South Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 1592]
East 15 min. In front of 934 South
Avenue
Stewart Place [Added
8-20-1980 by Ord.
No. 1497]
Both 2 hrs. Entire length
Sutton Avenue East 2 hrs. From Second Avenue to a
point 100 feet south of
the southerly curbline of
MacDade Boulevard
Taylor Avenue, South [Repealed 11-1-1978 by Ord. No. 1470]
Whitney Road [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord.
No. 1798]
Both 2 hrs. On the 1000 Block
§ 299-32. Special purpose parking zones.
The following are hereby established as special purpose parking zones, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or tractor or to allow
the same to remain parked in any such zone except as specifically provided
for such zone.
Name of Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
(Reserved)
§ 299-33. Permit parking; residents only. [Added 6-6-1979 by Ord.
No. 1481]
A. Parking by nonresidents shall not be permitted on the following
highways:
§ 299-31 UTILITY LINES § 299-33
294:765
Name of Highway Location
Adams Street Entire length
Cedar Avenue 200 Block
Edgewood Avenue 200 Block and 300 Block
Evergreen Avenue 200 Block and 300 Block
Fernwood Avenue 200 Block and 300 Block
Folsum Avenue 200 Block and 300 Block
Green Avenue 200 Block
Hazel Avenue 200 Block and 300 Block
Lee Circle Entire length
Norwood Avenue 200 Block
Ridley Avenue 200 Block and 300 Block
Rutledge Avenue 200 Block and 300 Block
Springfield Avenue 200 Block and 300 Block
Stanbridge Road 200 Block
Sutton Avenue 200 Block and 300 Block
Swarthmore Avenue 200 Block and 300 Block
Sycamore Avenue 200 Block and 300 Block
Sylvania Avenue 200 Block and 300 Block
Tasker Avenue 200 Block and 300 Block
B. Regulations for the implementation of this section (Permit Parking
Ordinance No. 1481 of the Township of Ridley) shall be as follows:
(1) Preliminary evaluation. When complaints concerning parking
problems in residential areas near apartment, commercial or office
areas are received by any Township agency, they should be referred
to the member of Township Commissioners from whose districts
the complaint originated. That member of Township
Commissioners shall in turn introduce to the Commissioners a
resolution providing that the street subject to the complaint be
evaluated as to its applicability to the criteria of this section
(Ordinance No. 1481). Upon passage of such a resolution, the
matter shall be referred to the Captain of Police or his designee for
initial evaluation. [Amended 2-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2014]
(2) Parking study. If the initial evaluation indicates that this section
(Ordinance No. 1481) might apply, a parking study will be made.
Each street segment of one block in length which could be eligible
for permit parking will be inventoried for the potential number of
parking spaces. Then a parked vehicle count will be made on a
weekday when the greatest number of parked cars is anticipated. If
more than 75% of the potential spaces are occupied by parked
§ 299-33 RIDLEY CODE § 299-33
294:766
vehicles, then no further parked vehicle counts will be made. If
nearly 75% of the spaces are parked and it is reasonably expected
that 75% could be met on a different weekday or a different time
of the day, then additional parked vehicle counts will be made
until an average of more than 75% is found or finally rejected.
On those street segments of one block in length that have 75%
of the spaces actually parked, a study will be made to determine
if a number of drivers of parked vehicles exceeding 25% of the
potential spaces in that block left their vehicle to use a district
in which apartment, commercial or industrial uses are permitted.
This will be determined by observing the operators of the vehicles
after they have parked. If this is not possible, then an on-thestreet
interview will be conducted by the Captain of Police or his
designee. [Amended 2-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2014]
(3) Township Commissioners' resolution. The blocks that meet the
above criteria will be submitted to the Public Safety Committee of
the Township Commissioners on a form which designates the block,
the number of potential parking spaces, the date and the
percentage of the potential number of parking spaces that were
occupied by users of apartment, commercial or industrial districts
and a recommendation as to the appropriate hours during which
restricted parking should apply. The Public Safety Committee will
verify that the zoning is of the category required in this section
(Ordinance No. 1481). If all requirements are met, the Chairman of
the Public Safety Committee will prepare the appropriate
resolution for the consideration of the Township Board of
Commissioners. [Amended 2-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2014]
(4) Parking permits. After passage of a resolution adding a designated
street or segment thereof, a list of every residential address within
that street segment will be prepared by the Chief Administrative
Officer. A copy of that list will immediately be supplied to the
Captain of Police. Thereafter, a form letter will be sent over the
Chief Administrative Officer's signature to every residential
address within the eligible street segment notifying them that they
are in a permit parking area and must go to the Public Safety
Building to receive a parking permit sticker for each vehicle which
is registered at that address. The letter will advise residents that
permit parking will be effective 30 days from the date thereof.
Residents must furnish proof in the form of vehicle registrations for
each vehicle for which they claim a parking sticker. This form letter
will also furnish information on the eligibility for a parking permit
of visitors, day guests and contractors or other persons transacting
business with a resident in a permit parking district.
(5) Signing. On the 30th day after issuance of the notice letter, the
Director of Public Works or his designee will post the affected
street segments with "Permit Parking Only, 8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.
Weekdays" (or any such other time limitations as the parking study
§ 299-33 UTILITY LINES § 299-33
294:767
§ 299-34. Parking or standing of commercial vehicles.171
determination might warrant). On streets that are less than 36 feet
in width, "No Parking Anytime" signs may be necessary on one side
of the street in the narrow area.
(6) Visitor permits. Each residence may secure up to two visitor
permits for overnight visitors for up to 30 days. Any person in an
unmarked vehicle who does business with a resident of a permit
parking district may secure a permit from the Public Safety
Building. A service or delivery vehicle does not require a permit.
The Captain of Police or his designee will issue permits for social
gatherings or other uses consistent with the residential character
of the area for one day and for up to four hours on that day. The
number of such permits issued for a street segment shall not
exceed 50% of the potential parking spaces in that segment. The
Captain of Police will be furnished with the number of potential
parking spaces in each block at the time the permit parking signs
are posted.
(7) Reevaluation process. A petition signed by a majority of the
residences of a street segment will automatically except the street
segment from permit parking until such time as a thorough
reevaluation of the applicability of the standards to that particular
street segment and a public hearing on that applicability has been
made. Consideration will be given to a written request by a lesser
number than the majority if hardship or other adverse
circumstances have resulted from the permit parking.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a commercial vehicle or
permit it to stand, whether attended or unattended, upon any of the
highways or portion of highways described below.
Name of Street Side Location
Bullens Lane [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both The 200 Block
Harfman Drive [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both The 1800 Block
Hazel Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both The 500 Block
Holmes Road West From the northerly curbline of
MacDade Boulevard to a point
307 feet north thereof
171. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 202, Parking, Off-Street, Art. I, Parking of Commercial
Vehicles.
§ 299-33 RIDLEY CODE § 299-34
294:768
Name of Street Side Location
Ladomus Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both The 100 Block
Meadow Road [Added
5-22-2002 by Ord. No.
1828]
Both The 1200 Block
Villanova Avenue [Added
1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592]
Both The 1000 Block
Villanova Circle [Added
11-1-1978 by Ord. No.
1470]
Both From the westerly curbline of
Villanova Avenue around the
circle and back to the easterly
curbline of Villanova Avenue
B. Continuous parking. [Amended 10-1-1975 by Ord. No. 1419;
11-16-2005 by Ord. No. 1887]
(1) It shall be unlawful to park or permit to stand any truck or
commercial vehicle, as defined in § 202-1, or any vehicle classified
as Class 3, 4 or 5 by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code Section
1916, on any street or highway in an area zoned residential for a
continuous period in excess of 1/2 hour.
(2) All such vehicles shall only be parked in a garage or driveway on
the property, provided that the vehicle is set back a minimum of 15
feet from the curb or paved edge of the street if no curb exists. Only
one such vehicle per property is permitted.
(3) No such vehicle shall be parked in a shared driveway. A shared
driveway is an undivided driveway accessed by two adjacent
properties, including both those sharing a single entrance as well
as those with separate entrances but sharing an undivided parking
area.
(4) This prohibition shall not apply to trucks, commercial vehicles or
Class 3, 4, or 5 vehicles that are necessary to haul materials for the
repair of streets or sewers, nor to trucks or commercial vehicles
that are used in conjunction with the construction, improvement or
repair of buildings which are adjacent to such parking.
C. It shall be unlawful to park or permit to stand any truck or commercial
vehicle that has a capacity in excess of 3/4 ton on any street or highway
in the Township of Ridley between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m., prevailing time. [Amended 10-1-1975 by Ord. No. 1419]
§ 299-34 UTILITY LINES § 299-35
294:769
§ 299-35. Handicapped parking. [Added 1-15-1986 by Ord. No.
1592; amended 9-16-1987 by Ord. No. 1617]
The following locations are hereby designated as parking areas for the
handicapped:
Street Location
Academy Avenue [Added
2-26-1997 by Ord. No. 1757]
At 2616 Academy Avenue
Acres Drive [Added 3-24-1999 by
Ord. No. 1798]
At 21 Acres Drive
Acres Drive [Added 3-24-1999 by
Ord. No. 1798]
At 46 Acres Drive
Acres Drive [Added 6-27-2012 by
Ord. No. 1987]
In front of 245 Acres Drive
Adams Street [Added 7-28-1999
by Ord. No. 1800]
In front of 1163 Adams Street
Amosland Road [Added
12-19-1990 by Ord. No. 1669]
Outside the Church of Atonement
Anderson Avenue [Added
7-28-1999 by Ord. No. 1800]
In front of 505 Anderson Avenue
Braxton Road [Added 10-28-2009
by Ord. No. 1955]
In front of 624 Braxton Road
Buchanan Avenue [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No. 1817]
In front of 401 Buchanan Avenue
Cedar Avenue [Added 10-26-1994
by Ord. No. 1729]
In front of 226 Cedar Avenue
Chester Pike [Added 9-26-2007
by Ord. No. 1924]
In front of 1133 Chester Pike
Cornell Avenue [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord. No. 1955]
In front of 1305 Morton Avenue
Crum Creek Drive [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord. No. 1955]
In front of 204 Crum Creek Drive
Darby Road, 305 [Repealed
3-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1798]
Eighth Avenue [Added 9-26-2007
by Ord. No. 1924]
In front of 618 Eighth Avenue
Eighth Avenue [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No. 1729]
In front of 622 Eighth Avenue
Eighth Avenue [Added 6-22-2005
by Ord. No. 1884]
In front of 624 Eighth Avenue
Eleventh Avenue [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1884]
In front of 1039 Eleventh Avenue
§ 299-35 RIDLEY CODE § 299-35
294:770
Street Location
Essex Avenue [Added 6-27-2012
by Ord. No. 1987]
In front of 1232 Essex Avenue
Fairview Road [Added 9-26-2007
by Ord. No. 1924]
In front of 213 Fairview Road
Folsom Avenue [Added 9-26-2007
by Ord. No. 1924; repealed
6-27-2012 by Ord. No. 1987]
Folsom Avenue [Added 7-23-2014
by Ord. No. 2006]
In front of 308 Folsom Avenue
Forrester Avenue [Added
3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 1937]
In front of 2124 Forrester Avenue
Fourth Avenue and Tasker Avenue In front of the Church of Christ
Garfield Avenue [Added
3-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1798]
At 131 Garfield Avenue
Gilmore Street [Added 7-23-2014
by Ord. No. 2006]
In front of 326 Gilmore Street
Haller Road [Added 6-27-2012 by
Ord. No. 1987]
In front of 110 Haller Road
Haller Road [Added 7-23-2014 by
Ord. No. 2006]
In front of 234 Haller Road
Haller Road [Added 10-28-2009
by Ord. No. 1955]
In front of 244 Haller Road
Haverford Road [Added
11-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1641]
At 1116 Haverford Road, "B" building
Haverford Road [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No. 1729;
repealed 6-27-2012 by Ord. No.
1987]
Hoffman Road [Added 3-26-2008
by Ord. No. 1937; repealed
10-28-2009 by Ord. No. 1955]
Holland Street [Added 6-22-2005
by Ord. No. 1884]
In front of 1306 Holland Street
Holmes Road [Added 3-24-2004
by Ord. No. 1854]
On Baldwin Avenue at Holmes Road
Holmes Road [Added 3-24-2004
by Ord. No. 1854]
In front of 345 Holmes Road
Holmes Road [Added 3-26-2008
by Ord. No. 1937; repealed
10-28-2009 by Ord. No. 1955]
§ 299-35 UTILITY LINES § 299-35
294:771
Street Location
Howard Road [Added 10-26-1994
by Ord. No. 1729]
In front of 1020 Howard Road
Jefferson Avenue [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord. No. 1955]
In front of 1404 Jefferson Avenue
Lakeview Drive [Added 6-27-2012
by Ord. No. 1987]
In front of 110 Lakeview Drive
Lukens Avenue [Added 5-22-2002
by Ord. No. 1828]
In front of St. Matthew's Lutheran
Church
Lynn Road [Added 9-23-1992 by
Ord. No. 1695]
In front of 204 Lynn Road
Lynn Road [Added 9-26-2001 by
Ord. No. 1817]
In front of 216 Lynn Road
Lynn Road [Added 6-27-2012 by
Ord. No. 1987]
In front of 218 Lynn Road
MacDade Boulevard and Morton
Avenue [Added 12-19-1990 by
Ord. No. 1669]
Outside the entrance to the Police
Station
Maddock Street [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No. 1817]
In front of 617 Maddock Stret
Marlin Street [Added 9-26-2001
by Ord. No. 1817]
In front of 241 Marlin Street
Melrose Terrace [Added
6-27-2012 by Ord. No. 1987]
In front of 1121 Melrose Terrace
(Community Church of Folsom)
Michell Street [Added 9-23-1992
by Ord. No. 1695]
In front of 542 Michelle Street
Michell Street [Added 3-26-2008
by Ord. No. 1937]
In front of 558 Michell Street
Michell Street [Added 10-28-2009
by Ord. No. 1955]
In front of 606 Michell Street
Michell Street [Added 7-23-2014
by Ord. No. 2006]
In front of 718 Michell Street
Mitchell Avenue [Added
9-26-2001 by Ord. No. 1817]
In front of 624 Mitchell Avenue
Morris Circle [Added 10-28-2009
by Ord. No. 1955]
In front of 209 Morris Circle
Norwood Avenue [Added
3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 1937]
In front of 116 Norwood Avenue
Norwood Avenue [Repealed
6-27-2012 by Ord. No. 1987]
Norwood Avenue [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No. 1729]
In front of 225 Norwood Avenue
§ 299-35 RIDLEY CODE § 299-35
294:772
Street Location
Ohio Avenue [Added 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1924]
In front of 401 Ohio Avenue
Ohio Avenue [Added 9-26-2001 by
Ord. No. 1817]
In front of 406 Ohio Avenue
Orchard Avenue [Added
10-28-2009 by Ord. No. 1955]
In front of 1712 Orchard Avenue
Orchard Avenue/Folsom [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2006]
In front of 1715 Orchard Avenue/
Folsom
Quaint Street [Added 3-26-2008
by Ord. No. 1937]
In front of 2815 Quaint Street
Ramblewood Lane [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No. 1729]
In front of 1308 Ramblewood Lane
Ramblewood Lane [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No. 1729]
In front of 1325 Ramblewood Lane
Randall Avenue, 55 [Added
3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 1937;
repealed 7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
Randall Avenue [Added 7-28-1999
by Ord. No. 1800]
In front of 235 Randall Avenue
Randall Avenue, 237 [Repealed
3-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1798]
Ridley Avenue [Added 7-23-2014
by Ord. No. 2006]
In front of 530 Ridley Avenue
Rodney Road [Added 9-26-2007
by Ord. No. 1924]
In front of 208 Rodney Road
Sixth Avenue In front of 829 Sixth Avenue
South Morris Avenue [Added
11-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1641;
repealed 3-24-2004 by Ord. No.
1854]
Stockton Circle [Added 9-23-1992
by Ord. No. 1695]
In front of 727 Stockton Circle
Stoneyhill Road [Added 7-23-2014
by Ord. No. 2006]
In front of 209 Stoneyhill Road
Sutton Street [Added 6-22-2005
by Ord. No. 1884]
In front of 425 Sutton Street
Sycamore Avenue [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2006]
In front of 315 Sycamore Avenue
Sylvania Avenue [Added
6-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1884]
In front of 205 Sylvania Avenue
§ 299-35 UTILITY LINES § 299-35
294:773
Street Location
Taylor Avenue [Added 7-23-2014
by Ord. No. 2006]
In front of 343 South Taylor Avenue
Walnut Avenue In front of 2000 Walnut Avenue
Walnut Avenue, 2039 [Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1924;
repealed 7-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2006]
Willowbrook Avenue, 208 [Added
10-26-1994 by Ord. No. 1729;
repealed 5-22-2002 by Ord. No.
1828]
Willowbrook Avenue [Added
7-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2006]
In front of 212 Willowbrook Avenue
Worrall Street [Added 9-26-2001
by Ord. No. 1817]
In front of 1301 Worrall Street
Youngs Avenue [Added 3-24-2004
by Ord. No. 1854]
In front of 192 Youngs Avenue
Youngs Avenue [Added 5-22-2002
by Ord. No. 1828]
In front of 1502 Youngs Avenue
§ 299-35 RIDLEY CODE § 299-35
294:774
ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 299-36. Declaration of emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of excessive snow and ice on the highways or portions of highways named
in § 299-37 below, the Captain of Police, in his discretion, may declare an
emergency due to such hazards.
§ 299-37. Parking prohibited on certain streets.
§ 299-38. Placement of signs.
A. After any such emergency shall have been declared, it shall be
unlawful, during the period of such emergency, for any person to park a
motor vehicle or tractor or to allow the same to remain parked, on any
highway or portion thereof named in Subsection B below, or to operate
any motor vehicle or tractor on any such highway or portion thereof,
unless such vehicle or tractor shall be equipped with adequate
equipment to provide sufficient traction to keep such vehicle or tractor
in motion so that other traffic on such highways will not be blocked or
seriously impeded.
B. The highways or portions thereof to which the provisions of this article
shall be applicable during all periods of emergency declared as
provided in § 299-36 above shall be as described below.
Name of Highway Limits
(Reserved)
A. In order to assist the operators of motor vehicles and tractors in
determining the highways affected by this article, the on-duty Sergeant
or the Captain of Police shall place around the utility poles on the
highways or portions thereof designated in § 299-37B above, signs
reading as follows:
§ 299-36 UTILITY LINES § 299-38
294:775
§ 299-39. Violations.
SNOW
EMERGENCY
ROUTE
SNOW TIRES OR
CHAINS REQUIRED
NO PARKING
DURING EMERGENCY
VEHICLES
TOWED AWAY
B. The Township Secretary or the Captain of Police shall also, through
radio, newspaper or other available media, disseminate information as
to the existence of such emergency.
A. Any person who shall park a motor vehicle or tractor upon or along any
of the highways or portions thereof listed in § 299-37B, at any time
during a period of emergency declared as provided in § 299-36, shall be
guilty of a violation of this article.
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle or tractor upon any highway or
portion thereof listed in § 299-37B and such vehicle or tractor shall
become stalled upon any of such highways during a period of
emergency declared as provided in § 299-36 of this article, if such
stalling shall have been by reason of the failure to have such vehicle or
tractor equipped with the equipment hereinabove prescribed, shall be
guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 299-38 RIDLEY CODE § 299-39
294:776
ARTICLE V
Parking on Private or Municipal Property
§ 299-40. Locations in which parking is restricted.
A. Parking on private property. Pursuant to the authorization provided by
Section 1502, Subsections XLIX and LII of the First Class Township
Code,172 no person shall park a vehicle, tractor, trailer or semitrailer,
nor permit it to stand, whether attended or unattended, in any of the
following places:
(1) At any location that obstructs the free passage of fire engines,
ambulances, police cars or trash trucks, in any driveway or parking
area of an apartment house or commercial building.
(2) At any location that obstructs the free passage of fire engines,
ambulances, police cars or trash trucks, in any alleyway or
passageway accommodating three or more private homes.
(3) Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant that is located on private
property.
B. Parking on municipal property. [Added 10-1-1975 by Ord. No. 1420]
(1) No person shall park or leave unattended any motor vehicle on
municipally owned property or on the driveways thereof unless
such person:
(a) Is on official business of the Township or attending a meeting
of the Township Commissioners or one of its committees, or
meeting with one of the Township's officials.
(b) Is attending a hearing before a District Justice.
(c) Is meeting with a member of the Police Department.
(d) Is a Township official or employee.
(e) Has received from the Township Secretary a permit, which
permit shall be displayed on the windshield of the permittee's
motor vehicle.
(2) The Township of Ridley may have any such vehicle, whose owner or
operator violates the provisions of this Subsection B, removed or
hire another person to remove such vehicle at the cost of the owner
thereof.
172. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 56549 and 56552.
§ 299-40 UTILITY LINES § 299-41
294:777
§ 299-41. Signs.
The owner of every apartment house or commercial building is hereby
required to erect and maintain suitable signs setting forth the restrictions
hereinabove set forth.
§ 299-41 RIDLEY CODE § 299-41
294:778
ARTICLE VI
Removal and Impounding of Vehicles
§ 299-42. Authorization for removal and impoundment.
The Captain of Police of the Township is hereby authorized to remove and
impound or to order the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked on
any streets, highways or public property in the Township in violation of any
provision of the law or of any ordinance of the Township, and any motor
vehicle not bearing valid registration tags for the current year; provided,
however, that no such vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in
strict adherence to the provisions of this article.
§ 299-43. Approved storage garages designated. [Amended
2-1-1978 by Ord. No. 1458; 3-19-1980 by Ord. No. 1493; 3-18-1981
by Ord. No. 1493A; 2-26-2003 by Ord. No. 1836]
§ 299-44. Bonding of garages.
Every such approved storage garage or pound shall be bonded in the
amount of $5,000 for the indemnifying of the owner of every such
impounded vehicle against the loss thereof, or injury or damage thereto,
while in custody of such poundkeeper.
§ 299-45. Towing and storage charges. [Amended 10-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 1605]
The towing and storage charges to be collected by every such poundkeeper
shall be established by the Board of Commissioners by an annual resolution
based on the prevailing rates in the community.
§ 299-46. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under the authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that such vehicle has been
impounded shall be sent by the Captain of Police of the Township to the
owner of record of such vehicle. Such notice shall designate the place from
which such vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding
and the pound in which it shall have been impounded.
§ 299-47. Payment of charges; protests.
A. The approved storage garages as pounds for the storage of such
impounded vehicles shall be set by the Board of Commissioners from
time to time by resolution.
B. The approved storage garages for abandoned and junk vehicles shall be
set by the Board of Commissioners from time to time by resolution.
A. The payment of any towing and impounding charges, authorized by this
article, shall, unless such payment shall have been made under protest,
§ 299-42 UTILITY LINES § 299-47
294:779
§ 299-48. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Captain of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded and shall
be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the agents of the
owners thereof with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
§ 299-49. Liability of owner or operator for fine or penalty.
[Amended 8-17-1988 by Ord. No. 1632; 12-17-2003 by Ord. No.
1846]
The last registered owner of any vehicle incurring towing and storage
charges authorized by this article shall be in addition to and not in place of
the imposition of a fine and costs for violation of any law or ordinance on
account of which such vehicle was removed and impounded.
§ 299-50. Disposition of unregistered vehicles.
be final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any right to
recover the money so paid.
B. In the event that any towing and impounding charges so imposed shall
be paid under protest, the offender shall be entitled to a hearing before
a district justice or court of record having jurisdiction, in which case
such defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive such notice
as is provided in the Vehicle Code in other cases of summary offenses
and shall have the same rights as to appeal and waiver of hearing.
A. In the event that there is no current registration on any impounded
motor vehicle by which the owner of said vehicle can be readily
identified, the Police Clerk shall cause a notice to be placed upon the
official bulletin board of the Township, describing the make, type,
description, engine number and manufacturer's serial number of such
motor vehicle, the place where it was parked, and the garage where the
said motor vehicle is impounded; thereupon it shall be the duty of the
person in charge of the garage where the motor vehicle of unknown
ownership has been left for a period of 15 consecutive days, without
being removed by its owner or any other person duly authorized to
remove the same, to report the same to the Department of Revenue of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania within 24 hours of the elapse of
such fifteen-day period, giving the engine number, manufacturer's
serial number, registration plate number and the name and address of
the person abandoning same, if known.
B. In the event that the Department of Revenue determines that the
vehicle is not valueless, the garage keeper may enforce his lien as a
garage keeper for storage of the motor vehicle. Valueless motor
vehicles, duly certified to as such by the Secretary of Revenue, shall be
destroyed as provided by the Act of April 29, 1959 P.L. 58, Section
1223.173
173. Editor's Note: See 75 P.S. § 1223.
§ 299-47 RIDLEY CODE § 299-50
294:780
C. Any person who parks any motor vehicle not licensed under the Motor
Vehicle Registration Law for the current year on the streets, highways
or public property of the Township of Ridley, in addition to the payment
of the towing and storage charges as herein provided, shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $10 and costs of prosecution,
and, in default of the payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for
not more than 10 days.
§ 299-50 UTILITY LINES § 299-50
294:781

ARTICLE VII
Penalties
§ 299-51. Violations and penalties.
A. Unless another penalty is specifically provided for in Subsection B
below, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and
costs of prosecution and, in the event of nonpayment of such fine and
costs of prosecution, such person shall be subject to imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 10 days.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of a section listed below
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than that
specified for violation of said sections and, in the event of nonpayment
of such fine and costs of prosecution, such persons shall be subject to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding that indicated for said section.
[Amended 10-6-1976 by Ord. No. 1429; 3-27-1991 by Ord. No.
1670]
Article/Section
Maximum
Fine
Maximum
Imprisonment
(days)
Article I
(§§ 299-3 and 299-4) $25 5
Article II
(§§ 299-7, 299-11, 299-12,
299-13, 299-15, 299-23 and
299-24)
$25 5
(§§ 299-8, 299-16, 299-17,
and 299-18)
$25 3
(§ 299-22) $25 10
(§ 299-24) $25 10
Article III
(§§ 299-27 through
299-34A)
$25 5
(§ 299-34B and C) $25 5
Article IV
(§ 299-39A) $25 5
(§ 299-39B) $25 10
Article V
(§ 299-40A) $25 5
(§ 299-40B) $25 10
§ 299-51 UTILITY LINES § 299-51
294:783
C. Any person who has received a ticket for the violation of any provision
of this chapter pertaining to parking [Article III (§§ 299-24 through
299-30) or Article V (§ 299-35)] must pay a fine of $15 within 10 days of
the violation and failure to do so will result in the imposition of a
penalty plus court costs. [Amended 10-6-1976 by Ord. No. 1429;
3-27-1991 by Ord. No. 1670; 8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1870]
§ 299-51 RIDLEY CODE § 299-51
294:784
Chapter 303
VEHICLES, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking of commercial vehicles and trailers;
front yard parking — See Ch. 202.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 224.
§ 303-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes one or more motor vehicles, including trailers
or semitrailers, or parts thereof.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
§ 303-2. Unauthorized storage prohibited.
§ 303-3. Permit required.
Any person desiring to store or to continue to store any motor vehicle or
parts thereof in the open space on private grounds, except those vehicles
kept for the purpose of current transportation, shall apply in writing to
the Health Officer of the Township of Ridley for a permit, setting forth the
location and description of the land on which said motor vehicle or part
thereof has been or will be placed, the number and nature of said motor
vehicles or parts thereof and the manner of, length of time and the purpose
for the storage of said motor vehicle or parts thereof.
§ 303-4. Issuance of permit; fee; appeal on denial.
A. Except for motor vehicles currently used for transportation by the
owners or occupiers of private grounds within the Township of Ridley,
no used motor vehicle, junked or otherwise, shall be stored in any open
space on said premises unless the keeping or storage of the same has
been approved by the Health Officer of the Township of Ridley.
B. All trailers and recreational vehicles shall be currently registered and,
where necessary, currently inspected.174
A. If the Health Officer determines that the requested storage does not or
will not adversely affect the health, safety, general welfare, cleanliness
and beauty of the Township and does not or will not constitute a
nuisance, he shall issue a written permit therefor. Otherwise he shall
174. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 299-51 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 303-4
303:785
§ 303-5. Notice to remove; removal by Township. [Amended
12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 1846]
Any motor vehicle or part thereof not currently used for transportation and
stored in any open space as herein provided shall be removed by the owner
or occupier of said grounds and/or the last registered owner of such vehicle
after notice to do so and, in default thereof, the Township may cause the
same to be done and collect the costs thereof, together with a penalty of
10% of such costs, in the manner provided by law for the collection of
municipal claims or by action of assumpsit, or may seek relief by bill in
equity.
§ 303-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 8-17-1988 by Ord. No.
1633]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution, and upon default
in the payment thereof, be sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a period
not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 306
VEHICLES, TOWING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 299. Storage of vehicles on private property — See
Ch. 303.
refuse to issue said permit, stating the reason for such refusal, and give
notice thereof to the applicant.
B. The permit shall be for a period of one month and shall cost the sum as
set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
[Amended 11-16-1983 by Ord. No. 1560; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
C. Any person aggrieved by a refusal of the Health Officer to issue a
permit may request and shall be granted a hearing before the Township
Commissioners of the Township of Ridley, provided he shall file with
said Board a written appeal requesting such hearing and setting forth a
brief statement of the grounds therefor within five days after notice that
a permit has been refused. The appeal shall be heard not later than 30
days after the date on which the appeal was filed, unless postponed for
sufficient cause.
D. After a hearing on said appeal, the Board of Commissioners shall
sustain, modify or reverse the action of the Health Officer.
§ 303-4 RIDLEY CODE § 303-6
303:786
§ 306-1. Purpose and intent. [Amended 8-26-2009 by Ord. No. 1952]
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to regulate towing rates and
towing services as permitted by 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 3353 to provide for proper
licensing of towing services and notice to the Ridley Township Police where
vehicles are towed from public or private property without the consent
of the owner or operator of the vehicle by a towing service operated on
behalf of a private property owner; and to avoid erroneous reports of stolen
vehicles being submitted to the Ridley Township Police Department. Towing
companies should be exempt from compliance with the towing ordinance
while engaged in the repossession of a vehicle on behalf of lienholders
or lessees of vehicles. However, prior to beginning the repossession of
a vehicle, the towing company must call 911 to notify the Township of
Ridley Police Department of its intention to repossess the vehicle and must
wait at least 15 minutes for police response before commencing with the
repossession. When the police respond, the towing company must provide
the police with the name of the vehicle owner and the address at which the
repossession is intended to take place.
§ 306-2. Towing costs and hooking fees for passenger cars and
vehicles weighing 9,000 pounds or below. [Amended 8-26-2009 by
Ord. No. 1952]
The cost of towing passenger cars or other vehicles weighing 9,000 pounds
or below, "hooked" and removed from the premises, shall not be in excess of
$95 for each crane tow, wheel lift or flatbed removal. In all instances when
a passenger car or other vehicle weighing 9,000 pounds or below is hooked
on a crane tow or wheel lift, fitted with wheel dollies, or hooked to be moved
onto a flatbed and the owner/operator returns prior to the vehicle being
removed, tow operators shall charge no more than a $50 hooking fee and
shall release the vehicle to the owner/operator immediately upon receipt of
the fee. Said owner/operator shall have 30 minutes after returning to pay
the hooking fee in order to obtain release of the vehicle.
§ 306-3. Towing costs and hooking fees for vehicles above 9,000
pounds.
The cost of towing a vehicle weighing over 9,000 pounds shall not be in
excess of $165 per hour. In all instances when a vehicle weighing more
than 9,000 pounds is hooked on a crane tow or wheel lift, fitted with
wheel dollies, or hooked to be moved onto a flatbed and the owner/operator
returns prior to the vehicle being removed, tow operators shall release the
vehicle to the owner/operator immediately upon receipt of the hourly fee.
§ 306-4. Storage costs.
A. The cost for storage for any impounded vehicle shall be as follows:
§ 303-6 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 306-4
303:787
§ 306-5. Computation of time for purpose of storage fee calculation.
All daily fees charged for the storage of vehicle pursuant to this chapter
shall be calculated on a twenty-four-hour basis rather than by calendar
days.
§ 306-6. Towing unattended vehicles from public or private
property.
The following regulations shall apply to the towing of any vehicle parked
or left unattended on public or private property without the consent of the
property owner, including, but not limited to, repossession of vehicle on
behalf of a lienholder or leaseholder:
(1) Passenger car or vehicle weighing 9,000 pounds or below: amount
charged by any towing service operator with respect to any
passenger car or vehicle weighing 9,000 pounds or below towed
from the Township of Ridley shall not be in excess of $40 per day.
(2) Vehicle weighing over 9,000 pounds: amount charged by any
towing service operator with respect to any vehicle weighing over
9,000 pounds towed from the Township of Ridley shall not be in
excess of $75 per day.
B. Vehicle owners/operators must have the ability to recover their vehicles
from any impound lot Monday through Saturday during reasonable
business hours. In addition to Sunday, the impound lot may be closed on
the following national holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Fourth
of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas Days. [Amended
8-22-2007 by Ord. No. 1923]
A. No towing service shall remove any vehicle parked or left unattended
on private property without the consent of the property owner. In
addition, any towing service shall first secure a license from the
Township of Ridley prior to doing any towing from any public or private
property located in Ridley Township. A license shall be issued for a fee
as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners
per calendar year and shall be issued by the Ridley Township Police
Department upon completion of the Department application containing
at a minimum the following information:
(1) Name and address of towing service.
(2) The name and business address of all persons or entities having an
ownership interest in the towing service.
(3) The name and address of all persons from whose property in Ridley
Township the towing service is authorized to remove vehicles.
(4) The address of the storage yard where vehicles which are removed
from private or public property in Ridley Township will be towed.
§ 306-4 RIDLEY CODE § 306-6
303:788
(5) The name of the bonding company and the name and address of the
bonding company agent through whom the bond required by this
section has been issued.
(6) Any changes in the information required in Subsection A(1)
through (5) herein shall be reported in writing to the Ridley
Township Police Department within one week of such change.
B. The Captain of Police, upon determining that any provision of this
section has been violated, in addition to any other penalties provided
herein, may revoke a license issued hereunder, together with the right
to reapply for a subsequent license, for a period of up to two years.
Appeal from such revocation shall be to the Public Safety Committee of
the Board of Commissioners.
C. Authorized towing services shall:
(1) Maintain a current bond with the Township in the sum of $10,000
in form and surety satisfactory to the Township's Solicitor,
conditioned upon the faithful performance discharged by the
towing service of its duties as bailee of removed vehicles, and to
indemnify the owner of vehicles against loss, injury or damage
while in his custody.
(2) Provide certificates of insurance as follows: in the minimum of
amount of $500,000 combined single limit for hired autos, nonowned
autos; $100,000 for each personal injury; and $50,000 per
occurrence for garagekeeper's liability.
(3) Comply with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code
with respect to the removal and storage of vehicles from private
property or the removal and impoundment of vehicle from public
property.
(4) Notify the Township of Ridley Police Department by telephone, in
person or by facsimile transmission of the removal of a vehicle from
public or private property within 30 minutes of such removal and
provide a description and license number of the vehicle thus
removed and the location to which it has been taken. [Amended
8-26-2009 by Ord. No. 1952]
(5) Provide the Ridley Township Police Department with a true and
correct copy of each and every contract between the applicant and
the owner and/or lessee of the private property with respect to the
removal of vehicles from private property within the Township.
(6) Display the name of the towing service and or the person operating
it, together with a valid phone number therefor, by signs on both
sides of the tow truck.
(7) Maintain during off hours either a telephone operator answering
service or telephone tape machine to provide owners or operators
§ 306-6 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 306-6
303:789
§ 306-7. Registration plate used as evidence.
In any proceeding for a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the
registration plate, if any, displayed on such motor vehicle shall be prima
fade evidence that the owner of said motor vehicle was either operating said
motor vehicle or was in the operation and control of said motor vehicle at
the time of said violation.
of towed vehicles with the necessary information as to the costs,
the required method of payment and the procedure for claiming the
towed vehicle.
(8) Prior to the issuance of any license, provide proof that they have
paid occupational privilege tax to Ridley Township.
(9) Display a current towing license obtained from Ridley Township on
the driver side window of the vehicle.
D. Signs on private lots. No person shall remove or cause to be removed a
vehicle parked on a private lot without authorization unless signs are
posted by the property owner as follows. [Amended 8-26-2009 by
Ord. No. 1952]
(1) That a sign at least three feet by two feet in size is placed at every
entrance to a private lot clearly indicating that the parking lot is
private, that unauthorized vehicles will be towed at owners
expense, the name and phone number of the towing agency, the
hours of tow operation, hours for vehicle retrieval and the towing,
hooking and storage fees.
(2) That within a lot containing less than 20 parking spaces, additional
signs at least 18 inches by 12 inches in size are to be posted
approximately eight feet above ground level, clearly indicating that
all unauthorized vehicles will be towed at owner's expense. One
sign shall be posted for every four parking spaces and be readily
visible from the parking spaces.
(3) That within a lot containing more than 20 parking spaces, the
property owner shall prepare a site plan, subject to the approval of
the Captain of Police, showing signage readily visible from all
directions. Such signs, clearly indicating that all unauthorized
vehicles will be towed at the owner's expense, shall thereafter be
posted and maintained pursuant to the approved site plan.
(4) In the event that the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code provides for
a higher standard with regard to signs and posting of signs, said
standards shall be followed.
§ 306-6 RIDLEY CODE § 306-8
303:790
§ 306-8. Changes to be made by resolution.
Any changes in the amount of towing, hooking or storage costs in this
chapter will be established by resolution of the Board of Commissioners
from time to time.
§ 306-9. Appeal procedure. [Added 8-26-2009 by Ord. No. 1952175]
Any person who has requested an increase in towing, hooking or storage
fees and who has been denied, or if no decision has been made within
30 days of the request, shall have the right to appeal to the Board of
Commissioners within 30 days of the denial or of the expiration of 30 days
after the request if no decision is rendered. The Board of Commissioners
shall set a hearing date within 30 days of receiving such appeal request. At
such hearing, the applicant is entitled to be heard and present evidence on
its behalf. The Board shall render a decision on the request within 15 days
following the date of the hearing.
§ 306-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, cooperation or other legal entity violating the
provisions of this chapter, shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and
in default of payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period
not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 310
WALLS AND FENCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 325.
175. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 306-9 as § 306-10.
§ 306-8 WALLS AND FENCES § 306-10
310:791

ARTICLE I
Buffer Areas Between Commercial and Residential Zones
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 149 of the 1975 Code]
§ 310-1. Walls or fences required at rear of certain commercial
businesses. [Amended 7-7-1976 by Ord. No. 1427]
Pursuant to the authorization provided in Section 1502, Clause XLIV, of
the First Class Township Code,176 and in the interest of health, safety,
morals, general welfare, cleanliness, beauty, convenience and comfort of
the Township and its inhabitants, the owners of all real estate in the
Township of Ridley on which there is located any shopping center,
apartment house containing 10 or more apartments, or other commercial
business containing an area of 10,000 square feet or more, that is located
within 50 feet of a residentially zoned area, shall erect and properly
maintain in good repair a masonry wall or ornamental fence not less than
six feet in height, as a buffer between the commercial or apartment zone
area and the residential zone area.
§ 310-2. Notice to erect; permit required.
§ 310-3. Failure to comply.
The failure or refusal of any owner of such real estate to apply for a permit,
or the failure to erect and properly maintain such wall or fence, after seven
days' written notice so to do, shall constitute a separate offense for each
day that such violation continues. Said written notice shall be issued by the
Secretary of the Township upon the direction of the Board of Commissioners
to issue such notice.
A. All persons required to erect such wall or fence shall be notified in
writing to comply with the provisions of this article. Such notice may be
served personally or by certified mail. If sent by certified mail, the
mailing of such notice shall be sufficient, whether or not the owner
accepts such mail.
B. Within seven days after the date on the notice, the owner of the
property involved shall apply to the Secretary of the Township of Ridley
for a permit, and the application therefor shall be accompanied by a
sketch showing the proposed location of the wall or fence.
C. In the event that the Secretary, after advice from the Building
Committee, determines that the proposed location of the wall or fence
is not appropriate, the Secretary shall indicate the proper location
thereof.
D. Upon approval of the location of the wall or fence, either as applied for
or as relocated, as aforesaid, the permit shall be issued and said wall or
fence shall be erected within 30 days after the issuance of the permit.
176. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 56544.
§ 310-1 WALLS AND FENCES § 310-4
310:793
§ 310-4. Violations and penalties.177
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
177. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 310-4 RIDLEY CODE § 310-4
310:794
ARTICLE II
Privacy Fences
[Adopted 6-27-1990 by Ord. No. 1659]
§ 310-5. Method of installation.
All horizontal and vertical members of a fence shall be located on the
interior side of the fence.
§ 310-6. Permit required; fee.
Prior to the erection of a fence, a permit must be obtained from the
Township, the fee for which shall be established by the Township Manager
and subject to periodic adjustments.
§ 310-7. Violations and penalties.178
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
178. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 310-5 WALLS AND FENCES § 310-7
310:795
Chapter 314
WASTEWATER TREATMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 237.
§ 314-1. Title and purpose.
§ 314-2. Adoption of DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations.179
The DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations are hereby adopted by the
Township of Ridley to govern the conduct of all discharges to the DELCORA
Wastewater Management System.
A. This chapter is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and other aspects of the general welfare. These
general goals include, among others, the specific enforcement of the
various regulations promulgated by the Delaware County Regional
Water Quality Control Authority (DELCORA), United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP), and such other
agencies which may succeed the aforementioned agencies to
implement the Delaware County Wastewater Management Plan and the
National Pretreatment Standards, 40 Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR) 401 et seq.
B. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Ridley Township
Wastewater Treatment Ordinance."
A. It is intended that this chapter provide for the enforcement and
prosecution of the DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations, and
the National Pretreatment Standards.
B. It is the specific intent of this chapter to provide a means of
enforcement of the National Pretreatment Standards promulgated by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency as set forth in 40
CFR 401 et seq. (1983) pursuant to the Clean Water Act, as amended,
33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.
C. The DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations shall be minimum
standards and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of user within
the Township of Ridley.
179. Editor's Note: The DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations of 2011 were adopted
4-19-2011 by Res. No. 2011-04. See also Ch. 237, Art. IV, Wastewater Control and
Treatment.
§ 310-7 RIDLEY CODE § 314-3
310:796
§ 314-3. Compliance required.
The Board of the Commissioners of the Township of Ridley hereby ordains
and establishes that any person, firm or corporation who fails or refuses to
comply with the DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations, embodied in
DELCORA Resolution Number 91-03, adopted May 22, 1991, as same may
be amended from time to time, which is incorporated herein by reference
and attached hereto as Appendix "A",180 shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in this chapter.
§ 314-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
1808]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to pay a fine of up to $1,000 or the maximum legal
limit of the fining authority, whichever is greater, plus costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of such fine and costs shall be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that each
violation continues of this chapter and/or DELCORA's Standards, Rules and
Regulations, as amended, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 314-5. Prosecution and enforcement.
Chapter 318
WEAPONS
A. The Township of Ridley hereby appoints DELCORA, or its designee, as
its agent having the power of the Township of Ridley to institute
proceedings in the name of the Township of Ridley against any and all
persons, firms or corporations who violate the provisions of this
chapter.
B. In cases involving the enforcement of this chapter, the Solicitor of
DELCORA or its designee may cause subpoenas to be issued for
witnesses for the prosecution and may conduct the hearing on behalf of
the Township of Ridley.
180. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 314-3 WEAPONS § 314-5
318:797

ARTICLE I
Air Guns
[Adopted 3-19-1975 as Ch. 153 of the 1975 Code]
§ 318-1. Discharge prohibited.
No person shall discharge or use, or possess for the purpose of discharging
or using, any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol or any implement
not a firearm which impels with force an object or pellet of any nature or
kind. Upon prosecution of any person violating the provisions of this article,
the District Justice before whom such case is being heard may infer that
the possession of an air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol or any
implement not a firearm which impels with force a pellet of any nature or
kind was for the purpose of discharging or using the same.
§ 318-2. Sales.
No person, persons, firm or corporation shall store, sell, offer or expose for
sale at retail or have in his, its or their possession with intent to sell any
air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol or any implement not a firearm
which impels with force a pellet of any nature or kind within the Township
of Ridley.
§ 318-3. Right of seizure.
The Captain of Police of the Township of Ridley is hereby authorized to seize
or remove and destroy any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol or
any implement not a firearm which impels with force a pellet of any nature
or kind which shall be used or discharged within the Township of Ridley or
which shall be held and possessed in violation of this article.
§ 318-4. Exemption.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the use of fireworks
within the Township of Ridley, provided that the explosion and discharge of
the same shall be pursuant to a permit issued by the Township of Ridley in
accordance with the provisions of the Act of May 15, 1939, P.L. 134.181
§ 318-5. Violations and penalties.182
Except as otherwise provided by state law, every person violating this
article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, together with costs of prosecution, and upon
default in the payment thereof, be sentenced to undergo imprisonment for
a period not exceeding 30 days.
181. Editor's Note: 35 P.S. § 1271 et seq.
182. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 318-1 WEAPONS § 318-5
318:799

ARTICLE II
Discharge of Weapons
[Adopted 4-6-1977 by Ord. No. 1442]
§ 318-6. Discharge prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any rifle, gun, pistol,
revolver, air rifle, air pistol, or any other weapon which could cause injury
to other persons, in pursuit of game, for amusement to himself or others or
for damage to property.
§ 318-7. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall be construed to be supplementary to the
provisions of the Uniform Firearms Act,183 and shall not apply to:
§ 318-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord. No.
1639]
Every person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000,
together with costs of prosecution, and upon default in the payment thereof,
be sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days.
A. Constables, sheriffs, prison or jail wardens, or their deputies, policemen
of this commonwealth or its political subdivisions or other law
enforcement officers.
B. Members of the Army, Navy or Marine Corps of the United States or of
the National Guard or organized reserves when on duty.
C. Officers or employees of the United States duly authorized to carry a
concealed firearm.
D. Agents, messengers and other employees of common carriers, banks or
business firms, whose duties require them to protect moneys, valuables
and other property in the discharge of such duties.
183. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq.
§ 318-6 WEAPONS § 318-8
318:801

ARTICLE III
Carrying of Knives
[Adopted 8-20-1980 by Ord. No. 1496]
§ 318-9. Carrying of certain knives prohibited.
No person shall carry a knife with a blade greater than three inches in
length on or about his person, except in his place of abode or fixed place of
business.
§ 318-10. Exceptions.
The provisions of § 318-9 of this article shall not apply to:
§ 318-11. Right of seizure.
The Captain of Police of the Township of Ridley is hereby authorized to seize
or remove and destroy any knife which shall be carried or concealed by any
person within the Township of Ridley in violation of this article.
§ 318-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 1639]
Every person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000,
together with costs of prosecution, and upon default in the payment thereof,
be sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days.
A. Constables, sheriffs, prison or jail wardens or their deputies, policemen
of the commonwealth or its political subdivisions or other law
enforcement officers.
B. Members of the Army, Navy or Marine Corps of the United States or of
the National Guard or organized reserves when on duty.
C. Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing, repairing or
dealing in knives or the agent or representative of any such person
having in his possession, using or carrying a knife in the usual or
ordinary course of such business.
D. Any person while carrying a knife in a secure wrapper from the place of
purchase to his home or place of business or to a place of repair, or back
to his home or place of business, or in moving from one place of abode
or business to another.
E. Persons licensed to hunt or fish in the commonwealth, if such persons
are actually hunting or fishing or are going to the places where they
desire to hunt or fish or returning from. such places.
§ 318-9 WEAPONS § 318-12
318:803
Chapter 325
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 9, Art. IV.
Adult uses — See Ch. 62.
Building construction and floodplain
management — See Ch. 92.
Day-care homes — See Ch. 108.
Assessment of improvements — See Ch. 160.
Off-street parking — See Ch. 202.
Signs and billboards — See Ch. 249.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 260.
Utility installations in improved streets — See
Ch. 264, Art. VI.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
268.
Telecommunications facilities — See Ch. 282.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 303.
Walls and fences — See Ch. 310.
§ 318-12 RIDLEY CODE § 318-12
318:804
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 325-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Ridley
Zoning Ordinance."
§ 325-2. Jurisdiction.
§ 325-3. Purposes.
A. Township authority. Section 601 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (Act 170)184 provides that the Ridley Township
Commissioners may enact, amend and repeal zoning ordinances to
implement comprehensive plans.
B. Applicability. This chapter requires that, within the Township of Ridley,
in the County of Delaware and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, no
land, body of water or structure shall hereafter be used or occupied and
no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with
all the regulations and procedures herein specified for the district in
which such land, body of water or structure is located.
C. County authority. The Delaware County Planning Commission is
empowered under Sections 607 and 609 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (Act 170)185 to submit its
recommendations on the proposed adoption, amendment or repeal of
any municipal zoning ordinance or part thereof.
A. General purposes. The zoning regulations and districts herein set forth
have been made in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and are
designed:
(1) To promote protect and facilitate any or all of the following: the
public health, safety, morals, and the general welfare; coordinated
and practical community development and proper density of
population; emergency management preparedness and operations,
airports, and national defense facilities, the provisions of adequate
light and air, access to incident solar energy, police protection,
vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, recreational facilities public grounds, the
provision of a safe, reliable and adequate water supply for
domestic, commercial, agricultural or industrial use, and other
public requirements; as well as preservation of the natural, scenic
and historic values in the environment and preservation of forests,
wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.
184. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10601.
185. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10607 and 10609, respectively.
§ 325-1 WEAPONS § 325-3
318:805
§ 325-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(2) To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land,
blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation loss of
health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other damages.
(3) To preserve prime agriculture and farmland considering
topography soil type and classification, and present use.
(4) To provide for the use of land within the Township for residential
housing of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of
housing, including single-family and two-family dwellings, and a
reasonable range of multifamily dwellings in various arrangements,
mobile homes and mobile home parks.
(5) To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth, and opportunities for
development of a variety of residential dwelling types and
nonresidential uses.
B. Community development objectives. This chapter provides a legal basis
and framework for future Township development and redevelopment.
Its provisions are guided by the policies and proposals contained within
the Ridley Township Comprehensive Plan and the community
development objectives set forth in § 325-3A(1) to (5) inclusive.
A. Enforcement notice.
(1) If it appears to the Township that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
(2) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has
filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding
that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the
owner of record.
(3) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(b) The location of the property in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
§ 325-3 RIDLEY CODE § 325-4
318:806
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
B. Causes of action. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is,
or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter, the Board of
Commissioners, or the Zoning Officer, or any aggrieved owner or tenant
of real property who shows that his property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping
or land, business or use constituting a violation. When any such action
is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be
served upon the Township at least 30 days prior to the time the action is
begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the Ridley Township Board
of Commissioners. No such action may be maintained until such notice
has been given.
C. Jurisdiction. District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction over
proceedings brought under § 325-4D below.
D. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more that $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by
the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or
be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of
a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays not
timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the District Justice determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to
have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth
day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and
reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this chapter
shall be paid over the Zoning Officer, payable to the Township of
Ridley.
§ 325-4 WEAPONS § 325-4
318:807
§ 325-5. Construal of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health,
safety and morals and general welfare of the Township. It is not intended
by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul the Ridley Township
Building Code186 or any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted
or issued thereunder, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this
chapter; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of the
building, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by
such ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
(2) The court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Township of Ridley
the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this
section.
186. Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Building Construction and Floodplain Management.
§ 325-4 RIDLEY CODE § 325-5
318:808
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 325-6. Word usage.
As used in these regulations, words expressed in their singular include their
plural meanings; and words expressed in their plural include their singular
meanings. The word "person" includes a corporation, unincorporated
association and a partnership, as well as an individual. The words "building"
and "street" are used generally and shall be construed as if followed by the
phrase "or part thereof." The word "may" is permissive; the words "shall"
and "will" are mandatory.
§ 325-7. Definitions.
The following words or phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning. Any word or term not defined herein shall be
used with a meaning of standard usage.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — (See "building.")
ACCESSORY USE — (See "use.")
ACRE — Includes the following definitions:[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES — (See Article XVIII.)
AGENT — Any person, other than the landowner of a lot, who, acting
under specific authorization of the landowner, submits plans, data and/or
applications to the Zoning Officer or Township Planning Commission for the
purpose of obtaining approval thereof.
ALLEY — A right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or
rear of two or more properties.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or an enlargement, whether by
extending on a side or increasing in height, or the moving from one location
or position to another.
AMUSEMENT SYSTEM — Any ride, device, building or structure that is
used primarily for human entertainment and enjoyment which is either
ACRE, GROSS ACRE, or GROSS ACREAGE — An area of 43,560 square
feet and includes the total area within the property lines of a lot or
parcel of land before public streets, flood control channels or basins,
or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use are deducted
from such lot or parcel, including property previously dedicated.
A.
NET ACREAGE — An area that excludes public streets, alleys, flood
control channels or basins, or other areas to be dedicated or reserved
for a public use, including property previously dedicated, either
abutting on, running through or within a building site.
B.
§ 325-6 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:809
moving or stationary. The Building Official shall make the final
determinations to whether a ride, device, or structure shall be classified
under this definition. For the purposes of this chapter, slot machines,
electronic gaming devices, pinball games or electronic arcade games, and
nonmotorized playground equipment are not amusement systems. (See also
"recreational facility.")[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
AMUSEMENT/THEME PARK — A facility composed of one or more
buildings or structures operated for a profit on a permanent basis, including
a use which is designed to provide indoor or outdoor entertainment,
pleasure, or relaxation which may promote some theme, motif, or concept
and may provide lifts, tramways, monorails, elevators, escalators, roller
coasters, or other conveyances or rides for the entertainment or amusement
of the public. (See also "man-made recreational water theme park.")[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar
devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves
external to or attached to the exterior of any building or ground mounted.
(See also "communication antenna" and "satellite dish antenna.")[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The Board of Commissioners of the Township
of Ridley.
AREA —
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of individual
parcels of land shown on a plan, excluding any area within a street
right-of-way but including the area of any easement or future street
right-of-ways and shall exclude the area required for a sidewalk.
A.
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal crosssection
area of the building on a lot, excluding cornices, eaves, gutters,
or chimneys projecting not more than 18 inches, steps, one-story
porches, bay windows not extending through more than one story and
not projecting more than five feet, balconies and terraces.
B.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of the several floors of a building
structure including areas used for human occupancy, and basements,
attics and penthouses, measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It
does not include cellars, unenclosed porches, attics not used for human
occupancy or any floor space in an accessory building or in the main
C.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:810
AUTHORITY — (See "municipal authority.")[Amended 10-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 1808]
BANQUET FACILITY — An establishment that is rented by individuals or
groups to accommodate private functions, including, but not limited to,
banquets, weddings, anniversaries and other similar celebrations. Such a
use may or may not include kitchen facilities for the preparation or catering
of food, the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, only
during scheduled events and not open to the general public, and outdoor
gardens or reception facilities.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade (see "story, above grade").[Amended 11-30-1993 by Ord.
No. 1712]
BLOCK WALL — See "walls, perimeter."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under the Municipalities Planning
Code187 or this chapter to render final adjudications, including but not
limited to the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Ridley, the Ridley
Township Planning Commission and the Ridley Township Zoning Hearing
Board.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A dwelling designed to accommodate three or more
roomers.
BUFFER WALL — See "walls, perimeter."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
BUILDING — A structure having a roof which is used for the shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals or property. The word "building" shall include
any part thereof.
building intended and designed for the parking of motor vehicles in
order to meet the parking requirements of this chapter or any such
floor space intended and designed for accessory heating and ventilating
equipment. It does include the area of a commercial deck or patio and
said area shall be included when calculating the parking requirements
of this chapter. [Amended 4-23-2003 by Ord. No. 1839]
SITE AREA — The total area of a proposed development, regardless of
interior lot lines or proposed lots, streets or easements.
D.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building located on the same
lot as a principal building, and clearly incidental and subordinate to
the principal building, including, but not limited to, utility buildings,
tool sheds, noncommercial greenhouses, etc. Any part of a principal
building devoted or intended to be devoted to an accessory use is not
an accessory building.
A.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted or intended
to be conducted any principal use of the lot on which it is located.
B.
187. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:811
BULKHEAD — An embankment or a wall along a body of water that acts
as a protective barrier. (See "walls, perimeter - retaining wall.")[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
BULKHEAD LINE — An artificial line established in or along a river,
watercourse or body of water designating the maximum distance or limit
that land filling will be permitted. For the purpose of this chapter, the
bulkhead line is the boundary line of the floodway as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, or the boundary line of the floodway as determined by hydrologic
and hydraulic analysis performed by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods
used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. (Also see:
"flood fringe," "floodplain," and "floodway.")[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1901]
CARPORT — An accessory use consisting of a covered parking space,
not completely enclosed by walls or doors, and for the accommodation of
an automobile. A carport is subject to regulations for a garage.[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
CARTWAY — The portion of a street or alley right-of-way intended for
vehicular use.188
CASINO — Any place where gaming is operated or maintained, except that
casino shall not be construed to include any place devoted to the use of
15 or fewer slot machines. (Also see "hotel, resort.")[Added 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1901]
CHANGE OF USE — An alteration of a building or a change of use
theretofore existing within a building or on a lot to a new use which
imposes other provisions of law governing building construction or zoning
regulations.
BUILDING COVERAGE — That percentage of the plot or lot area
covered by the building area.
C.
BUILDING HEIGHT — A vertical distance measured from the mean
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to
the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck lines of mansard
roofs and to the mean height between eves and ridge for gable, hip or
gambrel roofs.
D.
BUILDING PERMIT — Any permit required by this chapter or other
Township ordinances for the construction, alteration or razing of any
structure.
E.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line within a property defining the
required minimum distance between any structure and any adjacent
street.
F.
188. Editor's Note: The former definition of CELLAR, which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 11-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1712.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:812
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersection defined by two street lines and by a line of sight between two
points on the street lines at a given distance from the intersection.
COMMERCE — The purchase, rental, sale or other transaction involving
the handling or disposition of any article, substance or commodity for profit
or livelihood, or the ownership or management of office buildings, offices,
recreational or amusement enterprises, motels, garages, hotels, outdoor
advertising and outdoor advertising structures, or shops conducted for
the sale of personal services and other similar enterprises of the same
class.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
COMMERCIAL COMPLEX — A commercial or industrial development with
more than one user and which share common parking and/or vehicular
access.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
COMMERCIAL PAD SITE — A freestanding building or prepared building
area within a commercial complex that is usually located significantly closer
to the street than any other adjacent commercial buildings.[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
COMMISSION or PLANNING COMMISSION — The Ridley Township
Planning Commission.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including public streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for
public facilities.
COMMUNICATION ANTENNA — A structure intended for use in the
wireless transmission or relaying of any portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum, including television, radio, telephonic, or any other type of
communicative transmission that is to be affixed to another building or
structure, including the equipment necessary for its use, but not including
structures for signal reception only. (See "antenna.")[Added 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1901]
COMMUNICATION BUILDING — A building used by private, public, or
quasi-public communication providers for the purpose of housing
communication equipment, such as, but not limited to, computer network
server connections and electronic cabling systems, but not including
communication antennas and towers or offices for permanent staff. (Also
see "communication antenna" and "communication tower.")[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
COMMUNICATION TOWER — A freestanding structure designed to
accommodate one or more communication antennas. Communication
towers shall be considered to mean the tower plus the antenna(s) to be
affixed to the tower.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The complete plan for the continuing
development and redevelopment of Ridley Township as recommended by
the Planning Commission.
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:813
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which may be permitted in one or more zoning
districts upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission to the
governing body which may grant approval pursuant to applicable standards
and criteria expressed in this chapter, the Chapter 268, Subdivision and
Land Development, and other applicable regulations.
CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility used for conferences, seminars and
similar events with accommodations for sleeping, food preparation/service,
and eating. The center may include banquet facilities, recreation,
entertainment, meeting rooms, fitness and health facilities, retail stores,
personal service such as beauty and barbershops and similar uses
customarily included in conference centers.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1901]
CONVERSION APARTMENTS — One-family dwellings converted for
occupancy by more than two families.
COUNTY — Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
DAY-CARE HOME — A dwelling which is also used to provide care for no
more than six nonresident children for part of the day and is licensed or
registered with the state for that purpose.
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under this chapter or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code189 granted jurisdiction to do so, either by reason of the grant of
exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from determinations. All
decisions shall be appealable to the Court of Common Pleas of the County
of Delaware and judicial district wherein Ridley Township lies.
DECKS AND PATIOS — A deck or patio shall be an area surfaced with
material such as but not limited to wood or masonry; with a roof or awning
and walls or other appurtenance extending not more than 48 inches above
the surface of the deck or patio; and constructed outside of the exterior
walls of the principal building, whether attached or unattached.[Added
4-23-2003 by Ord. No. 1839; amended 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1853]
DECORATIVE FENCE — See "fence."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
COMMERCIAL DECK OR PATIO — In addition to the above, commercial
decks or patios shall comply with lot coverage and side and rear yard
setback regulations as set forth in the applicable provisions of this
Code as well as the land development process. A commercial deck or
patio shall be constructed only at the rear and/or side of the building.
However, it shall not be constructed at the side of a building that faces
a street but may be constructed at the rear of a building that faces
a street. No commercial deck or patio shall be operated if within 100
feet of a residential use, as measured from the deck or patio to the
residential property line. All decks or patios are limited to direct access
from the first floor of the establishment only.
A.
189. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:814
DECORATIVE WALL — See "walls, perimeter."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1901]
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any
general and public uses, reserving to himself no other rights than are
compatible with the full exercise and enjoyments of the public uses to which
the property has been devoted.
DETERMINATION —
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT[Amended 11-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1712]: —
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
development plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DISTRIBUTION CENTER — A warehouse or a complex of warehouses with
each building containing a minimum of 72,000 square feet, having a
minimum overhead clearance of 24 feet within the building, with dock-high
loading doors either in a depressed dock well or a flat truck apron, and with
no drop ceiling constructed within the building outside of accessory office
area.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with the
administration of this chapter or applications thereunder, except the
following:
(1) The Ridley Township Board of Commissioners;
(2) The Ridley Township Zoning Hearing Board; or
The Ridley Township Planning Commission, only if and to the extent
the Planning Commission is charged with final decision on
preliminary or final plans under Chapter 268, Subdivision and Land
Development, or planned residential development provisions of this
chapter.
(3)
A.
Determinations shall be appealable only to the boards designated as
having jurisdiction for such appeal.
B.
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
A.
B. "Development" also includes "land development" and "subdivision."
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:815
DISTRICT — A zoning district as laid out on the Zoning Map, along with the
regulations pertaining thereto.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT — (See "lot".)
DRIVE AISLE — The principal means of vehicular access, other than a
street, into and within the development or to lots within the
development.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE PLACES — An establishment where patrons
are served food, refreshments or beverages for consumption outside the
confines of the principal building or in vehicles parked upon the premises,
regardless of whether or not, in addition thereto, seats or other
accommodations are provided for the patrons; or where patrons are
provided with professional or personal service such as banking, film
processing, and the like. (See also "restaurant, fast food.")[Added
3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 1758]
DRIVEWAY — The means of ingress and egress from a drive aisle, street,
or access easement into a garage, parking area or entry of a lot or
property.[Amended 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1902]
DWELLING — A building containing one or more dwelling units.
EAST COAST GREENWAY — A proposed bicycle and pedestrian trail which
when completed is expected to connect the major cities on the eastern
seaboard and extend from Maine to Florida.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1901]
FAMILY — One or more persons, related by blood, marriage or adoption,
living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, or a number of
persons living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit though
not related by blood, adoption or marriage.[Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 1808]
FAMILY-BASED COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL FACILITY — A residential
facility licensed by the appropriate agency and used as living quarters by
unrelated persons requiring special care, and by their adult supervisors.
A family-based community residential facility is specifically designed to
create a residential environment for the following types of individuals:
developmentally disabled, mentally ill, mentally retarded, physically
handicapped, elderly, dependent children or similar types of individuals who
are unable to live without supervision. The number of residents shall not
exceed eight persons at any one time, including live-in supervision. On-site
APARTMENT — A building designed to provide for the residence of
three or more family units living independently of each other, and
assigned different sections in the same structure.
A.
MULTIFAMILY — A building occupied as a home or residence of two
families, under one roof, one living unit of which shall be wholly or
partly above the other and each family occupying a single living unit.
B.
SINGLE-FAMILY — A building designed for and occupied exclusively as
a home or residence for not more than one family.
C.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:816
supervision shall be provided by responsible adults on a twenty-four-houra-
day basis. Residency shall be on a nontransient basis. This definition shall
not apply to a club, lodge, fraternity house, nursing or day-care facility or
similar use.
FENCE — Any artificial barrier constructed of any material or combination
of materials erected for the purpose of screening one property from another
either to assure privacy or protect the property screened. The restrictions
applicable to walls apply to fences, however, a fence shall not be substituted
for a wall when required by the provisions of this chapter. Includes the
following definitions:[Amended 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1902]
FENCE HEIGHT — See "fence."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
FLAG LOT — A lot having less lot frontage than the minimum required
for standard lots by applicable zoning regulations but sufficient to provide
adequate access by way of an access strip or staff, to the main portion of
the lot in the rear, which is intended and suitable to accommodate a singlefamily
residence in compliance with development regulations.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN —
DECORATIVE FENCE — A fence constructed of decorative wrought
iron or similar material in combination with decorative walls and/or
columns with not less than 50% of the vertical surface of the fence
open. Wire and untreated wood fences are not decorative.
A.
FENCE HEIGHT — The distance from the finished grade to the highest
point of the fence, wall or hedge.
B.
SCREEN FENCE — A fence designed to block the view of motorists and
pedestrians into the interior of a lot to the extent that the activities
conducted on the lot are indiscernible. Metal supports and wire mesh
capable of blocking 90% of light are permitted, however, slats are not
acceptable.
C.
SECURITY FENCE — A fence up to 10 feet in height. Security wire,
including barbed, razor, or similar wire, may be permitted, but must
be above six feet if straight or slanted inward and above eight feet if
slanted outward, but must not overhang the property line.
D.
TEMPORARY FENCE — A fence constructed to temporarily provide
security pending the final development of the lot or to control access,
dust, or prevent the dumping of refuse. A temporary fence need not be
decorative, and may be allowed at any height required by the Building
Official.
E.
A relatively flat or lowland area adjoining a river, stream or watercourse
which is subject to partial or complete inundation.
A.
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:817
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry and
discharge flood waters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this
chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the onehundred-
year magnitude.
FREIGHT TERMINAL — An area and building(s) where cargo is stored
and where railroad cars, aircraft, and/or trucks (including tractors and
trailer units) load and unload cargo for transshipment of distribution on a
regular basis, and which may include facilities for the temporary storage
of loads prior to shipment and facilities for the maintenance of transport
vehicles.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
FUTURE STREET WIDTH — Lines established adjacent to highways or
streets for the purpose of defining limits within which no structure or any
part thereof shall be erected or maintained in order to ensure the future
acquisition of these limits as public rights-of-way. The term "ultimate rightof-
way" is meant to be the same as future street width.[Added 9-26-2007
by Ord. No. 1901]
GAMING — Includes all games of chance or devices and any slot or video
poker machines played for money or for checks or tokens redeemable in
money except, for the purpose of this chapter only, gaming shall not be
construed to include slot or video poker machines when such machines are
operated incidental or accessory to the conduct of a business permitted
under the provisions of this chapter. (See "hotel, resort.")[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
GARAGE — A detached accessory building or a portion of a main building
designed or used for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles
owned and used by the occupants of the premises or their guests or patrons,
or as a principal use as permitted within this chapter. (Also see
"carport.")[Amended 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1902]
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of
Ridley.
GRADE PLANE — A reference plane representing the average of finished
ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. Where the finished
ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall
be established by the lowest points within the area between the building
and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six feet from the building,
between the building and a point six feet from the building.[Amended
11-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1712]
GROUP-BASED COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL FACILITY —
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
B.
A residential facility in which individuals reside while receiving therapy,
counseling or other rehabilitative services for the following purposes:
To assist them in recuperating from the effect of drugs and/or
alcohol.
(1)
A.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:818
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE — Products or waste products that
have potential to be dangerous, extremely noxious, or cause substantial
environmental impacts on or beyond the boundaries of the property on
which the products are used or stored and includes, but is not limited to,
the materials specified in the Township of Ridley Building Code190 and/
or the Township of Ridley Fire Prevention Code191 when present in the
quantities listed. (Also see "hazardous materials storage" and "hazardous
occupancy.")[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS STORAGE — The storage of chemicals,
explosives, or other hazardous materials for commercial or industrial use,
or hazardous waste, and includes the wholesale distribution of chemical
products but not the incidental storage of chemicals for personal use and/
or in conjunction with other uses. A hazardous occupancy is required per
the Township of Ridley Building Code.192 (Also see "hazardous material
or waste," "hazardous occupancy," "outside storage/outside display" and
"personal use.")[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
HAZARDOUS OCCUPANCY — The use of buildings or structures, or
portions thereof for the purpose of manufacturing, processing, generating,
or storing of hazardous chemicals, explosives, waste, or other hazardous
materials in amounts smaller than those specified in the Township of Ridley
Building Code193 and/or the Township of Ridley Fire Prevention Code,194
that constitute a high fire, explosive, or health hazard and require a
hazardous occupancy as determined by the Building Official.[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
HEARING — An administrative proceeding conducted by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
HELIPORT — Any area used or to be used for the landing or takeoff of
helicopters, hot-air balloons, or other steep gradient aircraft capable of
hovering and shall include any and all of the area or buildings which are
appropriate to accomplish these functions.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
To assist them in adjusting to living with handicaps of mental
illness or retardation, emotional disorders or physical disabilities.
(2)
All group-based community residential facilities shall be licensed by
the appropriate state agencies, and the number of residents shall not
exceed six at any one time.
B.
Duration of residence shall not exceed one year. Supervision by
responsible adults shall be available on twenty-four-hour-a-day basis.
C.
190. Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Building Construction and Floodplain Management.
191. Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Fire Prevention.
192. Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Building Construction and Floodplain Management.
193. Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Building Construction and Floodplain Management.
194. Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Fire Prevention.
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:819
HOME OCCUPATION — Any commercial use conducted entirely within a
dwelling unit and carried on by family members residing in that dwelling
unit, the use of which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes, and does not alter the exterior or affect the
residential character of the neighborhood and, in connection with which,
there is no display, nor stock in trade. Any commercial use conducted as a
home occupation shall not involve the use of any accessory building or yard
space, nor involve any activities not normally associated with residential
use outside of the main building. (Also see "no-impact home-based business"
and "professional office.")[Amended 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1902]
HOT-AIR BALLOON — See "heliport."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
HOTEL — Any building or group of buildings, other than a spa/retreat,
in which there are five or more guest rooms used, designed or intended
to be used, let or hired out for the purpose of offering to the general
public lodging on a day-to-day basis not to exceed 30 consecutive calendar
days, where the primary entrance is through a lobby or foyer and also
that in which there are no provisions for cooking in any individual room
or suite unless specifically permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board. A hotel
may include additional facilities and services, such as restaurants, meeting
rooms, entertainment, personal services and recreational facilities.[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
HOTEL, RESORT — A building, or complex of buildings or other structures,
kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a hotel
or motel wherein food is served, in which 300 or more guest rooms are used
for sleeping accommodations, and which has amenities as defined in this
chapter, all of which are directly connected to the complex or building and
the proposed or existing gaming operation and operated in such a manner
as to form a part of the same operation and complex. This shall not be
construed to approve any licenses of liquor and gaming.[Added 9-26-2007
by Ord. No. 1901]
INDUSTRIAL/TECHNOLOGY CORRIDOR — A strip of land located
generally within Eddystone Borough, Ridley Township and Tinicum
Township, between I-95 and the Delaware River within which the Industrial
Corridor Design, Phase 1 component of the Delaware County Renaissance
Program permits lower impact, technology-based and water-related uses in
specified zoning districts.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
INDUSTRY — The manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction or
destruction of any article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment,
in such a manner as to change the form, character or appearance or add
value to the final product.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
LABORATORY — A facility for scientific research or the testing of
materials.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:820
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other persons having
a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the
purpose of this chapter.
LANDSCAPING — Landscaping shall include, but not be limited to, grass
and other plantings such as trees, shrubs and bushes.
LAND USE ORDINANCE — An ordinance or map adopted pursuant to
the authority granted in Articles IV, V, VI and VII of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, including but not limited to the following:
LARGE SCALE RETAIL BUSINESS — A business that exceeds 115,000
gross square feet excluding outside sales or storage, restrooms and other
nonpublic areas.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT — The provision of any amusement or attention
engaging activity by an animal or human performing in person, including,
but not limited to, the performance of acts, music, speech, dance,
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
The following land development is specifically excluded from the above
definition only when such land development involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium; or
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
(2)
C.
A. This chapter;
B. The Ridley Township Zoning Map; and
Chapter 268, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Ridley, as amended and supplemented.
C.
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:821
acrobatics, disc jockeys, karaoke, or display, but not including adult
uses.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth for the temporary parking
of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
LOT — A separate parcel of land that is recorded or that will be recorded
after Township final subdivision approval in the office of the Delaware
County Recorder of Deeds.[Amended 8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1869]
LOT AREA — See "area."[Amended 8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1869]
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more intersecting streets which
has an interior angle of less than 135º at the intersection of right-of-way
lines of two streets. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be
considered a corner lot if the tangent to the curve at the points beginning
within the lot or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the
street lines intersect at an angle of less than 135º.[Amended 8-25-2004
by Ord. No. 1869]
LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front lot line
to its opposite lot line, measured through the approximate center of the
lot.[Amended 8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1869]
LOT, FLAG — An irregularly shaped lot characterized by an elongated
extension from a street to the principal part of the lot. The flagpole shape of
the lot is normally intended to provide for access to an otherwise landlocked
interior parcel.[Amended 8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1869]
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.[Added 8-25-2004 by Ord.
No. 1869]
LOT LINE — The property lines bounding the lot.[Amended 8-25-2004 by
Ord. No. 1869]
LOT, MANUFACTURED HOME — A parcel of land in a manufactured home
park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single manufactured
home.[Amended 8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1869]
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter but that fails to conform
FRONT LOT LINE (street line) — A lot line separating the lot from the
existing street right-of-way.
A.
REAR LOT LINE — A lot line that is parallel to or within 45º of being
parallel to a front lot line, except for a lot line that is itself a front lot
line. In the case of a corner lot, the owner shall have the option of
choosing which of the two lot lines that are not front lot lines is to be
considered a rear lot line. In the case of a lot of an odd shape, only the
one lot line furthest from any street shall be considered a rear lot line.
A three-sided or triangular lot has no rear lot line.
B.
C. SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:822
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons
of such adoption or amendment.[Amended 8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1869]
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot that abuts two streets but only has
access onto one street and is not a corner lot.[Amended 8-25-2004 by
Ord. No. 1869]
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that abuts two streets and is not a corner
lot.[Added 8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1869]
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between a side lot line and its
opposite lot line, measured at the minimum prescribed front yard setback,
unless otherwise required by this chapter. In the event of a curved front
lot line, the lot width shall be measured using a straight line from end to
end.[Amended 8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1869]
LOUNGE — See "tavern."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
MAJOR SHOPPING CENTER — A shopping center located on a lot with
a lot area of 15 acres or more. The purpose of this use is to provide
opportunities for large community shopping centers directly accessible by
a major roadway. These centers are intended to meet the shopping and
service needs of the Township of Ridley, adjacent and nearby communities
and transient motorists.[Added 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 1758; amended
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1902]
MANMADE DECORATIVE WATER FEATURE — Any manmade stream,
fountain, waterfall, or other manmade water feature containing water that
flows or is sprayed into the air, constructed for decorative, scenic or
landscape purposes, excluding swimming pools, manmade lakes, and
manmade recreational water theme parks.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
MANMADE LAKE — Every manmade bodies of water, including lakes,
ponds, lagoons and reservoirs (excluding tank-type reservoirs which are
fully enclosed and contained), that are filled or refilled with water or
reclaimed wastewater from any source for recreational, scenic or landscape
purposes, except for swimming pools, manmade decorative water features
or manmade recreational water theme parks.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1901]
MANMADE RECREATIONAL WATER THEME PARK — Any manmade bodies
of water in combination, including streams, fountains, waterfalls, swimming
pools, water slides or other manmade water features, used primarily for
contact recreational purposes and existing as the principal use of the
property and open to the general public.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
selections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term does not include recreational vehicles.[Amended
11-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1712]
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:823
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a manufactured home
park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile
home.[Amended 11-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1712]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
which has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
manufactured home lots for the placement thereon of manufactured
homes.[Amended 11-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1712]
MANUFACTURING — Includes the following definitions:[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — The storage and/or utilization of the
following materials to fabricate and/or assemble products with added
value: bones, building products/materials, clay, cork, feathers, gases,
glass, glue, hair, horn, leather, metal, paint and similar surfacing
materials and solvents, paper, plastics, rubber, seeds, shell, stone,
straw, textiles, wax, and wood. Cosmetic manufacturing, electric
plating and glass blowing shall also be included. The incidental storage
and utilization of materials within residential, commercial, special, or
industrial development which are permitted only in more intense
manufacturing districts does not constitute a more intense use, unless
the quantity of such materials meet the definition of hazardous
materials. (See "hazardous material.")
A.
MEDIUM MANUFACTURING — The creation of the following
materials: building products/materials, glass (other than glass
blowing), glue, textiles, and wax, as well as the commercial
manufacturing of small arms ammunition if no more than 50 pounds of
gunpowder is stored at any time. The incidental storage and utilization
of materials within residential, commercial, special or industrial
development which are permitted only in intense manufacturing
districts does not constitute a more intense use unless the quantity
of such materials meets the definition of hazardous materials. (See
"hazardous material.")
B.
HEAVY MANUFACTURING — The creation of the following materials:
chemicals, gases, leather or other tanned goods, metal and smelting
of metal, paint and similar surfacing materials and solvents, paper,
plastics and rubber. The incidental storage and utilization of materials
within residential, commercial, special or industrial development which
are permitted only in intense manufacturing districts does not
constitute a more intense use unless the quantity of such materials
meets the definition of hazardous materials. (See "hazardous
material.")
C.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:824
MINOR SHOPPING CENTER — A shopping center located on a lot with a lot
area of less than 15 acres.[Added 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 1758; amended
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1902]
MOBILE HOME — (See "manufactured home.")[Amended 11-30-1993 by
Ord. No. 1712]
MOBILE HOME LOT — (See "manufactured home lot.")[Amended
11-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1712]
MOBILE HOME PARK — (See "manufactured home park.")[Amended
11-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1712]
MOTEL — A building or group of two or more detached or semidetached
buildings, other than a spa/retreat, containing five or more individual
dwelling or sleeping units, each with a separate exterior entrance, with or
without cooking facilities, designed for or used temporarily by automobile
tourists or transients for rent on a day-to-day basis not intended to exceed
30 consecutive calendar days. Each rentable room shall constitute one
unit.[Amended 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1902]
MOTION PICTURE PRODUCTION/STUDIO — The producing, directing,
editing, filming, recording, or taping of a production, including the use or
transmission via the internet or computer, regardless of whether picture
presentation originates with closed circuit, live broadcast, or cassette, or
other recording, at an established or fixed place of business.[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945."195
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for the
Township of Ridley or for the Planning Commission of the Township of
Ridley.
MUNICIPALITY — Ridley Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. (Also see "home occupation.") The business or
commercial activity must satisfy the following requirements:[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
B.
195. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:825
NOISE ATTENUATING WALL — See "walls, perimeter."[Added 9-26-2007
by Ord. No. 1901]
NONCONFORMING LOT — (See "lot.")
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — (See "structure.")
NONCONFORMING USE — (See "use.")
NONRESIDENT CHILD — A a child who does not ordinarily reside in a
dwelling which is used as a day-care home.
NURSING HOME — A nursing home (also commonly known as a
"convalescent home") is a licensed establishment which provides full-time
convalescent or chronic care or both for three or more individuals who are
not related by blood or marriage to the operator and who, by reason of
chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. No care for
the acutely ill or surgical or obstetrical services shall be provided in such a
home; a hospital shall not be construed to be included in this definition.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit stating that all work indicated on a
building permit has been satisfactorily completed or, in cases not involving
construction, a proposed new use is in conformity with this chapter and the
building or lot may be occupied.
OCCUPANCY, TEMPORARY — The habitation of a building involving
construction pending completion at a future date.
OFFICE — The buildings, structures, or parts thereof used to conduct the
business of administrative, professional or clerical operations, including but
not limited to administrative governmental functions, mortgage companies,
and aviation or flight simulation facilities, but not including any office for
an escort bureau or outcall entertainment referral service. Incidental uses,
such as medical or dental testing or diagnostic services, are permitted in
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stocking or
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including,
but not limited to, parking, signs or lights. No significant additional
vehicular or pedestrian traffic to the residence shall be created, nor
shall the use require delivery by tractor-trailer trucks.
D.
The business activity may not use an equipment or process that creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference,
including interference with radio or television reception, which is
detectable in the neighborhood.
E.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewerage
discharge in volume or type that is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
F.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
G.
H. The business use may not involve any illegal activity.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:826
conjunction with medical and dental offices.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1901]
OFFICIAL MAP — (See "Ridley Township Zoning Map.")
OFF-SITE PARKING — See "on-site parking."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1901]
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring
each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
ON-SITE PARKING — Parking provided for a specific use located on the
same lot. All other parking is off site.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
OPEN SPACE and RECREATIONAL OPEN SPACE[Added 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1901] —
OUTDOOR — Not enclosed by walls and a ceiling.[Added 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1901]
OUTDOOR DINING, DRINKING AND COOKING — The seating, eating/
drinking and/or preparation of food only for patrons outside the area
enclosed within a dining establishment.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
OUTSIDE DISPLAY — The showing of goods, material and/or merchandise
for sale not within an enclosed building.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
OUTSIDE STORAGE — The keeping of any goods, material, merchandise,
or equipment not within an enclosed building, including incidental
maintenance and repair of the material which is being stored.[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A zoning district that imposes additional
requirements, limitations or restrictions beyond those of the underlying
zoning district.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
OPEN SPACE — Land areas which are not and may not be occupied
by any surface designed or intended for vehicular traffic, parking,
buildings, or structures but allow water features and decorative
objects, such as art work, decorative fences, atriums and unenclosed
patios.
A.
RECREATIONAL OPEN SPACE — Includes areas for the purpose of
recreation, including landscaped areas with special lighting and seating
(passive recreation areas such as gardens, town greens, and
promenades), walks, paths, trails (such as jogging paths, para-course
paths, and exercise trails with activity stations), recreational buildings,
game courts and fields, enclosed child play areas, clubhouses, workout
areas, picnic areas, swimming pools, or other similar uses accessible
to each lot or dwelling unit within a development through a system of
public or private walkways.
B.
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:827
PAD SITE — See "commercial pad site."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
PARKING GARAGE — See "garage."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
PASSENGER TERMINAL — An area and building(s) where a facility for the
staging and transportation of passengers is conducted, including bus and
rail depots, and air terminals.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
PEDESTRIAN ARCADE — An area that is contiguous to, and whose floor if
level with, a street or plaza, open and unobstructed to a minimum height
of 12 feet, and accessible to the public at all times.[Added 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1901]
PEDESTRIAN CONNECTION — A continuous, unobstructed, direct route
between two points intended for pedestrian use that may include, but is
not limited to, sidewalks, walkways, stairways, pedestrian bridges, and
trails.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION — Site design and building scale that is
designed with a primary emphasis on streetscape functionality and
pedestrian access to a site (rather than vehicular access and parking
concerns which are limited). Pedestrian-oriented buildings are typically
constructed close to the street with windows and display features facing the
street and main entrances designed to accommodate access from the street
sidewalk.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
PEDESTRIAN SCALE — Site and building design components that are
proportionally smaller than those intended to accommodate vehicular traffic
and large-scale buffering concerns. Pedestrian scale considerations may
include, but are not limited to, reduced height for ornamental lighting, use
of bricks, pavers, or other enhanced paving materials, variety of landscape
materials, awnings that reduce perceived wall heights, and signage
designed for short-distance viewing.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
PERSONAL USE — For the purpose of regulating the storage of hazardous
materials and chemicals, the use by employees or other persons at public
or private facilities of foods, drugs, cosmetics, or other personal items
containing toxic chemicals, including supplies of such products within the
facilities (for example, a facility-operated cafeteria, store, or infirmary), and
also including home use of such products. Examples of personal use items
also include chemical product items used for facility and motor vehicle
maintenance, janitorial cleaning supplies, fertilizers, and pesticides that are
similar in type, quantity, and concentration to consumer products.[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
dwelling, or use, density, or intensity, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one district created, from time to time,
under provisions of this chapter.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:828
PLANNING AGENCY — The Ridley Township Planning Commission.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development whether
preliminary or final.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — For the purpose of regulating accessory
dwelling uses, the office of a member of a recognized profession, as
hereinafter indicated, when conducted on a residential property shall be
conducted by a member or members of the residential family entirely within
a residential building and shall include only the offices of doctors, ministers,
architects, professional engineers, lawyers and similar professional
occupations which may be so designated by the Zoning Hearing Board,
upon findings by such Board that such occupation is truly professional in
character by virtue of the need for similar training and experience as a
condition for the practice thereof and that the practice of such occupation
shall in no way adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of
property rights in any zone in which it is located to a greater extent than for
professional activities listed herein. The issuance of a state or local license
or regulation of any gainful occupation need not be deemed indicative of
profession standing.[Amended 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1902]
PUBLIC FACILITY — Any infrastructure facility, building, structure, service,
or combination thereof intended for use by the general public or land
approved for such use that is owned, leased, operated and/or controlled by a
local, state, or federal government entity performing government functions.
Public facilities may be community serving for local neighborhood
communities, including facilities such as reservoirs, flood control basins,
trail systems, fire and police stations, public schools and libraries,
neighborhood parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, and athletic fields; or
they may be regionally serving for extended geographic regions, including
facilities such as airports, bus barns, marinas, golf courses, convention
centers, and universities.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
PUBLIC GROUNDS — See "public facility."[Amended 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1902]
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain public
comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 338, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."196
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in any newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such
notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature
of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall
not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than
seven days from the date of the hearing.
196. Editor's Note: See now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:829
RACETRACK — A course designed for contests of speed, including car,
motorcycle, bicycle, dog, horse, or similar races.[Added 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1901]
RADIO TOWER — See "communication tower."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1901]
RAILROAD TERMINAL OR YARD — See "passenger terminal" or "freight
terminal."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
RECORDING STUDIO — A facility used to electronically copy sound to
any electronic device, (including dubbing) including, but not limited to,
record, tape, and/or compact disc, when acoustically designed to prevent
the emanation of noise from the interior of the facility.[Added 9-26-2007
by Ord. No. 1901]
RECREATIONAL OPEN SPACE — See "open space and recreational open
space."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
RECREATIONAL RAMPS — Any structure or improvement which is used
for the purpose of riding or propelling wheeled vehicles, including but not
limited to skateboards, bicycles, roller skates or other similar vehicles or
devices. Small skateboard units commonly known as "quarter pipes" or
other similar structures that are easily portable by an individual under his
or her own power are excluded from this definition.[Added 2-25-2004 by
Ord. No. 1852]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:[Amended 11-30-1993
by Ord. No. 1712]
RECREATION FACILITY — A facility or area used for sport, entertainment,
games of skill, or recreation by the general public for a fee, or when not
in conjunction with a principal use. Examples include, but are not limited
to, amphitheaters, amusement systems, arenas, bowling alleys, roller and
ice skating rinks, game courts, swimming pools, amusement/theme parks
(located at a specific location for generally more than a year), golf courses,
ranges, private convention and reception facilities, and go-cart tracks, but
does not include adult uses, movie theaters, health clubs, or arcades. (Also
see "amusement system.")[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCE — Any method, process or substance
whose supply as rejuvenated through natural processes and, subject to
those natural processes, remains relatively constant, including, but not
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:830
limited to, biomass conversion, geothermal energy, solar and wind energy
and hydroelectric energy and excluding those sources of energy used in the
fission and fusion processes.
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall
not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer or agency, nor shall any
appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the body,
board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall be
made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to any
proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost of
reproduction.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY — Any type of dwelling(s) used for human
habitation.197
RESORT CONDOMINIUM — A commercial hotel condominium
development that can be subdivided into individual rooms or suites for
separate ownership or time-share, and that may include cooking facilities.
A resort condominium may be used for continuous, unlimited residency
by a single individual, group or family and may also be offered to the
general public on a day-to-day basis, as required and enforced by the
covenants, conditions and restrictions of the commercial condominium
development.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
RESORT HOTEL — See "hotel, resort."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
RESTAURANT — Any premises used for the sale of food, refreshments
and/or beverages. All restaurants shall be classified as one of the
following:[Added 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 1758]
RESTAURANT, SIT-DOWN — A restaurant where the customer is served
by a restaurant employee at the table, booth or counter at which said
items are consumed.
A.
RESTAURANT, COUNTER SERVICE — A restaurant in which the
customer is served at a counter and the food or beverages are
consumed either on or off premises. This definition does not encompass
drive-through or fast food restaurants.
B.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD — Any premises used for the sale of food,
refreshments or nonalcoholic beverages, whose design or method of
operation includes the serving of food or beverages in disposable
containers and in which food or beverages are not normally delivered to
the customer's table by an employee of the restaurant. Such restaurant
C.
197. Editor's Note: The former definitions of RESTAURANT, QUICK SERVICE, and
RESTAURANT, SIT DOWN, which immediately followed this definition, were repealed
3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 1758.
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:831
RETAINING WALL — See "walls, perimeter".[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1901]
REVERSE-FRONTAGE LOT — (See "lot.")
RIDLEY TOWNSHIP ZONING MAP — The official map adopted by this
chapter which delivers the boundaries of the zoning districts, which
accompanies and which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is part of this
chapter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for the public or others for use as a street
or other purpose. Unless otherwise stated, right-of-way shall mean the
existing street right-of-way line.[Amended 8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1869]
ROCKSCAPING — Landscaping with no live-planted material.[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
ROOMER — A person occupying any room or group of rooms forming a
single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but
not for cooking or eating purposes, and paying compensation for lodging or
board and lodging by prearrangement for a week or more at a time to an
owner or operator. Any person occupying such room or rooms and paying
such compensation without prearrangement or for less than a week at a
time shall be classified, for the purposes of this chapter, not as a roomer,
boarder, or lodger but as a guest of a commercial lodging establishment
(motel, hotel, tourist home).
ROOMING HOUSE — An accessory use to a single-family dwelling and
designed to accommodate less than five roomers.
shall also include the delivery of food and beverages in a drive-through
service manner. (See also "drive-through service places.")
OUTDOOR CAFE — Those exterior facilities adjacent to and part of
establishments selling food and/or drink, entirely located on private
property, open to the elements except for a roof or awning and a wall,
railing or fence not exceeding 48 inches, such as commercial decks and
patios. [Added 4-23-2003 by Ord. No. 1839; amended 2-25-2004
by Ord. No. 1853]
D.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, EXISTING OR LEGAL — The line separating a lot from
the established official street right-of-way that either the Township
or the commonwealth will own after the completion of any proposed
subdivision, land development or development of a use under this
chapter.
A.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, FUTURE — Land that is dedicated or is required to be
defined or reserved for future dedication for use as a street and for
related public improvements. The terms "ultimate right-of-way," "rightof-
way reserved for future dedication" and "future right-of-way" shall
have the same meaning. When not required that a "future right-of-way"
be defined, then "future right-of-way" shall have the same meaning as
"existing right-of-way."
B.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:832
ROOT SHIELD — A product that provides an effective root control barrier
between plant materials and hardscape structures, such as sidewalks,
curbing, pavement, concrete, and building foundations, to prevent
structural damage caused by vegetative root penetration or
encroachment.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
SANITARY LANDFILL — The method of refuse disposal by which sand, soil
or other inert material is applied over alternate layers of refuse.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A structure, either self-standing but
permanently fixed to the ground or attached to a building or roof of a
building, which enables the owner to receive television and or radio
transmissions from certain satellites in orbit around the earth.
SCREEN FENCE — See "fence."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
SECURITY FENCE — See "fence."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
SECURITY WALL — See "walls, perimeter."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
SERVICE BAR — The incidental retail sale and service of alcoholic
beverages by the drink at dining tables or booths within a restaurant, only
in conjunction with meals.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
SETBACK LINE[Added 8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1869] —
SEWAGE FACILITY — Any sewer, sewage system, sewage treatment works
or parts thereof designed, intended or constructed for the collection,
treatment or disposal of liquid waste (including industrial waste).
The line within a lot defining the required minimum distance between
any structure to be erected or use to be developed and the adjacent
existing or future street right-of-way or exterior lot line (when the
property is not abutted by a right-of-way). Such line shall be measured
at right angles from and parallel to the front lot line.
A.
Any building setbacks shall be measured from the foundation, exterior
wall or other component of a structure that is closest to the right-of-way
line or lot line from which the setback is being measured, exclusive of
any exceptions stated within this chapter.
B.
Unless otherwise stated, setback distances are for both accessory and
principal structures.
C.
Private streets. For a building setback measured from a private street,
the setback shall be measured from the existing right-of-way of such
a street or the defined access easement lines, if a right-of-way or
easement exists. If a private street does not have a right-of-way or
access easement, then setback shall be measured from the edge of the
cartway.
D.
OFF-LOT SEWAGE FACILITY — Any approved system or part thereof in
which sanitary sewage is collected from buildings and piped by means
of a sewerage system to a sanitary sewage treatment plant.
A.
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:833
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of stores and/or shops forming a central
retail market within a given area.[Added 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 1758]
SIDE YARD — (See "yard.")
SPA/RETREAT — A facility used primarily for relaxation, rejuvenation or
spiritual healing where sleeping accommodations for patrons may be
provided. Physical activities sessions may be part of the overall program
for stay that may include hiking, biking, swimming, ball field activities,
meditation and yoga, and other similar uses. Accessory commercial uses
may be provided in conjunction with the establishment, including, but not
limited to, shops, snack bars, lounges and restaurants, incidental retailing,
personal services (massage, manicures, mud baths) and centralized dining
facilities, however no cooking facilities may be provided in sleeping
units.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use to be granted or denied a zoning permit by
the Zoning Hearing Board on the basis of the specific standards and criteria
specified in Article XVI for the use in question and on the general standards
included in Article XVI. Special exceptions may not be granted for uses
other than those expressly stated in this chapter.
STACKING LANE — An area for temporary queuing of motor vehicles that
serves a particular business or development.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1901]
STORAGE — See "outside storage."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
STREET — A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, whether public
or private, intended primarily as a means of vehicular and pedestrian
travel. The term "street" includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended
to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians. Streets are further classified
as follows:
ON-LOT SEWAGE FACILITY — Any approved system or part thereof
designed to serve a single dwelling or building in which sanitary
sewage is collected in a septic tank, holding tank or similar container
located on the same lot, is untreated except for bacterial action
occurring within such tank and is disposed of either by leaching from
drain lines connected to the tank or by hauling to a sewage treatment
facility.
B.
ARTERIAL STREET — Streets serving large numbers of high speed
traffic and connecting population and employment centers and which
are so designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — Streets which, in addition to giving access
to abutting properties, intercept local streets and provide routes to
community facilities and arterial streets and which are so designated in
the Comprehensive Plan.
B.
LOCAL STREETS — Streets primarily used for access to abutting
properties and generally serving internally developed areas.
C.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:834
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above.[Amended
11-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1712]
STORY, ABOVE GRADE — Any story having its finished floor surface entirely
above grade except that a basement shall be considered as a story above
grade where the finished surface of the floor above the basement
is:[Amended 11-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1712]
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land, including
but not limited to buildings, sheds, signs, fences, mobile homes, commercial
decks or patios, and other similar items.[Amended 4-23-2003 by Ord. No.
1839]
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs of devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.[Amended 11-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1712]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is
started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A local street, parallel and adjacent to
an arterial or collector street, providing access to abutting properties
and control of intersections with the collector or arterial streets.
D.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot; the
limit of a right-of-way.
E.
A. More than six feet above grade plane;
More than six feet above the finished ground level for more than 50%
of the total building perimeter; or
B.
C. More than 12 feet above the finished ground level at any point.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of
use provisions in this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment
of such chapter or amendment or prior to the application of such
chapter or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such
nonconforming structures include but are not limited to nonconforming
signs.
A.
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:835
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Municipal
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements
for which financial security was posted pursuant to Section 509 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code198) of those improvements
required as a condition for final approval have been completed in
accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be
used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SUPPER CLUB — A restaurant with a tavern/bar where the restaurant
operations is a principal business and food sales is no less than 55% gross
revenue of the total sales of food and alcoholic liquor.[Added 9-26-2007
by Ord. No. 1901]
SWIMMING POOL — A body of water in an artificial or semiartificial
receptacle or other container having a depth of water at any point of more
than two feet or a surface area of more than 100 square feet, used or
intended to be used for public, semipublic or private swimming by adults or
children.
TAVERN/BAR/LOUNGE — A place where the sale and service of alcoholic
beverages are sold by the drink, where meals are not required.[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
TELEVISION TOWER — See "communication tower."[Added 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1901]
TEMPORARY FENCE — See "fence."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1901]
THEME PARK — See "amusement/theme park."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1901]
TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS — The attaching of development
rights to specified lands which are desired by the Township of Ridley to be
kept undeveloped, but permitting those rights to be transferred from those
lands so that the development potential which they represent may occur
on other lands within the Township where more intensive development is
deemed by the Township to be appropriate.
TRANSPORTATION SERVICE — A business for the delivery of passengers or
goods, such as taxis, limousines, couriers, or other similar uses, excluding
freight or passenger terminals, but may include tour guide services.[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL — See "passenger terminal."[Added
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
TRASH ENCLOSURE — A screen around a trash container or recyclables
container to block views and to contain trash for pickup. Trash containers
may be screened by walls, fences or buildings.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1901]
198. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:836
TRUCK TERMINAL — See "freight terminal."[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1901]
TURF — Any grassy area maintained by frequent mowing and fertilization
and/or watering, commonly used for lawns and playing fields. The following
describes types of turf:[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — See "future street width."[Added 9-26-2007
by Ord. No. 1901]
USE — Any activity carried on or intended to be carried on in a building or
other structure or on a lot.
UTILITY — Any utility coming under the jurisdiction of the Public Utility
Commission of Pennsylvania.
VARIANCE — A modification of the regulations of this chapter granted
by the Zoning Hearing Board on grounds of practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardship, not self-imposed, pursuant to appropriate provisions
of this chapter and Section 910.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.199
VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT AND STORAGE YARDS — A use of property for
the temporary (60 days or less) storage of motor vehicles only which have
been damaged, repossessed or abandoned.[Added 9-22-1993 by Ord. No.
1706]
WALLS, PERIMETER — An opaque structure constructed with masonry,
brick, concrete, stucco, or other similar material, that is greater than 36
FUNCTIONAL TURF — A turf area designed or suitable for recreational
purposes.
A.
NONFUNCTIONAL TURF — Turf within medians, streetscapes, and
parking lots; turf for required perimeter landscaping; and turf designed
and suitable only for aesthetic purposes.
B.
ACCESSORY USE — A subordinate use authorized for each zoning
district, normally located on the same lot with a principal use.
A.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this
chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance
or amendment, or prior to the application of such ordinance or
amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
B.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary purpose of purposes for which a lot
is occupied as listed in the use regulations for each zoning district.
If more than two principal uses occupy a single lot, each such use
must be positioned so that the lot on which such uses are located
could subsequently be subdivided, separating each use yet meeting all
applicable district dimensional requirements.
C.
199. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:837
inches in height, and constructed within a required setback for the purpose
of providing security and/or buffering for the property owner. Walls
constructed within the buildable area and which are not affixed to the
principal building shall be considered accessory structures (See "fence").
The following describes types of perimeter walls:[Added 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1901]
WATER-DEPENDENT USE — A use that requires direct access to or location
adjacent to the Delaware River, Darby Creek, Ridley Creek or Crum Creek
and which, therefore, is not customarily located in inland areas. Waterdependent
uses include, but are not limited to, marinas, recreational and
commercial fishing and boating facilities, waterfront dock and port
facilities, and commercial and industrial uses dependent on waterborne
transportation.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1901]
WATER FACILITY — Any water works, water supply works, water
distribution system or part thereof designed, intended or constructed to
provide or distribute potable water.
BLOCK WALL — A perimeter wall enclosing property which need not
be a decorative wall and may also be in the form of rock features,
waterfalls and decorative forms, providing the wall complies with
height restrictions.
A.
BUFFER WALL — A wall that mitigates the potential negative impact
between uses.
B.
DECORATIVE WALL — A wall having an appearance enhanced by either
texture or design finished with stucco, plasters, tile, or brick, splitfaced
block, block containing a pattern or design or a combination of
any of the above. A decorative wall shall not include the standard,
solid gray concrete masonry unit or concrete walls with a flat finish
nor include wood or chain link fences, either with or without slats.
Wherever possible, decorative walls shall have a harmonious
relationship with existing adjoining walls.
C.
NOISE ATTENUATING WALL — A wall constructed between adjacent
uses designed to mitigate the impact of noise generated by one use on
an adjacent use.
D.
RETAINING WALL — A wall where the grade on one side of the wall is
greater than the grade on the opposite side, if engineered so that the
wall is designed to support the weight of the soil on the high side of the
wall. Paving or a similar treatment of a slope to prevent erosion is not a
retaining wall.
E.
SECURITY WALL — A wall that meets the requirements of a security
fence (see "security fence".)
F.
OFF-LOT WATER DISTRIBUTION FACILITY — Any approved system
in which potable water is supplied from a central water source to a
dwelling or other building located off the lot on which such dwelling or
building is located.
A.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:838
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface-water resources within a municipality.
XERISCAPING — Landscaping with slow-growing, drought-tolerant plants
to conserve water and reduce yard trimmings.[Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1901]
YARD — An area not covered by buildings and that is on the same lot
as the subject structure or use. Regulations of specific districts prohibit
principal and accessory structures within specified required minimum
yards.[Amended 8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1869]
YARD, FRONT — An area required to be open to the sky and not covered by
buildings between the front lot line and a line drawn parallel to such front
lot line at a distance specified by the applicable section of this chapter. A
front yard shall extend the entire length of the front lot line. No accessory
or principal structure shall extend into the required front yard, except as
provided in this chapter.[Amended 8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1869]
YARD, REAR — An area required to be open to the sky and not covered by
buildings between the rear lot line and a line drawn parallel to such rear
lot line at a distance specified by the applicable section of this chapter. A
rear yard shall extend the full width of the lot from a side lot line to a side
lot line or, in the case of a lot with more than one front yard, a rear yard
shall extend the full width of the lot from a front yard to a side lot line. A
principal building shall not extend into the required rear yard for a principal
building, and an accessory structure shall not extend into the required yard
for an accessory structure, except as provided in this chapter.[Amended
8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1869]
YARD, SIDE — An area required to be open to the sky and not covered
by buildings between a side lot line and a line drawn parallel to such side
lot line at a distance specified by the applicable section of this chapter. A
side yard shall extend the entire length of the lot from a front yard to a
rear yard. A principal building shall not extend into the required side yard
for a principal building, and an accessory structure shall not extend into
the required yard for an accessory structure, except as provided in this
chapter.[Amended 8-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1869]
ZERO LOT LINE — The location of a building on a lot in such a manner
that one or more of the building's sides rests directly on a lot line.[Added
3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 1686]
ZONING HEARING BOARD — A body, named the Ridley Township Zoning
Hearing Board, granted jurisdiction under this chapter or under the
Municipalities Planning Code to render final adjudications.
ZONING MAP — (See "Ridley Township Zoning Map.")
ON-LOT WATER DISTRIBUTION FACILITY — Any approved system in
which potable water is supplied from an individual well to a dwelling or
other building located on the same lot as the well.
B.
§ 325-7 WEAPONS § 325-7
318:839
ZONING OFFICER — The duly appointed municipal official designated by
the Township Commissioners as the administering and enforcing officer for
this chapter.
ZONING PERMIT — A building permit or occupancy permit, or both,
whichever is required in a special circumstance.
§ 325-7 RIDLEY CODE § 325-7
318:840
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts
§ 325-8. Establishment of districts.
The Township of Ridley is hereby divided into districts of different types,
each being of such number, shape, kind and area and of such common unity
of purpose and adaptability of use deemed most suitable to carry out the
purpose of this chapter.
§ 325-9. Zoning Map.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the Township of Ridley is divided into
the following zoning districts:
A Residential District
B Residential District
C Residential District
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
C-2 General Commercial District
SC Shopping Center District [Added 3-11-1997 by Ord. No.
1758]
I Industrial District
SPECIAL DISTRICTS:
APT Apartment District
MH Multiple Type Housing District
FP Floodplain District
Steep Slope Conservation District
MU Municipal Use District [Added 2-25-1998 by Ord. No.
1780]
PRD Planned Residential Development District
IHC Industrial Heritage Corridor District [Added 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1903]
A. The boundaries of the above districts are delivered on a map entitled
"Ridley Township Zoning Map" which accompanies and which, with all
explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter.
B. Furthermore, all land which is not classified and made part of one of the
Districts set forth in § 325-8 as of the date of the enactment of this
amendment, including but not limited to the land in the right-of-way of
the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad tracks and the Philadelphia, Baltimore &
Washington Railroad tracks is hereby classified B Residential.
C. However, there are several parcels of land existing within the Railroad
right-of-way which appear unzoned on the Ridley Township Zoning Map
§ 325-8 WEAPONS § 325-9
318:841
§ 325-10. Applicability.
Unless otherwise provided by law or in this chapter, no building, structure
or land in each district shall be used or occupied except for the express
purpose applicable thereto. Uses, structures and lots existing at the time of
passage of this chapter and not in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter shall comply with the applicable provisions of Article XV.
§ 325-11. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of a district as
indicated on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
but which were previously zoned and never designated as such on
the map. These parcels shall retain whatever zoning classification they
previously had obtained and shall not be affected by this present zoning
amendment.
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding
with the center lines of streets, highways, railroad lines or streams,
such center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to center lines of streets and highways, such district
boundaries shall be construed as parallel thereto and at such distances
therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map.
§ 325-9 RIDLEY CODE § 325-11
318:842
ARTICLE IV
A Residential Districts
§ 325-12. Intended purpose.
The A Residential Districts are composed of low density residential areas
of the Township, plus certain open areas where similar residential
development appears likely to occur. The regulations for these districts are
designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the area,
protect the amenities of certain areas of the Township where the pattern
has already been established with single-family development on relatively
large lots and promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life.
To these ends, development is restricted to conventional low density singlefamily
detached dwellings and related land uses.
§ 325-13. Permitted uses.
A structure may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premise may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Churches and similar places of worship.
C. Public grounds.
D. General gardening and the growing of trees and nursery stock; not
including roadside displays or commercial signs.
E. Public utility structures, subject to regulations in Article XIII of this
chapter.
F. Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any permitted
uses, including:
(1) Private swimming pools, subject to regulations in Article XIII of this
chapter.
(2) Private garages, carports and accessory buildings, subject to
regulation in Article XIII of this chapter.
(3) Signs, subject to regulation in Article XII of this chapter.
(4) Fence, subject to regulation in Article XIII of this chapter.
(5) Parking, subject to regulation in Article XIII of this chapter.
(6) Satellite dishes 39 inches in diameter or smaller as an accessory
use to a dwelling, subject to regulation in Article XIII of this
chapter. [Added 4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 1782]
§ 325-12 WEAPONS § 325-14
318:843
§ 325-14. Special exception uses.
The following special exception uses shall be permitted, subject to the
issuance of a permit by the Zoning Hearing Board as provided for in this
chapter.
§ 325-15. Dimensional requirements.
In this district, any structure, hereafter erected or any lot hereafter used or
occupied for any lawful purpose shall provide the minimum and not exceed
the maximum dimensions specified below.
A. Hospital or sanitarium.
B. Professional offices and home occupations, subject to regulation in
Article XIII of this chapter.
C. Installation or erection of a satellite dish larger than 39 inches in
diameter as an accessory use to a dwelling, subject to regulation in
Article XIII of this chapter. [Amended 4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 1782]
D. Day-care home, as an accessory use to a dwelling, subject to regulation
in Article XIII of this chapter.
E. Recreational ramps, subject to regulation in Article XIII of this chapter.
[Added 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1852]
A. The building area shall not exceed 20% of the lot area, and in no case
shall any building be erected on a lot with an area of less than 6,000
square feet and width of less than 60 feet. [Amended 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1903]
B. There shall be a front yard, the depth of which shall be at least 30 feet.
C. In case of a corner lot, a front yard as provided for in § 325-15B shall be
required on each street on which the lot abuts.
D. In case of a single-family dwelling, there shall be two side yards, one on
each side of the main building, the aggregate widths of which shall be
at least 30 feet, and neither side yard shall be less than 10 feet wide.
E. In the case of churches or other places of worship, there shall be two
side yards. If such building is not over 40 feet high, the width of each of
the side yards shall be at least 20 feet; and if such building is over 40
feet high, this width shall be increased five feet for each 12 feet or
portion thereof, by which the building exceeds 40 feet in height.
F. There shall be a rear yard, the depth of which shall be at least 25 feet;
provided that if at the time this chapter becomes effective, any lot is
held in single and separate ownership with a depth of less than 100
feet, the depth of the rear yard shall be at least 15 feet. In case of a
building over 40 feet high, the depth shall be increased five feet for
§ 325-14 RIDLEY CODE § 325-15
318:844
each 12 feet or portion thereof by which the building exceeds 40 feet in
height.
G. No garage or accessory building that is separated from the main
building shall hereafter be located at a distance of less than 30 feet
from any portion of any other building erected on the same lot. A deck
addition is not to be included as part of the main building for purposes
of this calculation. [Amended 4-20-1995 by Ord. No. 1735]
H. Accessory structure dimensional requirements shall be required by
Article XIII of this chapter.
I. No building may be erected, altered or used, nor may any lot be used,
which may be noxious or offensive by reason of odor, dust, fumes,
smoke, gas, vibration or noise.
J. The minimum habitable floor area of any new dwelling unit hereafter
utilized shall be:
(1) One-story dwelling: 1,150 square feet for residential purposes.
(2) One-and-one-half story dwelling: approximately 1,300 square feet
for residential purposes.
(3) Two-story dwelling: 1,450 square feet for residential purposes.
K. Flag lot conditions and standards shall be as required by Article XIII of
this chapter.
§ 325-15 WEAPONS § 325-15
318:845

ARTICLE V
B Residential Districts
§ 325-16. Intended purpose.
The B Residential Districts are composed of certain medium density
residential areas of the Township representing one dwelling, plus certain
open areas where similar residential development appears likely to occur.
The regulations for these districts are designed to stabilize and protect
the essential characteristics of the districts and promote and encourage a
suitable environment for family life. To these ends, development is limited to
medium density concentration, permitting primarily single- and two-family
dwellings.
§ 325-17. Permitted uses.
A structure may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following uses and no other:
§ 325-18. Special exception uses.
The following special exception uses shall be permitted, upon the issuance
of a permit by the Zoning Hearing Board as provided in this chapter:
§ 325-19. Dimensional requirements.
In this district, any structure hereafter erected or any lot hereafter used or
occupied for any lawful purpose shall provide the minimum and not exceed
the maximum dimensions specified below:
A. Uses permitted in the A Residential Districts, subject to the regulations
of the A Residential Districts.
B. Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any of the above
permitted uses, including those specified in the A Residential Districts.
C. Municipal recreation areas.
A. Special exception uses as specified in the A Residential District.
B. Hospital or sanitarium.
C. Family-based community residential facilities, subject to the
requirements of Article XIII of this chapter.
A. The building area shall not exceed 30% of the lot area, and in no case
shall any building be erected on any lot with an area of less than 5,000
square feet and a width of less than 50 feet. [Amended 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1903]
B. There shall be a front yard, the depth of which shall be at least 20 feet.
§ 325-16 WEAPONS § 325-19
318:847
C. In case of a corner lot, a front yard as provided for in § 325-19B shall be
required on each street on which the lot abuts. In case of a single-family
dwelling there shall be two side yards, one on each side of the main
building, the aggregate widths of which shall be at least 20 feet.
Neither side yard shall be less than eight feet wide.
D. There shall be a rear yard, the depth of which shall be at least 25 feet;
provided that if at the time this chapter becomes effective any lot is
held in single and separate ownership with a depth of less than 100
feet, the depth of the rear yard shall be at least 15 feet. In case of a
building over 40 feet high, the depth shall be increased five feet for
each 12 feet or portion thereof by which the building exceeds 40 feet in
height.
E. No garage or accessory building that is separated from the main
building shall hereafter be located at a distance of less than 20 feet
from any portion of any other building erected on the same lot. A deck
addition is not to be included as part of the main building for purposes
of this calculation. [Amended 4-20-1995 by Ord. No. 1735]
F. Accessory structure dimensional requirements shall be as required by
Article XIII of this chapter.
G. No building may be erected, altered, or used, nor may any lot be used,
which may be noxious or offensive, by reason of odor, dust, fumes,
smoke, gas, vibration or noise.
H. The minimum habitable floor area of any new or reconverted dwelling
unit hereafter utilized shall be:
(1) One-story dwelling: 950 square feet for residential purposes.
(2) One-and-one-half-story dwelling: approximately 1,075 square feet
for residential purposes.
(3) Two-story dwelling: 1,200 square feet for residential purposes.
I. Flag lot conditions and standards shall be as required by Article XIII of
this chapter.
§ 325-19 RIDLEY CODE § 325-19
318:848
ARTICLE VI
C Residential Districts
§ 325-20. Intended purpose.
The regulations for these districts are designated to accommodate higher
density residential development in areas conducive to this type of
development in terms of location, accessibility, existing development
patterns and anticipated growth trends.
§ 325-21. Permitted uses.
A structure may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following uses and no other:
§ 325-22. Special exception uses.
The following special exception uses shall be permitted, upon the issuance
of a permit by the Zoning Hearing Board as provided in this chapter:
§ 325-23. Dimensional requirements.
In this district, any structure hereafter erected or any lot hereafter used or
occupied for any lawful purpose shall provide the minimum and not exceed
the maximum dimensions specified below:
A. Uses permitted in the A and B Residential Districts, subject to the
regulations of these districts.
B. Two-family attached or semidetached dwellings.
A. Special exception uses as specified in the A and B Residential Districts.
B. Conversion apartments.
A. The building area shall not exceed 40% of the lot area, and in no case
shall a building be erected on a lot with an area of less than 5,000
square feet and a width of less than 50 feet. [Amended 9-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 1903]
B. There shall be a front yard, the depth of which shall be at least 15 feet.
C. In case of a corner lot, a front yard as provided for in § 325-23B shall be
required on each street on which the lot abuts.
D. In case of a single-family detached dwelling there shall be two side
yards, one on each side of the main building, the aggregate width of
which shall be at least 20 feet. Neither side yard shall be less than eight
feet wide. In case of a single-family semidetached dwelling, the one
building comprising two dwellings shall have two side yards, neither of
which shall be less than 10 feet wide.
§ 325-20 WEAPONS § 325-23
318:849
E. In case of any building other than a single-family dwelling or a building
accessory thereto, there shall be two side yards. If such building is not
over 40 feet high, the width of each of the two side yards shall be at
least 20 feet; and if such building is over 40 feet high, this width shall
be increased five feet for each 12 feet, or portion thereof, by which the
building exceeds 40 feet in height.
F. There shall be a rear yard, the depth of which shall be at least 25 feet;
provided that if at the time this chapter becomes effective any lot is
held in single and separate ownership with a depth of less than 100
feet, the depth of the rear yard shall be at least 15 feet. In the case of a
building over 40 feet high, the depth shall be increased five feet for
each 12 feet or portion thereof by which the building exceeds 40 feet in
height.
G. No garage or accessory building that is separated from the main
building shall hereafter be located at a distance of less than 20 feet
from any portion of any other building erected on the same lot. A deck
addition is not to be included as part of the main building for purposes
of this calculation. [Amended 4-20-1995 by Ord. No. 1735]
H. Accessory structure dimensional requirements shall be as required by
Article XIII of this chapter.
I. No building may be erected, altered or used, nor may any lot be used,
which may be noxious or offensive by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas,
vibration or noise.
J. The minimum habitable floor area of any new dwelling or reconverted
unit hereafter utilized shall be:
(1) One-story dwelling: 720 square feet for residential purposes.
(2) One-and-one-half-story dwelling: approximately 835 square feet for
residential purposes.
(3) Two-story dwelling: 950 square feet for residential purposes.
K. Flag lot conditions and standards shall be as required by Article XIII of
this chapter.
§ 325-23 RIDLEY CODE § 325-23
318:850
ARTICLE VII
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial Districts
§ 325-24. Intended purpose.
These districts are intended to provide a suitable environment for certain
types of uses; primarily retail sales, professional offices and personal
services.
§ 325-25. Permitted uses.
A structure may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following uses and no other:
A. Any use permitted in the C Residential Districts, except single- and twofamily
dwellings, subject to the regulations of the C Residential
Districts.
B. Retail sales shall be conducted only in a fully enclosed building. No
sales or exposure of goods for sale are permitted outside of the
building.
(1) Food market.
(2) Drugstore.
(3) Clothing.
(4) Shoe store.
(5) Restaurant, but not to include the "drive-in" type.
(6) Jewelry store.
(7) Gift shop, florist shop.
(8) Book store, stationery shop.
(9) Radio, television and music store.
(10) Variety store.
(11) Dry goods and notions store.
(12) Hardware store, sporting goods.
C. Offices for lawyers, realtors, architects, engineers, tax consultants and
similar professional businesses; offices for industrial and trade union;
offices for credit union and offices for commercial and civic
organizations.
D. Medical clinics and offices of doctors, dentists, osteopaths and similar
or allied professions but not including veterinarian establishments.
E. Banks, offices of stock brokers and finance agencies.
§ 325-24 WEAPONS § 325-25
318:851
F. Offices for nonprofit organizations, social and fraternal associations,
political and religious organizations.
G. Business office of a public utility, transportation, advertising, insurance,
executive and administrative offices of commercial and industrial
establishments.
H. Offices of local, state and federal government agencies.
I. Miscellaneous business services such as consumer credit reporting
services, telephone answering services, engineering and art supply
dealers.
J. Florist shops, art galleries, specialty shops selling at retail where goods
are not created or stored other than for sale.
K. Mortician and funeral establishments.
L. Studios for musicians, artists, photographers and dancing instruction.
M. Educational instruction and commercial schools.
N. Personal service shops which deal directly with consumers, offices and
establishments, provided that each such use occupies a total floor area
of not more than 4,000 square feet.
(1) Barber and beauty shops.
(2) Dry cleaning and laundry pickup shops.
(3) Tailors and dressmaker shops.
(4) Self-service laundry.
(5) Finance and loan agencies.
(6) Medical and dental offices.
O. Other uses which are similar to the above and subject to the following
regulations:
(1) All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods
produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises
where produced.
(2) All uses in this category shall be subject to approval by the Zoning
Hearing Board prior to issuance of a zoning permit.
P. Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any of the above
permitted uses, including the following:
(1) Advertising signs customarily incidental to any of the permitted
uses pertaining only to the products or services offered for sale on
the premises and subject regulation in Article XII of this chapter.
§ 325-25 RIDLEY CODE § 325-25
318:852
§ 325-26. Special exception uses.
The following special exception uses shall be permitted, upon the issuance
of a permit by the Zoning Hearing Board as provided in this chapter:
§ 325-27. Lot area, building height and yard requirements.
In this district, any structure hereafter erected or any lot hereafter used or
occupied for any lawful purpose shall provide the minimum and not exceed
the maximum dimensions specified below.
(2) Fence, subject to regulation in Article XIII of this chapter.
Q. No permitted use in this district shall include a drive-through or walkup
window whereby the consumer transacts for goods or services outside
of the building. [Added 10-26-1994 by Ord. No. 1728]
A. Hospitals and nursing homes.
B. Residential uses either as the exclusive occupant of a lot or as mixed
use with a permitted nonresidential use are permissible only when, in
the opinion of the Zoning Hearing Board, adequate conditions exist or
can be imposed that will make such uses compatible with the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Building heights in excess of those indicated in § 325-27C of this
chapter.
D. Group-based community residential facilities, subject to the
requirements of Article XIII of this chapter.
A. Lot requirements. Lot widths, area and yard setback requirements of
not less than the dimensions shown as follows shall be provided for any
use permitted in this district.
(1) Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 40 feet.
(3) Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
B. Yard requirements:
(1) Front yard: 20 feet.
(2) Side yard: None required for individual permitted uses, except that
side yards of not less than 25 feet shall be required when abutting
any other districts specified in this chapter.
(3) Rear yard: 20 feet.
C. Building height: No principal structure shall exceed two stories or 35
feet; and no accessory structure shall exceed one story or 15 feet in
height, except as provided in § 325-26C under special exception.
§ 325-25 WEAPONS § 325-28
318:853
§ 325-28. Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements.
[Amended 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1903]
§ 325-29. Limitations on signs.
Only those signs referring or relating to the uses conducted on the premises
or to the materials or products made, sold or displayed on the premises shall
be permitted, and further provided that all signs and advertising structures
shall be maintained in accordance with Article XII of this chapter.
§ 325-30. Buffers required to separate adjacent residential district.
Where C-1 Districts abut any residential district or an alleyway separating
the two districts, a landscaped strip of not less than 10 feet in width shall be
planted and maintained with appropriate vegetative landscaping materials.
Such vegetative planting, including any architectural screens of fences,
shall be planted or constructed and maintained at not less than five feet in
height, except on corner lots where a clear sight area shall be maintained
in accordance with Article XIII of this chapter.
A. Minimum off-street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with Article XIII of this chapter.
§ 325-28 RIDLEY CODE § 325-30
318:854
ARTICLE VIII
C-2 General Commercial Districts
§ 325-31. Intended purpose.
The C-2 General Commercial District is intended to serve the central retail
marketing function of the entire Township and surrounding trade area.
The standards of this district are designed to encourage development of
an intensive self-contained shopping area catering to the free circulation
of pedestrian activity having arrived by automobile, the minimization of
traffic congestion along major thoroughfares and providing buffer yards
and screen planting when necessary to separate residential areas from
commercial areas. This district is intended for a wide range of shopping
and service functions which and provide adequate comparison shopping
activities.
§ 325-32. Permitted uses.
A structure may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following uses and no other:
A. Any principal use permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
Districts.
B. Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of new
merchandise in an enclosed building, including, but not limited to the
following:
(1) Automobile sales, boat sales, motorcycle sales.
C. Retail sales in which both a workshop and a retail outlet or showroom
are required (such as plumbing, electrician, interior decorating,
dressmaking, tailoring, upholstering, photographic reproducing, radio
and home appliance and similar establishments), subject to the
following provision: Not more than 25% of the total usable floor area of
the establishment shall be used for servicing, repairing, manufacturing
or processing activities.
D. Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes and other establishments serving food
and beverages, except those having the character of a "drive-in" type.
E. Enclosed theaters, assembly halls, concert halls, and similar places of
assembly or entertainment.
F. Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any of the above
permitted uses, including the following:
(1) Advertising signs subject to regulation in Article XII of this chapter;
provided, however, that such signs shall not detract from the
general intended purpose of this district.
(2) Fence, subject to regulation in Article XIII of this chapter.
§ 325-31 WEAPONS § 325-32
318:855
§ 325-33. Special exception uses.
The following special exception uses shall be permitted, upon the issuance
of a permit by the Zoning Hearing Board as provided in this chapter:
§ 325-34. Lot area, building height and yard requirements.
§ 325-35. Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements.
[Amended 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1903]
§ 325-36. Limitations on signs.
Only those signs referring or relating to the uses conducted on the premises
or to the materials or products made, sold or displayed on the premises shall
G. Uses which, in the opinion of the Zoning Hearing Board, are of the same
general character as those listed as permitted uses and which will not
be detrimental to the intended purpose of this district.
H. No permitted use in this district shall include a drive-through or walkup
window whereby the consumer transacts for goods or services outside
of the building. [Amended 10-26-1994 by Ord. No. 1728]
A. Minor shopping centers. [Amended 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 1758]
B. Automobile service stations for the sale of petroleum products, tires,
batteries, and accessories only.
C. Building heights in excess of those indicated in § 325-34B.
A. Lot requirements. A lot width, lot area and setbacks of not less than the
dimensions shown on the following table shall be provided for every
principal building erected or altered for any use permitted in this
district.
Lot Requirements Setback Requirements
Min. Lot
Area
Min.
Lot
Width
Max. Lot
Coverage
% Front
One
Side Sides
Total
Rear
5,000 sq.
ft.
40 ft. 70% 30 ft. 20 ft. 50
ft.* (if
provided)
20 ft. 30 ft.
NOTES:
*Side yard requirement when abutting residential districts.
B. Building height. No building shall exceed three stories or 45 feet in
height, unless authorized as a special exception.
A. Minimum off-street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with Article XIII of this chapter.
§ 325-32 RIDLEY CODE § 325-36
318:856
be permitted, and further provided that all signs and advertising structures
shall be maintained in accordance with Article XII of this chapter.
§ 325-37. Buffers required to separate adjacent residential district.
Where C-2 Districts abut any residential district or alleyway separating the
two districts, a landscaped strip of not less than 50 feet in width shall be
planted and maintained with appropriate vegetative landscaping materials.
Such vegetative planting, including any architectural screens, fences or
masonry walls, shall be planted and maintained at not less than five feet in
height, except on corner lots where a clear sight area shall be maintained
in accordance with Article XIII of this chapter.
§ 325-36 WEAPONS § 325-37
318:857

ARTICLE VIIIA
SC Shopping Center District
[Added 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 1758]
§ 325-38. Intended purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide opportunities for large
neighborhood and/or community shopping centers in areas directly
accessible by a major roadway. The district is intended to meet the shopping
and service needs of the residents of the Township, adjacent and nearby
communities, and transients. It is intended that establishments be
constructed in an attached fashion to comprise the shopping center,
although individual detached buildings are permitted.
§ 325-39. Permitted uses.
Land, buildings or premises shall be used only for one or more of the
following uses within a major shopping center:
A. Retail store, including the sale of general merchandise, clothing,
jewelry, footwear, gifts and/or flowers, books, stationery, electronics,
hardware, sporting goods and pharmaceuticals. All retail sales shall be
conducted only in a fully enclosed building. No sales or exposure of
goods for sale are permitted outside of the building.
B. Food store, including grocery, delicatessen, convenience store or
supermarket, liquor store, bakery sales, or ice-cream shop.
C. Sit-down or counter service restaurant, pizza or sandwich shop, tavern
or catering business. Walkup window establishments are strictly
prohibited.
D. Personal service shop, including barber or beautician, shoe repair,
laundromat where actual cleaning and pressing are done off premises,
tailor or similar personal service.
E. Office, office building or studio, bank, or other financial institution.
F. Medical or dental office, veterinarian office.
G. General service or repair shop including furniture and appliance repair.
H. Enclosed theaters, assembly halls, concert halls and similar places of
assembly or entertainment.
I. Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any of the above
permitted uses, including the following:
(1) Advertising signs pertaining only to the products or services
offered for sale on the premises and subject to regulation in Article
XII of this chapter.
(2) Fences, subject to regulation in Article XIII of this chapter.
§ 325-38 WEAPONS § 325-39
318:859
§ 325-40. Uses permitted by special exception.
The following are permitted as special exception uses, upon the issuance
of a permit by the Zoning Hearing Board as provided in this chapter, and
pursuant to the considerations set forth in § 325-116H et seq.
§ 325-41. Lot area, building height and yard requirements.
In this district, any structure hereafter erected or any lot hereafter used or
occupied for any lawful purpose shall provide the minimum and not exceed
the maximum dimensions specified below.
(3) Off-street parking and loading, subject to regulation in Article XIII
of this chapter.
(4) Storage building or enclosure, subject to regulation in Article XIII.
(5) Any accessory use customarily incidental to any of the above
permitted uses, and not detrimental to the neighborhood, subject
to regulation in Article XIII.
A. Building heights in excess of three stories or 45 feet.
B. Place of amusement or recreation, including arcades, health clubs and
spas.
C. Automobile service stations for the retail sale of tires, batteries and
automotive accessories.
D. Drive-through service places, including fast food restaurants, subject to
regulation in Article XIII.
E. Uses which are similar to those permitted by right, provided that all
such establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing
directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the premises where produced.
A. Lot requirements. Lot widths, area and coverage requirements of not
less than the dimensions shown as follows shall be provided for any use
permitted in this district.
(1) Minimum lot area: Seven acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(4) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 75%.
(5) Distance between buildings: 35 feet.
B. Yard requirements. No building or permanent structure other than a
permitted sign or traffic control device shall be erected within the
§ 325-39 RIDLEY CODE § 325-41
318:860
§ 325-42. Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements.
[Amended 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1903]
§ 325-43. Special development regulations.
following minimum yard areas. Parking and cartways are permitted
within the required yards.
(1) Front yard: 75 feet.
(2) Side yard: 25 feet each, except not less than 50 when abutting any
residential district or use.
(3) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(4) Building height: No principal building shall exceed three stories or
45 feet; and no accessory building shall exceed one story or 15 feet
in height, except as provided in § 325-40A under special exception.
C. Limitations on signs. Only those signs referring or relating to the uses
conducted on the premises or to the materials or products made, sold or
displayed on the premises shall be permitted and further provided that
all signs and advertising structures shall be maintained in accordance
with Article XII of this chapter.
D. Performance standards. The standards prescribed in Article XI
applicable to commercial uses shall be applicable to the Shopping
Center District.
A. Minimum off-street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with Article XIII of this chapter.
A. Buffer area. Where properties in this district abut a residential district
or use, a buffer area, consisting only of ground cover or other plantings,
shall be provided on the property zoned SC Shopping Center District
where it abuts the other property. Such buffer area shall be not less
than 25 feet in width and shall be planted and maintained with
appropriate vegetative landscaping materials.
B. Screening. Where properties in the district abut a residential district or
use, there shall be a planted visual screen within the buffer area
required above. This screen shall not be less than six feet high. A
privacy-type fence or wall not less than six feet high may be substituted
for the planted visual screen upon approval of the Township.
C. Landscaping. Any part or portion of a site which is not used for
buildings, other structures, parking or loading spaces and aisles,
sidewalk and designated storage areas shall be planted with an allseason
cover and shall be landscaped according to an overall plan.
Maximum advantage shall be taken of existing natural plantings in
landscaping.
§ 325-41 WEAPONS § 325-43
318:861
§ 325-44. Regulations for individual buildings.
D. Storage. No permanent storage of merchandise, articles or equipment
shall be permitted outside a building, and no goods, articles or
equipment shall be stored, displayed or offered for sale outside of a
building.
E. Reconstruction of nonconforming structures. In the Shopping Center
District only, if any nonconforming building shall be destroyed by
reason of windstorm, fire, explosion or other disaster, for which the
owner is not at fault, to an extent of 50% of the fair market value of the
building, the owner may rebuild, restore or repair the building, and
such nonconformities which existed prior to said disaster may continue
to exist but may not be expanded. [Added 8-27-1997 by Ord. No.
1769]
A. In addition to construction in an attached fashion, freestanding
buildings are permitted.
B. A landscaped area of not less than three feet in width shall be provided
on all sides of the building.
C. All other regulations in this chapter relating to parking and loading,
signs, etc., shall also apply to individual buildings as described herein.
§ 325-43 RIDLEY CODE § 325-44
318:862
ARTICLE IX
I Industrial Districts
§ 325-45. Intended purpose.
§ 325-46. Permitted uses.
A structure may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following uses and no other:
A. The Industrial Districts are designed to accommodate commercial,
wholesale activities, wholesale and industrial operations whose
external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the districts and
in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding
districts.
B. It is hereby determined that tattoo establishments, body-piercing
establishments and outpatient drug treatment facilities tend to bring
with them secondary concerns that impact the health, safety, and
general welfare concerns of the Township of Ridley. These associated
concerns include the deleterious effects on business and residential
property values and encourage residents and businesses to move
elsewhere. With these goals in mind, the Township is amending this
chapter to restrict or limit the location of where said activities can
locate within the bounds of the Township of Ridley so as to only permit
their use in the Industrial District. [Added 10-22-2014 by Ord. No.
2009]
A. Special trade contractors and building material wholesalers, providing
that all materials and storage are completely enclosed within a building
or similar shelter.
B. Utilities and communications, such as electrical receiving or
transforming stations, radio or television broadcasting stations and gas
service buildings and yards.
C. Warehousing, refrigerated and general storage.
D. Local and suburban transit and passenger transportation facilities,
trucking transportation terminals, maintenance and service facilities.
E. Laundries, laundry services and cleaning and dyeing plants.
F. Industrial plants manufacturing, processing or assembling the
following:
(1) Agricultural products.
(2) Food and kindred products.
(3) Furniture and fixtures.
(4) Printing, publishing and paperboard products.
§ 325-45 WEAPONS § 325-46
318:863
§ 325-47. Special exception uses.
The following special exception uses shall be permitted, upon the issuance
of a permit by the Zoning Hearing Board as provided in this chapter:
(5) Biological products, drugs, medicinal chemicals and
pharmaceutical preparation.
(6) Electrical machinery, equipment and supplies, electronic
components and accessories.
(7) Professional scientific and controlling instruments, photographic
and optical goods.
(8) Any uses which are charged with the principal function of research,
such as industrial research, scientific research and business
research.
(9) Any other manufacturing plant and uses having performance
characteristics similar to those listed in this district in that they
emit a minimum of noise, vibration, smoke, glare, electromagnetic
or atomic radiation, dust, dirt nor toxic or offensive odors or gases.
G. Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any of the above
permitted uses, including:
(1) Signs, subject to regulation in Article XII of this chapter.
(2) Fence, subject to regulation in Article XIII of this chapter.
H. Uses which, in the opinion of the Zoning Hearing Board are of the same
general character as those listed as permitted uses and which will not
be detrimental to the intended purpose of this district.
I. No permitted use in this district shall include a drive-through or walkup
window whereby the consumer transacts for goods or services outside
of the building. [Added 10-26-1994 by Ord. No. 1728]
J. Tattoo establishments and body-piercing establishments, subject to the
requirements of Chapter 155, Articles XI and XII. [Added 10-22-2014
by Ord. No. 2009]
K. Outpatient drug treatment facilities. [Added 10-22-2014 by Ord. No.
2009]
A. Hotels and motels.
B. Billboards.
C. Building heights in excess of those indicated in § 325-48B.
D. Industrial parks.
E. Amusement centers.
§ 325-46 RIDLEY CODE § 325-47
318:864
§ 325-48. Lot area, building height and yard requirements.
[Amended 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1903]
§ 325-49. Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements.
[Amended 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1903]
§ 325-50. Limitations on signs.
Only those signs referring or relating to the uses conducted on the premises
or to the materials or products made, sold or displayed on the premises shall
be permitted and further provided all signs and advertising structures shall
be maintained in accordance with Article XII of this chapter.
§ 325-51. General requirements.
Where districts abut any other nonindustrial use district, a landscaped strip
of not less than 20 feet in width shall be planted and maintained with
appropriated vegetative landscaping materials. Such vegetative planting,
including any architectural screens or fences shall be planted and
maintained at not less than five feet in height, except on corner lots where
a clear sight shall be maintained in accordance with Article XIII of this
chapter.
F. Vehicle impoundment and storage yards, subject to regulation in Article
XIII of this chapter. [Added 9-22-1993 by Ord. No. 1706]
G. Communication towers, subject to the requirements of Article XIII of
this chapter. [Added 1-18-1996 by Ord. No. 1745]
A. Minimum off-street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with Article XIII of this chapter.
Lot Requirements Setback Requirements
Min.
Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width
Max. Lot
Coverage
% Front
One
Side
Total
Sides Rear
None None 70% 30 ft. 20 ft. 50
ft.*
40 ft. 30 ft.
NOTES:
*Side yard requirements when abutting residential districts.
B. Building height. No building shall exceed three stories or 45 feet in
height, unless authorized as a special exception.
A. Minimum off-street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with Article XIII of this chapter.
§ 325-47 WEAPONS § 325-51
318:865

ARTICLE X
Special Districts
§ 325-52. APT Apartment Districts.
A. Intended purpose. These district regulations are designed to provide
areas for apartment development within the Township, where
reasonable access to shopping, arterial streets and public
transportation exists. It shall be the purpose of these districts to
provide exclusively for multiple-family dwellings and appropriate
support and accessory uses.
B. Standards and regulations.
(1) There shall be no storage of any kind, including but not limited to
trash and garbage, on the outside of any building.
(2) Rights-of-way, to be first approved by the Township Officials of the
arrangement of public and private sidewalks, so as to most
advantageously protect pedestrians from the hazards of motor
vehicle traffic.
(3) All occupant or tenant laundry washing and drying facilities shall
be within the apartment building or screened by suitable walls or
solid fences from both the street and adjoining properties.
(4) Construction to be of fire-resistant materials, with such additional
fire prevention and fire fighting facilities as may be required by the
Board of Township Commissioners and the Department of Labor
and Industry.
(5) No building or group of buildings shall be built on a tract of ground
less than one acre in area.
(6) The lot area for each dwelling unit shall be not less than 1,000
square feet.
(7) A setback of not less than 50 feet shall be provided as a front yard
on each street which the building abuts.
(8) No building shall occupy more than 30% of the lot area.
(9) Rear yard areas must be provided for a depth of at least 35 feet.
(10) Where any such lot or tract of ground abuts a residential district
located within or without the Township boundaries, all apartment
buildings shall be not less than 40 feet from the said residential
district boundary line.
(11) Where there are more than one apartment house buildings on a lot
or tract of ground, the distance between any two apartment houses
shall be not less than 20 feet.
§ 325-52 WEAPONS § 325-52
318:867
§ 325-53. MH Multiple Type Housing Districts.
(12) Minimum off-street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with Article XIII of this chapter. [Amended 9-26-2007
by Ord. No. 1903]
(13) No apartment house building shall exceed 50 feet in height.
(14)No commercial or professional facilities shall be permitted in any
apartment building, except by special exception granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board. Parking requirements for the approval of
such uses are six spaces for each professional occupying and
utilizing such apartment as a professional office and six spaces for
each commercial establishment.
(15)No permit for the construction of any apartment house building
shall be issued unless the application therefore shall first be
submitted to the Township Planning Commission, in order that
compliance with this chapter and all other applicable ordinances
can be assured.
C. Special exception uses. The following special exception uses are
permitted when authorized as a special exception granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board as provided in this chapter:
(1) Family-based community residential facilities, subject to the
requirements of Article XIII of this chapter.
A. Intended purpose. These districts are intended to provide a variety of
housing types for low and moderate income families.
B. Permitted uses. A building or buildings may be erected, altered or used;
and a parcel of land may be used for any or a combination of the
following purposes and no other:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Multifamily dwellings.
(3) Semidetached dwellings.
(4) Apartments.
(5) Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any of the
above permitted uses.
(6) Family-based community residential facilities are permitted when
authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board,
subject to the requirements of Article XIII of this chapter.
(7) Group-based community residential facilities are permitted when
authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board,
subject to the requirements of Article XIII of this chapter.
§ 325-52 RIDLEY CODE § 325-53
318:868
C. Standards and regulations.
(1) Disposal of sewage shall be through public sewer system.
(2) There shall be no storage of any kind, including but not limited to
trash and garbage, on the outside of any building which is more
than 2 1/2 stories in height.
(3) The arrangement of public and private sidewalks, if any, shall be
subject to approval by the Township officials so as to most
effectively protect pedestrians from the hazards of motor vehicle
traffic.
(4) In buildings of three stories or more, all occupant or tenant laundry
washing and drying facilities shall be within the building or
screened by suitable walls or solid fences from both the street and
adjoining properties.
(5) All buildings hereafter constructed in this district shall be
constructed of fire-resistant materials, with such additional fire
prevention and fire-fighting facilities as may be required by the
Board of Township Commissioners and the Department of Labor
and Industry.
(6) No building or group of buildings shall be built on a parcel of land
less than one acre in area.
(7) The density of living units shall not exceed the product of the total
square feet contained in the parcel of land upon which the building
or buildings are erected or are to be erected divided by 1,000.
(8) Building coverage of all buildings shall not exceed 30% of a parcel
of land. Excluding existing buildings, no more than three buildings
in excess of 2 1/2 stories shall be permitted on a parcel of land. The
computation of building coverage shall be based upon the gross
area of the parcel of land including areas of the parcel within
easements or rights of way of existing or future streets, highways,
pipelines and utilities and areas required for sidewalks. For the
purposes of this subsection that part of a building located between
floors and having less than 75% of its wall area above grade shall
not be considered as a story.
(9) A front yard of not less than 20 feet from any street upon which any
building fronts shall be provided.
(10)No building hereafter constructed shall be constructed closer than
20 feet to any other building.
(11)No building hereafter constructed shall be constructed closer than
35 feet to any property line of the parcel of land upon which it is
located.
§ 325-53 WEAPONS § 325-53
318:869
§ 325-54. (Reserved)200
§ 325-55. Steep Slope Conservation District.
(12) One off-street parking or garage space shall be provided for every
two dwelling units. Required yard setback and other open areas
may be uses for off-street parking. A parking space shall mean a
space on a lot for the parking of a motor vehicle to which there is an
access from a street, nondedicated private street or alley.
(13)No apartment building shall exceed 75 feet in height; provided,
however, where any apartment building exceeds 60 feet in height,
the minimum setbacks, yard areas and distances between buildings
relative to such building shall be increased by one foot for each one
foot of height above 55 feet.
(14) Commercial facilities shall be permitted in any apartment building
provided those facilities are designed and intended to serve only
the tenants of such apartment buildings and tenants of other
buildings situate on the same parcel of land.
D. For the purposes of defining permitted uses in this district, the term
"semidetached dwellings" shall be defined as any building or attached
buildings designed to be occupied by two families, each family
occupying a single living unit.
E. For the purposes of defining permitted uses in this district, the term
"apartments" shall be defined as any building or attached buildings
designed to provide living units for three or more families living
independently of each other and assigned different sections thereof.
F. In the case of a parcel of land held in single ownership at the effective
date of this chapter, which does not comply with the requirements for
minimum area width or open spaces, any lesser area, width or open
space may be permitted when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
G. For the purposes of defining uses in this district, the term "accessory
uses" shall include but not be limited to administration offices,
maintenance facilities, storage facilities and recreational facilities, all
or any of which may be located in any of the permitted uses or in a
freestanding building or buildings.
H. No permit for the construction of any apartment building shall be
issued unless the application therefor shall first be submitted to the
Township Planning Commission, in order that compliance with this
chapter and all other applicable ordinances of the Township can be
assured.
200. Editor's Note: Former § 325-54, FP Floodplain District, as amended, was repealed
12-19-2012 by Ord. No. 1995. For current provisions, see Ch. 138, Flood Damage
Prevention.
§ 325-53 RIDLEY CODE § 325-55
318:870
A. Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to expand upon the
community development objectives associated with environmental
protection and the preservation of natural resources expressed in
Article I of this chapter. Further, these provisions are designed to
encourage the sensitive treatment of hillsides and their related soil and
vegetation resources in an effort to minimize adverse environmental
impacts. The following objectives serve to complement these specific
purposes and the overall purposes of this chapter.
(1) To conserve and protect steep and very steep slopes from
inappropriate development such as excessive grading, land form
alteration and extensive vegetation removal.
(2) To avoid potential hazards to property and the disruption of
ecological balance which may be caused by increased runoff,
flooding, soil erosion and sedimentation, blasting and ripping of
rock, and landslide and soil failure.
(3) To encourage the use of steep and very steep slopes for open space
and other uses which are compatible with the preservation of
natural resources and protection of areas of environmental
concern.
B. General provisions.
(1) Compliance. No area within the Steep Slope Conservation District
shall hereafter be used without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations.
(2) Preservation of other restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter
to repeal, abrogate or impair any regulations set forth in any other
articles herein, any regulations set forth in any regulation of
Chapter 268, Subdivision and Land Development, or any
easements, covenants or deed restrictions, its provisions shall
prevail.201 Further, nothing contained in this chapter shall diminish
in any way the provisions of the Clean Streams Law202 and/or
Chapter 102 of the Department of Environmental Protection's
Rules and Regulations, or any other applicable state, federal,
county or Township regulations, codes, ordinances and the like.
(3) Definition. A "minor subdivision" is a subdivision of land less than
10 acres not involving any easement of access or creation of a
street or including a residential dwelling. All other subdivisions
shall be considered major subdivision.
C. Boundary definition and mapping.
(1) The Steep Slope Conservation District is comprised of areas of
steep and very steep slopes, as shown on the Steep Slope
201. Editor's Note: So in original.
202. Editor's Note: See See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 325-55 WEAPONS § 325-55
318:871
Conservation District Map which is attached to and made part of
this chapter. The map constitutes only a general representation of
steep and very steep slopes, based on the analysis of the contours
displayed on the United States Geological Survey (USGS)
Quadrangles for Media and West Chester, Pennsylvania. As such,
refined mapping will be required to more accurately define the
district, as specified in § 325-55C(4) below.
(2) Areas of steep slope are characterized by a change in elevation
from 15% to 25% over a specified distance of contour interval.
(3) Areas of very steep slope are characterized by a change in
elevation greater than or equal to 25% over a specified distance or
contour interval.
(4) The Steep Slope Conservation District Map shall be considered as
an overlay to the Ridley Township Zoning Map subject to the
following:
(a) The district shall have no effect on the permitted uses in the
underlying zoning district, except where said uses, intended to
be located within the boundaries of the district, are in conflict
with the permitted uses set forth in § 325-55D herein.
(b) In those areas of the Township where this district applies and
the requirements of this district are in conflict with the
permitted uses set forth in § 325-55D herein, this section shall
supersede the requirements of the underlying zoning district.
[1] Should the district boundaries be revised as a result of
judicial decision, the zoning requirements applicable to
the area in question shall revert to the requirements of the
underlying zoning district(s) without consideration of this
section.
(5) Interpretation of district boundaries.
(a) The Steep Slope Conservation District Map shall be used as a
general guide for determining the boundaries of the district. In
any application for major subdivision and/or land development,
the applicant shall, using two-foot contours, delineate slopes
from 15% to 25% and greater than or equal to 25%. In the case
of a minor subdivision, five-foot contours shall be used.
Further, the applicant shall use an actual field topographic
survey as the source of contour information and the basis for
depicting such slope categories.
(b) Once delineated, the mapping of the applicant will be reviewed
by the Planning Commission and the Township Engineer. The
applicant will be required to follow all regulations of this
chapter for those areas which reflect steep slope and very
§ 325-55 RIDLEY CODE § 325-55
318:872
steep slope conditions as determined through the Planning
Commission's and Township Engineer's review.
D. Use and regulations.
(1) Permitted principal uses in areas of very steep slope (greater than
25%):
(a) Agricultural uses that do not require cultivation or structures.
(b) Conservation and recreation uses not requiring structures.
(c) Structures existing prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(d) Front, rear and side yards of any lot or tract.
(2) Special exception uses (refer to § 325-55E and F) in areas of very
steep slopes (greater than 25%):
(a) Conservation and recreation uses requiring structures.
(b) Agricultural structures and cultivation.
(c) Proposed utilities, easements and right-of-way.
(d) Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the foregoing.
(e) Accessory structures to any uses permitted in § 325-55D(1).
(f) Roads and driveways only when no viable alternative
alignment of location is feasible.
(3) Prohibited uses and activities in areas of very steep slope (greater
than 25%):
(a) Cut and fill, other than in association with any uses related to
§ 325-55D(1) and (2) above.
(b) Soil, rock or mineral extraction, and/or removal, other than in
association with any uses related to § 325-55D(1) and (2)
above.
(c) Removal of topsoil, other than in association with any uses
related to § 325-55D(1) and (2) above.
(d) On-lot sewage disposal systems.
(4) Permitted principal uses in areas of steep slope (15% to 25%):
(a) Any principal use permitted in § 325-55D(1) herein.
(5) Special exception uses (refer to § 325-55E and F) in areas of steep
slope (15% to 25%):
(a) Any special exceptions identified in §§ 325-14, 325-18 and
325-22 and the following:
§ 325-55 WEAPONS § 325-55
318:873
(b) Single-family detached dwellings.
(c) Stormwater management facilities.
(d) Sanitary sewers and sewage pumping stations.
(e) On-lot sewage disposal systems.
(f) Buildings and other structures in the commercial and
industrial districts.
(g) Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to the
foregoing.
(6) Prohibited uses and activities in areas of steep slope (15% to 25%):
(a) Cut and fill other than in association with any uses related to
§ 325-55D(4) and (5) above.
(b) Soil, rock or mineral extraction and/or removal other than in
association with any uses related to § 325-55D(4) and (5)
above.
E. Application procedure. All applications for any use of land within the
Steep Slope Conservation District shall include the submission of the
following materials and information:
(1) Plans drawn to a scale of at least one inch equals 50 feet sealed by
a registered professional engineer, depicting the following:
(a) The location, dimensions and elevations of the property.
(b) Existing and proposed uses and development.
(c) Existing and proposed contours at two foot intervals, except
that five-foot contours may be used for minor subdivisions or
development on a single lot.
(d) The location and boundaries of steep slopes and very steep
slopes as described in § 325-55C.
(e) Typical cross-sections and elevations of the property and
proposed structures at intervals prescribed by the Township
Engineer.
(f) Existing land cover characteristics of that portion of the
property within the Steep Slope Conservation District
indicating wooded areas, open areas and their ground cover
type and any areas with impervious surfaces. The
modifications proposed to the existing land cover shall also be
indicated.
(g) Photographs showing existing uses, vegetation and topography
of areas within the Steep Slope Conservation District.
§ 325-55 RIDLEY CODE § 325-55
318:874
§ 325-56. Municipal Use District. [Added 2-25-1998 by Ord. No.
1780]
(2) A report describing the slope, soil and vegetation characteristics of
that portion of the property within the subject district. Such report
shall also describe the proposed type and methods of proposed
building construction, the type of foundation system(s) to be
employed, and proposals for landscaping, sewage disposal and
water supply. Further, the report shall describe all sediment and
erosion control measures to be used as required by Ridley
Township and/or the Department of Environmental Protection; and
any and all additional engineering and conservation techniques
designed to alleviate environmental impacts which may be created
by proposed development activities.
F. Standards for approval of special exception uses.
(1) In addition to the standards described in § 325-116H pertaining to
special exception uses, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the following:
(a) The degree of modification, proposed within the district, to the
topographic, soil and vegetation resources, and the techniques
proposed to mitigate potential environmental impacts.
(b) The effect the development of the subject district would have
on adjacent properties.
(c) The relationship of the proposed uses to the objectives
described in § 325-55A herein.
G. Any uses of structure(s) approved as a special exception use shall
provide evidence that:
(1) The Steep Slope Conservation District is being proposed for
development since no other alternative location is feasible or
practical.
(2) Earthmoving activities and vegetation removal will be conducted
only to the extent necessary to accommodate proposed uses and
structures and in a manner will not cause excessive surface water
runoff, erosion, sedimentation and unstable soil condition. Further,
it shall be demonstrated that any and all reasonable mitigation
techniques and procedures will be utilized or have been considered
in the preparation of the subdivision and/or land development plan.
(3) Proposed buildings and structures are of sound engineering design
and footings are assigned in response to the site's slope, soil and
bedrock characteristics; and, when applicable, shall extend to
stable soil and/or bedrock.
§ 325-55 WEAPONS § 325-56
318:875
A. Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to preserve and encourage
the use of property for the educational, recreational and community use
of the entire Township of Ridley. It is particularly intended to preserve
certain land or facilities already in place and now so used by the
community.
B. Permitted uses. Land, buildings or premises shall be used by right only
for one or more of the following uses:
(1) Educational use, public or private.
(2) Recreational or community use for the benefit of the entire
population of the Township, including parks, playgrounds, trails,
paths and athletic fields and courts.
(3) Office, in connection with on-site educational, recreational,
municipal or community use.
(4) Sites for sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities, including communication facilities for
police, fire, emergency and other Township functions. All
communications facilities shall comply with Article XIII of this
chapter.
(5) Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
(6) Library or noncommercial museum.
(7) Community center or publicly owned auditorium.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Private garages, carports and accessory buildings, subject to
regulation in Article XIII of this chapter.
(2) Signs, subject to regulation in Article XII of this chapter.
(3) Fence, subject to regulation in Article XIII of this chapter.
(4) Any accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental
to a permitted use, and not detrimental to the neighborhood.
D. Area and bulk requirements. In this district, any structure hereafter
erected or any lot hereafter used or occupied for any lawful purpose
shall provide the minimum and not exceed the maximum dimensions
specified below. However, any wireless telecommunications towers and
antennas shall be subject to the requirements in § 325-95 and not the
following:
(1) Minimum lot and area: None.
(2) Minimum lot width: None.
(3) Building coverage: 30%.
§ 325-56 RIDLEY CODE § 325-56
318:876
§ 325-56.1. IHC Industrial Heritage Corridor District. [Added
12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 1904]
(4) Impervious surface coverage: 75%.
(5) Front yard: 20 feet.
(6) Side yards: 20 feet, except where abutting a residential district, in
which case 40 feet shall be required.
(7) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(8) Building height: No building shall exceed three stories or 45 feet in
height, unless authorized as a special exception.
E. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with Article XIII of this chapter.
A. Purposes. The purposes of this district are to provide for technologybased
and waterfront-related uses designed to revitalize the Route 291
corridor, in order to create a sustainable economic setting consistent
with the needs and requirements of 21st century commerce. The
district also allows traditional heavy industrial development. Provisions
are also added to encourage the cultural, environmental and touristrelated
features and potential of the corridor.
B. Uses permitted by right. A building or group of buildings may be
erected, altered or used for only one or more of the following uses and
no other:
(1) Communication building.
(2) Light manufacturing.
(3) Industrial plants manufacturing, processing or assembling
helicopters, fixed-wing aircraft, or other steep-gradient aircraft
capable of hovering.
(4) Freight terminal.
(5) Distribution center.
(6) Hotel.
(7) Large-scale retail business.
(8) Minor shopping center.
(9) Restaurant, sit-down.
(10) Office.
(11)Water transportation facility.
(12) Recreational open space.
§ 325-56 WEAPONS § 325-56.1
318:877
(13) Public facility.
(14) Recreation facility.
(15) Museum.
C. Special exception uses. The following shall be permitted only as special
exception uses when approved by the Ridley Township Zoning Hearing
Board in compliance with §§ 325-56.1G and H and applicable provisions
of Article XVI of this chapter:
(1) Motion-picture production/studio.
(2) Spa/retreat.
(3) Resort hotel.
(4) Motel.
(5) Resort condominium.
(6) Banquet facility.
(7) Supper club.
(8) Restaurant, counter service.
(9) Restaurant, fast-food.
(10) Casino.
(11) Conference center.
(12) Commercial complex.
(13) Major shopping center.
(14) Laboratory.
(15) Sports stadium.
(16) Amusement/theme park.
(17) A combination or mix of uses permitted by right or by special
exception in one building or in more than one building, provided
that such mixed-use development shall be permitted only as a
single, unified development project with a common architectural
theme.
D. Accessory uses and structures:
(1) Signs, subject to Article XII, Signs, of this chapter.
(2) Storage within an enclosed building in conjunction with a
permitted use.
(3) Heliport.
§ 325-56.1 RIDLEY CODE § 325-56.1
318:878
(4) Parking area or garage for the general public or for employees,
subject to § 325-80 of this chapter.
(5) Satellite antenna, subject to § 325-90 of this chapter.
(6) Child day-care center, subject to § 325-91 of this chapter.
(7) Cafeteria, primarily for use of employees of uses and facilities
permitted in this district.
(8) Any accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental
to uses permitted above in this district.
E. Area and bulk regulations.
(1) For uses permitted by right:
(a) Lot area. A lot area of not less than two acres shall be provided
for every principal building hereafter erected.
(b) Lot width. The lot for each principal building hereafter erected
shall have a width of not less than 150 feet.
(c) Minimum yard requirements.
[1] Front yard. There shall be a front yard, the depth of which
shall be not less than 50 feet.
[2] Side yards. Each side yard shall not be less than 25 feet in
depth.
[3] Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard, the depth of which
shall not be less than 50 feet.
(d) Building height. No building shall have a height exceeding 75
feet with a maximum of six stories above grade.
(e) Building coverage. The aggregate area of all buildings on a lot
shall not exceed 40% of the lot area.
(f) Impervious coverage. The aggregate of all impervious
coverage on a lot shall not exceed 60% of the lot area.
(2) For special exception uses permitted by § 325-56.1C:
(a) Lot area. A lot area of not less than five acres shall be provided.
(b) Lot width. A lot width of not less than 150 feet shall be
provided.
(c) Minimum yard requirements.
[1] Front yard. There shall be a front yard, the depth of which
shall be not less than 75 feet.
§ 325-56.1 WEAPONS § 325-56.1
318:879
[2] Side yards. Each side yard shall not be less than 35 feet in
depth.
[3] Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard, the depth of which
shall not be less than 50 feet.
(d) Building height. No building shall have a height exceeding 75
feet with a maximum of six stories above grade.
(e) Building coverage. The aggregate area of all buildings on a lot
shall not exceed 40% of the lot area.
(f) Impervious coverage. The aggregate of all impervious
coverage on a lot shall not exceed 60% of the lot area.
F. Special development regulations. The following regulations shall apply
for uses permitted by right and to the special exception uses permitted
by § 325-56.1C of this chapter:
(1) Landscaping and screening.
(a) Landscaping consisting of shrubs, trees or other plantings
shall be provided in front of and along one other side of all
principal buildings. Such landscaping area shall be not less
than four feet wide.
(b) Landscaping shall also be provided in high-visibility areas such
as exterior and interior roadways, between individual parking
areas and to break up continuous rows of parking. Such
landscaping shall be provided in accordance with a
landscaping plan approved by the Township of Ridley Board of
Commissioners, upon the recommendation of the Township
Engineer.
(c) Mechanical equipment located on the ground, such as heating
or cooling equipment, pumps or generators, must be screened
from the street and any abutting residential zones by walls,
fences or vegetation tall enough to screen the equipment.
Mechanical equipment on roofs must be screened from the
ground level of any abutting residential zoned areas.
(d) Any portion of a lot or tract that is not used for buildings or
other structures, loading or parking spaces, or aisles or
designated storage areas shall be landscaped in accordance
with a landscaping plan approved by the Township of Ridley
Board of Commissioners, upon the recommendation of the
Township Engineer.
(e) Storage and display. Opaque, ornamental fencing, walls or
evergreen planting so that they cannot be seen from adjoining
streets or parking areas when viewed by a person standing at
ground level shall screen permanent outside storage areas.
§ 325-56.1 RIDLEY CODE § 325-56.1
318:880
(2) Interior circulation, access and traffic control.
(a) The entrance road from the exterior roadway that is a major
arterial shall have a cartway not less than 36 feet wide for at
least 200 feet from the point of entrance into the site.
(b) The interior circulation on a lot or tract shall be designed so
that no driveway or street providing parking spaces shall be
used as a through street. If parking spaces are indicated by
lines with angles other than 90°, the traffic lanes shall be
restricted to a one-way flow to permit head-in parking. No
driveway or street used for interior circulation shall have
traffic lanes less than 10 feet in width.
(c) Areas provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks
and other vehicles and for the servicing of shops by refuse
collection, fuel and other service vehicles shall be adequate in
size and shape and be so arranged that they may be used
without blockage or interference with the use of accessways or
automobile facilities.
(d) All accessways to any public street or highway shall be located
at least 200 feet from the intersection of any two street lines
and shall be designed in a manner conductive to safe ingress
and egress.
(e) No plan or proposal shall be approved which is likely to create
traffic hazards endangering the public safety. Safety
requirements that may be imposed, where appropriate in such
a review, shall include traffic control devices, acceleration
lanes or deceleration lanes, turning lanes, traffic and lane
markings and signs.
(3) Pedestrian standards.
(a) An on-site pedestrian circulation system must be provided,
which connects the parking areas and the structures on the
site. The circulation system must be hard-surfaced and be at
least five feet wide. Where the system crosses driveways,
parking areas and loading areas, the system must be clearly
identifiable, through the use of striping, elevation changes,
speed bumps, a different paving material or other similar
material. The on-site pedestrian circulation system must be
lighted so that employees, residents and customers can use it
at night.
(b) The applicant shall connect the pedestrian circulation system
to other areas of the site such as a parking lot and any
pedestrian amenities, such as plazas and resting areas.
(4) Building design.
§ 325-56.1 WEAPONS § 325-56.1
318:881
(a) Buildings may be designed and arranged either separately or
in an attached fashion.
(b) All buildings shall be designed according to a unified
architectural scheme.
(c) All pedestrian entrances shall be paved with an all-weather
surface. Curbing shall be provided to separate parking, access,
streets and driveways.
(d) All signs shall be designed so as to be harmonious and
consistent, in terms of size, design and color scheme, with
those of nearby uses or buildings. Also see applicable
provisions of Article XII of this chapter.
(e) All design schemes must obtain approval of the Ridley
Township Board of Commissioners.
G. Conditions for approval of special exception uses. The following
conditions shall be satisfied prior to the consideration of any tract as a
special exception use:
(1) The parcel(s) shall be entirely within the IHC Industrial Heritage
Corridor District.
(2) The parcel shall have an area of not less than five acres.
(3) When deemed necessary by the Ridley Township Zoning Hearing
Board, the applicant shall prepare a traffic impact study.
(4) A professional traffic engineer hired by the applicant and approved
by the Ridley Township Zoning Hearing Board shall prepare such
study.
(5) The purpose of the traffic study is to enable the Ridley Township
Zoning Hearing Board to access the impact of the proposed
development on the highway system, adjacent or nearby uses, or
the East Coast Greenway; to identify traffic-related problems
associated with the proposed development; and to identify
improvements and solutions to be incorporated into the project
design.
(6) No structure, except one used exclusively in connection with a
water-dependent use (e.g., marina) shall be erected, altered or
extended to within 50 feet of the bulkhead line.
(7) All buildings situated south of Pennsylvania Route 291 shall be
located with the objective of preserving the visual and physical
access to the Delaware River. Development plans shall show that
the location of buildings is such as to allow physical and visual
access to the Delaware River.
§ 325-56.1 RIDLEY CODE § 325-56.1
318:882
(8) In addition to the conditions above, the Ridley Township Zoning
Hearing Board may attach such additional, reasonable conditions
and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (Act 247, as amended) and protect the health and
welfare of the community.
(9) Applications for special exceptions shall also comply with all
applicable provisions of Article XVI, Enforcement and
Administration, of this chapter.
H. Route 291/13 Corridor and East Coast Greenway. Landscaping,
signage, and similar features within the Route 291/13 Corridor and
East Coast Greenway shall be consistent with the Delaware County
Industrial Heritage Route 291/13 Beautification and Greenway Plan of
2002 and the Delaware County Route 291/13 Landscaping and Signage
Project of 2005, as they relate to land within these corridors in Ridley
Township.
§ 325-56.1 WEAPONS § 325-56.1
318:883

ARTICLE XI
Performance Standards
§ 325-57. Compliance required.
In all districts, all uses and activities established after the effective date
of this chapter shall comply with the following standards; all existing uses
and activities in compliance with the following standards on the effective
date of this chapter shall continue in compliance; and all existing uses and
activities not in compliance with §§ 325-58 through 325-63 on the effective
date of this chapter shall, within two years following the effective date of
this chapter, bring themselves into compliance.
§ 325-58. (Reserved)203
§ 325-59. Vibration.
No use shall cause vibrations exceeding the maximum values specified in
this section. The maximum vibration is given as particle velocity, which
may be measured directly with suitable instrumentation or computed on the
basis of displacement and frequency. When computed the following formula
shall be used:
PV = 4.28 F x D
Where
PV = Particle velocity, inches per second
F = Vibration frequency, cycles per second
D = Single amplitude displacement of the vibration inches
Particle velocity shall be the vector sum of three individual components
measured simultaneously in three mutually perpendicular directions.
Maximum Ground Transmitted Vibration
Particle Velocity (in inches/second)
Zoning District Adjacent Lot Line Residential District
Residential 0.05 0.02
Commercial 0.10 0.02
Industrial 0.20 0.02
Where vibration is produced as discrete impulses and such impulses do not
exceed a frequency of 60 per minute, then the values in this table may be
multiplied by two.
§ 325-60. Heat.
No heat from any use shall be sensed at any property line to the extent of
raising the temperature of air or materials more than 1° F.
203. Editor's Note: Former § 325-58, Noise, was repealed 8-27-2003 by Ord. No. 1842.
§ 325-57 WEAPONS § 325-61
318:885
§ 325-61. Glare.
In commercial and industrial districts, any operation or activity-producing
glare shall be conducted so that direct or indirect light from the source
shall not cause illumination in excess of 0.5 footcandles when measured in
residential or special district.
§ 325-62. Fire and explosive hazards.
All operations, activities and uses shall be conducted so as to comply with
the performance standards governing fire and explosion hazards prescribed
below. Such uses shall also comply with the rules and regulations of the
currently effective Fire Code of the Township of Ridley204 and with the
regulations of the Department of Labor and Industry.
A. Detonable materials. Activities involving the storage, utilization or
manufacture of products which decompose by detonation shall be in
accordance with the regulations of each district. Such materials shall
include, but are not limited to: all primary explosives such as lead azide,
lead styphnate, fulminates and tetracene; all high explosives such as
TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN and picric acid; propellants and components
thereof such as dry nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides,
hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as
magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting
explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine; unstable organic
compounds such as acetylides, tetraxoles and ozonides; unstable
oxidizing agents such as perchloric acid, perchlorates and hydrogen
peroxide in concentration greater than 35%; and nuclear fuels,
fissionable materials and products and reactor elements such as
Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239.
(1) Residential, commercial and special districts. No storage or
manufacture of materials or products which decompose by
detonation is permitted.
(2) Industrial districts. The storage or manufacture of materials or
products which decompose by detonation is limited to five pounds.
Quantities in excess of five pounds of such materials may be stored
but not manufactured only when permitted in accordance with the
effective Fire Code.205
(3) Utilization. In all districts, the utilization of materials or products
which decompose by detonation shall be permitted only when in
accordance with the effective Fire Code.
B. Fire hazards, solids. The regulations of the Department of Labor and
Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall apply. In addition
thereto shall apply:
204. Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Fire Prevention.
205. Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Fire Prevention.
§ 325-61 RIDLEY CODE § 325-62
318:886
(1) Residential and special districts. The storage, utilization or
manufacture of solid materials which are active to intense burning
shall not be conducted in any residential or special district.
(2) Commercial. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid
materials which are active to intense burning shall be conducted
within spaces having fire resistive construction of no less than two
hours and protected with an automatic fire extinguishing system.
(3) Industrial districts. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid
materials which are active to intense burning shall be conducted
within walls having a fire resistance no less than two hours or
protected by an automatic fire extinguishing system or the building
wall shall be no less than 25 feet from all lot lines. The outdoor
storage of such materials shall be permitted no closer than 40 feet
from all lot lines.
C. Fire hazards, liquids and gases. The regulations of the Department of
Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall apply.
In addition thereto shall apply:
(1) The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids or
gases which produce flammable or explosive vapor shall be
permitted only in accordance with this section, exclusive of the
storage of finished products in original sealed containers (60
gallons or less) which shall be unrestricted.
(2) The total storage capacity of flammable liquids and gases shall not
exceed those quantities permitted in the following table for each of
the districts indicated but no other.
Liquids (Gallons)
Above-Ground Flash
Points*
Below-Ground Flash
Points*
Zoning
Districts
Less than
70 70-200
Less than
70 70-200
C-2, I 5,000 20,000 10,000 40,000
NOTES:
*Flash Point in degrees of Fahrenheit.
Zoning Districts
Gases (SCF)*
Above-Ground Below-Ground
C-2, I 150,000 300,000
NOTES:
*SCF = Standard cubic feet at 60° F. and 29.92 inches Hg.
§ 325-62 WEAPONS § 325-63
318:887
§ 325-63. Air pollution.
Ambient air quality standards have been established by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and are enforced by the Regional Air Pollution Control
Board. In order to minimize overlapping regulations, the Township adopts
these standards as its own. However, to govern situations of a localized
nature, the following additional regulations are provided.
§ 325-64. Applicability and enforcement.
A. Odor. Odor threshold is defined as the lowest concentration of odorous
matter that produces an olfactory response in normal human beings.
Odor thresholds shall be measured in accordance with ASTM d 1931-57
"Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmosphere (Dilution
Method)" or its equivalent.
(1) Residential, commercial, special districts. Odorous material
released from any operation or activity shall not exceed the odor
threshold concentration beyond the lot line, measured either at
ground level or habitable elevation.
(2) Industrial districts. Odorous materials released from any operation
or activity shall not exceed the odor threshold concentration at or
beyond the district boundary line, measured either at ground level
or habitable elevation.
(3) Toxic matter. Should any such odorous material contain toxic
material, such airborne toxic matter shall not exceed 1/30 of the
odor threshold at the appropriate points of measurement.
B. Smoke. For the purpose of grading the density or equivalent capacity of
smoke, the Ringelmann Chart published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines
shall be used.
(1) Residential, commercial, special districts. The emission of smoke
darker than Ringelmann No. 1 from any chimney stack, vent,
opening or combustion process is prohibited.
(2) Industrial districts. The emission of smoke darker than Ringelmann
No. 1 from any chimney stack, vent, opening or combustion process
is prohibited; however, smoke of a shade not to exceed Ringelmann
No. 3 is permitted for up to three minutes total in any one eighthour
period.
A. Any use established or changed to and any building, structure or land
developed, constructed or used for any use or any accessory use thereto
shall comply with all the performance standards herein set forth.
B. If any existing use or building or other structure is extended, enlarged
or reconstructed, the performance standards herein set forth shall
apply to such extended, enlarged or reconstructed portion or portions
of such use, building or other structure.
§ 325-63 RIDLEY CODE § 325-64
318:888
C. Determinations necessary for administration and enforcement of
performance standards set forth herein range from those which can be
made with satisfactory accuracy by a reasonable person using normal
senses and no mechanical equipment to those requiring great technical
competence and complex equipment for precise measurement. It is the
intent of this chapter that:
(1) Where determinations can be made by the Zoning Officer or other
Township employees using equipment normally available to the
Township or obtainable without extraordinary expenses, such
determinations shall be so made before notice of violation is issued.
(2) Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it
unreasonable for the Township to maintain the personnel or
equipment necessary for making difficult or unusual
determinations, procedures shall be available for causing
corrections of apparent violations of performance standards,
protecting individuals from arbitrary, capricious and unreasonable
administration and enforcement of performance standard
regulations and protecting the general public from unnecessary
costs for administration and enforcement.
D. If the Zoning Officer finds, after making determinations in the manner
set forth in this chapter, that there is a violation of the performance
standards set forth herein, he shall take or cause to be taken lawful
action to cause correction to within the limits established by such
performance standards. Failure to obey lawful orders concerning such
corrections shall be punishable under the provisions of § 325-4.
E. If, in the considered judgment of the Zoning Officer, there is probable
violation of the performance standards set forth herein, the following
procedures shall be followed.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall give written notice, by certified mail or
delivered personally to the person or persons responsible for the
alleged violation. The notice shall describe the particulars of the
alleged violation and the reasons why the Zoning Officer believes
there is a violation and shall require an answer or correction of the
alleged violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer. The notice
shall state, and it is hereby declared, that failure to reply or correct
the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer within
the time set constitutes admission of violation of the terms of this
chapter. The notice shall state that, on request of those to whom it
is directed, technical determinations as described in this chapter
will be made and that, if violations as alleged are found, costs of
such determinations shall be charged against those responsible for
the violation, in addition to such other penalties as may be
appropriate, but that, if it is determined that no violation exists, the
cost of the determination will be paid by the Township.
§ 325-64 WEAPONS § 325-64
318:889
(2) If there is no reply within the time limit set but the alleged violation
is corrected to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer, he shall note
"Violation Corrected" on his copy of the notice and shall retain it
among his official records, taking such other action as may be
warranted.
(3) If there is no reply within the time limit set and the violation is not
corrected to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer within the time
limit set, he shall take or cause to be taken such action as is
warranted by continuation of a violation after notice to cease.
(4) If a reply is received within the time limit set indicating that the
alleged violation will be corrected to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Officer but requesting additional time, the Zoning Officer may
grant an extension of time if he deems it warranted in the
circumstances of the case and if the extension will not, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life, health or property.
(5) If a reply is received within the time limit set requesting technical
determination as provided in this chapter and if the alleged
violation continues, the Zoning Officer may call in properly
qualified experts to make the determinations. If such
determinations indicate violation of the performance standards, the
costs of the determination shall be assessed against the person or
persons responsible for the violation, in addition to such other
penalties as may be appropriate under the terms of Article I of this
chapter. If no violation is found, the costs of the determinations
shall be paid by the Township without assessment against the
persons or persons involved.
§ 325-64 RIDLEY CODE § 325-64
318:890
ARTICLE XII
Signs
§ 325-65. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AREA OF SIGNS —
ILLUMINATION OF SIGNS — A sign designed to give forth artificial light
directly (or through transparent or translucent material) from a source of
light within such sign, including, but no limited to, neon and exposed lamp
signs. No directly illuminated sign shall violate the provisions of § 325-61.
PLACEMENT OF SIGNS —
The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording
and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background,
whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not
including any supporting framework and bracing incidental to the
display itself.
A.
Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to
a building, wall or window, the area shall be considered to be that
of the smallest rectangle or other regular geometric shape which
encompasses all of the letters and symbols. In computing square foot
area of a double-face sign, only one side shall be considered, provided
that both faces are identical. If the interior angle formed by the two
faces of the double-faces sign is greater than 45°, then both sides of
such sign shall be considered in the calculating the sign area.
B.
FESTOON LIGHTING — A directly illuminated sign comprised of a
group of incandescent bulbs hung or strung overhead or used to outline
a structure or any part thereof.
A.
INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign illuminated with a light so
shielded that no direct rays therefrom are visible elsewhere on the lot
where said illumination occurs. If such shielding device is defective,
such sign shall be deemed to be a directly illuminated sign.
B.
FLASHING SIGN — An illuminated sign on which the artificial light is
not maintained in a stationary position and constant in intensity and
color at all times when in use.
C.
NONILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign which is not illuminated either
directly or indirectly.
D.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD (LED) SIGN — A sign with a fixed or
changing message composed of a series of lights that may be changed
through electronic means. [Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1926]
E.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which directs attention to an activity
conducted on the same lot.
A.
§ 325-65 WEAPONS § 325-65
318:891
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof or any
device attached, painted or represented directly or indirectly on a structure
or other surface that shall display or include any letter, word, insignia, flag
or representation used as or which is in the nature of any advertisement,
announcement, visual communication, direction or is designed to attract the
eye or bring the subject to the attention of the public.
TYPES OF SIGNS —
§ 325-66. General sign regulations.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which directs attention to an activity
not conducted on the same lot.
B.
ADVERTISING SIGN — An off-premises sign which advertises or
otherwise directs attention to a commodity, business, industry, home
occupation or other similar activity which is sold, offered or conducted
elsewhere than on the lot upon which such sign is located.
C.
BUSINESS SIGN — An on-premises sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service, industry or other activity which is sold,
offered or conducted other than incidentally on the premises upon
which such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
D.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A self-supporting sign resting on the ground
or supported by means of poles or standards in the ground. The height
of freestanding signs shall be measured from the official street grade.
A.
PARALLEL SIGN — A sign attached, painted or otherwise mounted
parallel to a wall or other vertical building surface. Parallel signs shall
not extend beyond the edge of any wall or other surface to which they
are mounted or shall not project more than 18 inches from its surface.
B.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign mounted to a wall or other vertical
building surface other than a parallel sign. Projecting signs shall not
project more than two feet from the wall or surface to which they are
mounted nor in any way interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicular
traffic. Projecting signs shall not extend beyond the edge of any wall or
other surface to which they are mounted.
C.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected on or above the roof or parapet of a
building.
D.
A. Holiday decorations. Holiday decorations displayed for recognized
federal or state holidays shall be exempted from the provisions of this
chapter except as they may interfere with glare, traffic safety or in any
other way become a public safety hazard.
B. Nonconforming signs. Any sign not of a type permitted, or of a
permitted type but of a size exceeding the maximum permitted size by
more than 10%, may be continued for one year following the effective
date of this chapter, provided that, after the expiration of that period,
such sign shall be terminated. Any noncompliance as to location of any
§ 325-65 RIDLEY CODE § 325-66
318:892
sign shall be corrected within six months following the effective date of
this chapter.
C. Obstruction. No sign shall be placed in such a position that it will cause
danger on a street by obscuring the view and, in no case, except official
traffic and street signs, shall signs be placed within the clear-sight
triangle.
D. Official signs. No signs except those of a duly constituted governmental
body, including traffic signs and similar regulatory notices, shall be
allowed within street lines. This provision may be waived for parallel
and projecting signs in areas where no yard setback is required.
E. Permit required. Except for official signs, all on-premises signs over six
square feet in area and all off-premises signs regardless of size shall
require the issuance of a zoning permit before erection or replacement.
All signs must comply with all of the regulations contained herein,
regardless of whether a permit is required.
F. Posting of signs. No person shall paint, paste, brand, stamp or in any
manner whatsoever place on or attach to any tree, telegraph, electric
light or other pole on any street in the Township any written, printed,
painted or other advertisement, bill, notice, sign, card or poster.
G. Prohibition. Projection signs, roof signs, flashing signs, festoon lighting
and electronic message board signs shall not be permitted in any
district unless specified. [Amended 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1926]
H. Separate frontage. If an establishment has walls fronting on two or
more streets, the sign area for each street may be computed separately.
I. Unsafe and unlawful signs. If the Zoning Officer finds that any sign
regulated herein is unsafe or insecure or is a menace to the public or
had been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of
the provisions of this chapter, or if any sign is erected without obtaining
a permit therefor, he shall give written notice to the permittee or the
owner or occupier of the property thereof. If the permittee or the owner
or occupier of the property fails to remove or alter the sign so as to
comply with the standards herein set forth within 10 days after such
notice, such sign may be removed or altered to comply by the building
inspector at the expense of the owner of the property on which it is
located. The Township Building Inspector may cause any sign or other
advertising structure which is in immediate peril to persons or property
to be removed summarily and without notice.
J. Vehicular signs. Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a manner
that the carrying of such sign or signs is no longer incidental to the
vehicle's primary purpose but becomes a primary purpose in itself shall
be considered a freestanding sign and, as such, be subject to the
provisions regarding freestanding signs in the district in which such
vehicle is located.
§ 325-66 WEAPONS § 325-66
318:893
K. Yard requirements. No portion of any freestanding sign shall be located
closer to any lot line than 1/2 the required yard for the district in which
it is located. If this requirement cannot be met, then freestanding signs
shall be prohibited on such properties.
L. Zoning information. No sign shall be erected containing information
which it states or implies that a property may be used for any purpose
not permitted under the provisions of this chapter in the zoning district
in which the property to which the sign relates is located.
M. Hot or cold air balloons. All hot or cold air balloons or other floating
devices, with or without a message, placed or tethered on any property
or structure shall require the issuance of a permit pursuant to
§ 325-66M(3) of this subsection. The permit shall be obtained prior to
erection or placement of the hot or cold air balloon. Balloons used for
human conveyance are specifically excluded from this regulation.
[Added 2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 1746]
(1) Setback requirements. No portion of any hot or cold air balloon
shall be located closer to any lot line than a distance equal to the
height of the proposed balloon. The height of a proposed balloon
shall be measured from ground level to the top of the balloon,
including any wires, ropes or other stabilizing mechanisms. In the
case of a balloon erected on a building, said measurement shall
include the height of the building.
(2) Maximum duration of permit. No permit shall be issued for the
erection and use of a hot or cold air balloon for a period in excess of
three weeks.
(3) Permit process. An application for a hot or cold air balloon permit
shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer with a permit fee no later
than 30 days prior to the proposed time for erection of the balloon.
The permit fee shall be set periodically by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners. The following information shall be provided in the
permit application:
(a) Purpose of the balloon.
(b) Name, address and telephone number of the organization or
person proposing the balloon.
(c) Proposed time period of use of the balloon.
(d) The height and width of the balloon.
(e) Where on the property the balloon will be located, including
the distance to the closest property line.
(f) The applicant shall agree to provide a certificate of insurance
to the Township prior to the issuance of the permit adding the
Township as an "additional insured" on the applicant's
insurance policies.
§ 325-66 RIDLEY CODE § 325-66
318:894
§ 325-67. Signs in residential districts.
(g) Any other information the Zoning Officer deems reasonably
necessary to determine that the permit meets the
requirements of this subsection.
(4) Issuance or denial of permit. Based on the information provided
and a reasonable investigation, the Zoning Officer shall either issue
the permit or send a written denial of the permit. If a permit is
issued, it shall contain the information as provided by the applicant
in the permit application, subject to any changes made by the
Township Zoning Officer to ensure compliance with this chapter. A
denial of a permit may be appealed to the Township Zoning Hearing
Board.
A. On-premises signs. In residential districts, only the following onpremises
signs shall be permitted:
(1) Nonilluminated signs displayed strictly for the direction, safety or
convenience of the public, including signs which identify rest
rooms, telephone booths, parking area entrances or exits, freight
entrances or the like, provided that the area of any such sign shall
not exceed two square feet.
(2) Parallel, projecting and freestanding flags representing
governmental, educational or religious organizations.
(3) One nonilluminated sign posted in conjunction with door bells or
mailboxes, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed
36 square inches.
(4) One nonilluminated sign or indirectly illuminated sign displaying
only the name and address of the occupant of a premises, provided
that the area of any such sign shall not exceed 108 square inches.
The provisions of § 325-67A(7) do not apply to this type of sign.
(5) One nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated sign for home
occupations or accessory offices indicating only the names of
persons and their occupations (words only), and not larger than six
inches by 18 inches.
(6) One nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated bulletin or
announcement board or identification sign for a permitted
nonresidential building or use, provided that the area of any such
sign shall not exceed 20 square feet.
(7) One nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated sign in connection
with a lawfully maintained nonconforming use, provided that the
area of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(8) One nonilluminated sign advertising the sale or rental of the
premises on which the sign has been erected or one sign indicating
§ 325-66 WEAPONS § 325-67
318:895
that said premises have been sold or rented, provided that the
area of any such sign shall not exceed six square feet and shall
be removed within 20 days after an agreement of rental has been
entered into or legal title has been transferred.
(9) One temporary nonilluminated sign erected in connection with the
development or proposed development of the premises by a
builder, contractor, developer or other persons interested in such
sales or development, provided that the area of any such sign shall
not exceed 20 square feet and shall be removed within 20 days
after the last structure has been initially occupied or upon
expiration of the building permit, whichever is sooner.
(10) Temporary nonilluminated sign of mechanics or artisans may be
erected and maintained during the period such persons are
performing work on the premises on which such signs are erected,
provided that such sign shall be removed on completion of work by
the mechanic or artisan and the total area of all such signs shall not
exceed 12 square feet.
(11) Nonilluminated signs announcing no trespassing; signs indicating
the private nature of a road, driveway or premises; and signs
controlling fishing or hunting on the premises, provided that the
area of any such sign shall not exceed two square feet.
(12) Nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated memorial signs or
historical signs or tablets.
B. Off-premises signs. In residential districts, off-premises signs are
permitted as follows (signs permitted within this subsection may also be
on-premises signs):
(1) Signs necessary for the direction, regulation and control of traffic;
street name signs; legal notices; warnings at railroad crossings;
and other official signs which are similarly authorized or erected by
a duly constituted governmental body. Such signs may be
illuminated only as necessary or customary for traffic control or
safety.
(2) Temporary signs advertising political parties or candidates for
election may be erected or displayed and maintained, provided
that:
(a) The size of any such sign is not in excess of 16 square feet.
(b) The signs shall not be erected or displayed earlier than 70 days
prior to the election to which they pertain.
(c) The erector of such sign or an authorized agent of the political
party or candidate applies for and obtains a permit from the
Zoning Officer and deposits with the Township, at the time of
his application, the sum as set from time to time by resolution
§ 325-67 RIDLEY CODE § 325-67
318:896
§ 325-68. Signs in commercial districts.
of the Board of Commissioners per each 15 such signs or
fraction thereof as a guaranty that all such signs will be
removed promptly within five days after the date of the
election to which such signs relate. At the time of deposit,
the erector or authorized agent shall indicate on which streets
signs are to be located. If such signs are not removed at
the end of the five-day period, the Township shall have them
removed and keep the full sum deposited to reimburse the
expenses incurred by it and for general Township purposes.
[Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
(3) Temporary nonilluminated signs directing persons to temporary
exhibits, shows, events or proposed development located in the
Township may be erected, subject to the following requirements:
(a) Signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area.
(b) Signs shall not be posted earlier than two weeks before the
occurrence of the event to which it relates and must removed
within one week after the date of the exhibit, show or event.
When related to a proposed development, such sign must be
removed immediately on sale or rental of the final unit in such
development.
(c) Street banners are prohibited, except in the case of civic or
charitable nonprofit organizations. When permitted, such
banners are exempted from the size restrictions of
§ 325-67B(3)(a) above but must comply with the time limits for
display set forth in § 325-67B(3)(b) above.
(4) Nonilluminated signs used for directing patrons, members or an
audience to service clubs, churches or other nonprofit
organizations, provided that signs shall indicate only the name of
the facility and the direction to the facility and shall not exceed four
square feet in area.
C. Restrictions on type and placement of signs.
(1) Illuminated signs shall not be lighted after 11:00 p.m.; provided,
however, that illuminated signs shall be hooded, so that the
illumination does not affect areas outside of a fifty-foot radius.
(2) Freestanding ground signs may not exceed six feet in height.
(3) Parallel signs or portions of such signs shall not be located above
the ceiling of the ground floor of any building or more than 12 feet
above the upper surface of the official street grade, whichever is
less.
§ 325-67 WEAPONS § 325-68
318:897
A. On-premises signs. In commercial districts, only the following onpremises
signs shall be permitted.
(1) All signs permitted in § 325-67A at the standards prescribed
therein, except as otherwise provided in this section.
(2) Parallel business signs are permitted, provided that:
(a) The total area of all parallel signs for each establishment shall
not exceed four square feet for each foot of length of the front
building wall or length of that portion of such wall devoted to
such establishment.
(b) If such establishment does not occupy any floor area on the
ground level of the building other than an entryway, the
maximum permitted sign area shall not exceed one square foot
for each foot of length of the front building wall or length of
that portion of such wall devoted to such establishment.
(c) Signs painted on or affixed to the inside or outside of windows
shall be included in this computation if their combined area
exceeds 50% of the area of the window which they occupy.
(d) In no case, however, may the total area of parallel signs exceed
25% of the area of the wall (including windows, door area ana
cornices) to which they are attached.
(3) Freestanding business signs are permitted, provided that:
(a) Only one such sign shall be permitted on each property except
as provided in § 325-66H.
(b) The area of any such sign shall not exceed one square foot for
each two feet of lot frontage or 60 square feet, whichever is
smaller.
(c) Roof signs are permitted only in C-2 Districts.
(d) The maximum height of freestanding business signs shall not
exceed 20 feet.
(4) Nonilluminated, indirectly illuminated or directly illuminated
business signs are permitted.
(5) Projecting business signs are permitted as a substitute for either
parallel or freestanding signs, provided that such signs shall not
conflict with signs on neighboring properties, shall not visually
interfere with the view to and from adjacent properties, shall not
extend above any portion of the roof of the building to which such
sign is affixed, shall have its lower edge at least eight feet above
any sidewalk or pedestrian way, shall in most cases have a vertical
alignment and in general shall be appropriate to and in scale with
the building to which it is affixed.
§ 325-68 RIDLEY CODE § 325-68
318:898
§ 325-69. Signs in industrial districts.
(6) Canopies or marquees are permitted as projecting signs in C-2
Commercial Districts, subject to the requirements of the Township
Building Code.206 When signs are proposed in connection with said
canopy or marquee, they shall be considered to be projecting signs
and shall:
(a) Be affixed flat to such canopy or marquee;
(b) Be limited to announcing the name of the establishment or any
on-premises show or event;
(c) Have an eight-foot minimum clearance above any portion of
any walk directly below;
(d) Have the maximum permitted area of all other signs permitted
on the premises reduced in an amount equal to the area as the
sign to be located on such canopy or marquee.
(7) Electronic message board signs shall be allowed as either a
freestanding or wall-mounted sign. Such signs shall be allowed
subject to the following conditions: [Added 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1926]
(a) The LED display shall not be animated, flashing, multicolored,
or scrolling.
(b) Such signs are limited to amber text or images on black
background.
(c) The frequency of message change shall be restricted to no
more once every three minutes.
(d) The maximum area of an electronic message board shall not
exceed 10 square feet.
(e) All messages shall be of such a nature that they are not
normally objectionable to members of the public.
B. Off-premises signs. In Commercial Districts, only the following offpremises
signs shall be permitted:
(1) All off-premises signs permitted in § 325-67B at the standards
prescribed therein.
A. On-premises signs. In industrial districts, only the following onpremises
signs shall be permitted:
(1) All signs permitted in § 325-67A at the standards prescribed
therein.
206. Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Building Construction and Floodplain Management.
§ 325-68 WEAPONS § 325-69
318:899
(2) Parallel business signs, subject to the following provisions:
(a) The total area of any parallel sign shall not exceed two square
feet for each foot of length of that portion of such wall or length
of that portion of such wall devoted to such establishment or
150 square feet, whichever is smaller.
(b) No parallel sign shall be painted on or affixed to the inside or
outside of windows in such districts.
(3) Freestanding business signs, provided that:
(a) The area of all such signs shall not exceed one square foot for
each two feet of lot frontage or 60 square feet, whichever is
smaller.
(b) Signs mounted or otherwise affixed to the roof of a building are
permitted on one-story buildings, provided that such signs do
not extend more than four feet above the roof line.
(c) The maximum height of freestanding business signs shall not
exceed 20 feet.
(4) Nonilluminated, indirectly illuminated or directly illuminated
business signs.
B. Off-premises signs. In industrial districts, only the following offpremises
signs shall be permitted:
(1) All off-premises signs permitted in § 325-67B at the standards
prescribed therein.
(2) Advertising signs are permitted in I District, subject to the
following provisions:
(a) Advertising signs may not be located within 1,000 feet of any
area designated A Residential District, B Residential District,
or C Residential District.
(b) The area of any advertising sign shall not exceed 700 square
feet.
(c) Advertising signs may be nonilluminated or indirectly
illuminated but may not be directly illuminated or flashing.
(d) The maximum height of advertising signs shall not be more
than 26 feet above the height of the building or structure
(other than the sign support itself) to which the sign is affixed
or, in the case of freestanding signs, above the official street
grade nearest the sign. In cases of unique physical
circumstances, the maximum height of advertising signs may
be increased, provided that such increase is authorized as a
special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 325-69 RIDLEY CODE § 325-70
318:900
§ 325-70. Signs in special districts.
§ 325-71. Signs in Planned Residential Developments.
A. On-premises signs. In special districts, only the following on-premises
signs shall be permitted:
(1) All signs permitted in § 325-67A at the standards prescribed
therein.
B. Off-premises signs:
(1) All signs permitted in § 325-67B at the standards prescribed
therein.
A. On-premises signs. In Planned Residential Development areas, parallel
and freestanding business signs are permitted in conjunction with each
permitted commercial use, provided:
(1) Such signs may be nonilluminated, indirectly illuminated or
directly illuminated.
(2) The total area of all parallel signs for each use or establishment
shall not exceed two square feet for each foot of length of the front
building wall or length of that portion of such wall devoted to such
use or establishment.
(3) Signs painted on, affixed to or in any way intended for view from a
public way shall be included in this computation if their combined
area exceeds 25% of the window which they occupy.
(4) In no case may the total area of all parallel signs exceed 10% of the
wall to which they are attached.
(5) The area of any freestanding sign shall not exceed one square foot
for each two feet of lot frontage or 60 square feet, whichever is
smaller; only one such sign is permitted adjacent to any building,
irrespective of the number of occupants or uses.
(6) The maximum height of freestanding business signs shall not
exceed 14 feet.
B. Off-premises signs. The following off-premises signs shall be permitted:
(1) Advertising signs are permitted in planned residential development
areas and are subject to the following provisions:
(a) The area of any advertising sign shall not exceed 100 square
feet.
(b) Advertising signs may be freestanding or parallel signs but
may not be projecting or roof signs.
§ 325-70 WEAPONS § 325-71
318:901
§ 325-72. Signs in Shopping Center District. [Added 3-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 1758]
(c) Advertising signs may be nonilluminated or indirectly
illuminated but may not be directly illuminated or flashing.
(d) The maximum height of freestanding advertising signs shall
not exceed 14 feet.
(e) Advertising signs may advertise only uses or activities
occurring within the same zoning district within which such
sign is located; similarly, advertising signs are prohibited from
advertising any product whatsoever.
A. Prohibited signs. The following signs shall be prohibited in the
Shopping Center District:
(1) Spinning, animated, twirling or any other moving objects used for
advertising purposes whether containing a message or not.
(2) Flashing, blinking, twinkling, or lighted moving signs of any type
including automatic color changing and rotating lamps or other
displays that call attention to a sign.
(3) Advertising cloth or paper banner or signs of any similar character
suspended or hung on any property, except for temporary banners
which may be permitted through special permission of the
Township.
(4) Signs on mobile stands which can be moved from place to place and
thereby not permanently affixed to the ground.
(5) Curb or sidewalk signs or signs painted, attached or suspended
from any outdoor bench, chair or other structure.
(6) Swinging and hanging signs.
(7) Roof signs.
B. On-premises signs. In the Shopping Center District, only the following
on-premises signs shall be permitted.
(1) All signs permitted in § 325-67A at the standards prescribed
therein, except as otherwise provided in this section.
(2) One nonilluminated sign advertising the sale or rental of the
premises on which the sign has been erected or one sign indicating
that said premises have been sold or rented, provided the area of
any such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet and shall be removed
within 20 days after an agreement of rental has been entered or
legal title has been transferred.
(3) One parallel business sign is permitted for each establishment in
the shopping center, subject to the following limitations:
§ 325-71 RIDLEY CODE § 325-72
318:902
(a) The total area of the parallel sign for each establishment shall
not exceed four square feet for each foot of length of the front
building wall or length of that portion of such wall devoted to
such establishment.
(b) If such establishment does not occupy any floor area on the
ground level of the building other than an entryway, the
establishment shall be permitted one additional sign on the
ground level directing patrons to the second floor use. The
maximum permitted sign area for that sign shall not exceed
one square foot per foot of length of the front building wall (or
portion).
(c) Signs painted on or affixed to the inside or outside of windows
shall be permitted, provided that they do not exceed 25% of the
window in which they are placed.
(d) In no case, however, may the total area of parallel signs exceed
25% of the area of the wall (including windows, door area and
cornices) to which they are attached.
(4) Freestanding business signs are permitted, subject to the following
limitations:
(a) Only one such sign shall be permitted for the shopping center
except as provided in § 325-66H. One additional freestanding
sign is permitted when the shopping center can be accessed
from two or more arterial streets, each of which is controlled
by a traffic signal.
(b) The area of any such sign shall not exceed one square foot for
each two feet of lot frontage or 100 square feet, whichever is
smaller.
(c) The maximum height of freestanding business signs shall not
exceed 20 feet, and the lowest edge shall be no closer to the
ground than seven feet.
(d) No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting, concealed
or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
(5) A restaurant with drive-through service may erect one additional
freestanding sign which is a menu sign, provided that it does not
exceed 25 square feet.
(6) Projecting business signs are permitted as a substitute for either
parallel or freestanding signs, provided such sign shall not conflict
with signs on neighboring properties, shall not visually interfere
with the view to and from adjacent properties, shall not extend
above any portion of the roof of the building to which such sign is
affixed, shall have its lower edge at least eight feet above any
sidewalk or pedestrian way, shall in most cases have a vertical
§ 325-72 WEAPONS § 325-72
318:903
alignment and in general shall be appropriate to and in scale with
the building to which it is affixed.
(7) Canopies or marquees are permitted, subject to the requirements
of the Township Building Code.207 Signs that are proposed in
connection with canopies or marquees shall be considered to be
projecting signs and shall:
(a) Be affixed flat to such canopy or marquee.
(b) Be limited to announcing the name of the establishment or any
on-premises show or event.
(c) Have an eight-foot minimum clearance above any portion of
any walk directly below.
(d) Have the maximum permitted area of all other signs permitted
on the premises reduced in an amount equal to the area as the
sign to be located on such canopy or marquee.
C. Off-premises signs. In the Shopping Center District, only off-premises
signs as described in § 325-67B shall be permitted.
207. Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Building Construction and Floodplain Management.
§ 325-72 RIDLEY CODE § 325-72
318:904
ARTICLE XIII
Supplementary Regulations
§ 325-73. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to such exceptions, additions
or modifications as herein provided by the following supplementary
regulations.
§ 325-74. Temporary structures for dwelling purposes.
No cabin, mobile home, garage, basement or other temporary structure,
whether of a fixed or mobile nature, may hereafter be erected or established
for any dwelling purpose for any length of time unless approval for
temporary use is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 325-75. Fences, walls and vegetative screens.
In this section relating to walls, the term "wall" shall not be construed to
mean a retaining wall or the wall of a building.
§ 325-76. Regulations for home occupations. [Amended 9-26-2007
by Ord. No. 1908]
A. No fence, or wall shall be erected or maintained within the required
front yard setback of any premises situate in an area zoned residential.
B. No vegetative screen shall be erected or maintained in the front of the
front building line of any premises situate in an area zoned residential
that exceeds three feet in height. This limitation may be exceeded only
when granted as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. No fence, wall or vegetative screen shall be erected or maintained on
the side or rear yards of any premises zoned residential that exceeds six
feet in height.
D. No fence, wall or vegetative screen shall be erected or maintained on
any of the front, side or rear yards of any premises zoned commercial or
industrial that exceeds eight feet in height.
E. All fences shall be constructed inside, and not directly on, the property
line.
F. No fence shall be of a type or design so as to be clearly out of character
with the architecture of the surrounding area.
G. Prior to the erection of a fence, a permit must be obtained from the
Township.
A. Legislative intent. In order to maintain a strong residential character in
established neighborhoods, the Ridley Township Board of
Commissioners seeks to regulate the location and types of permitted
and prohibited home-based occupations to preserve and advance the
§ 325-73 WEAPONS § 325-76
318:905
public health, safety and welfare. The regulations are intended to
conserve property values, prevent blight, improve the aesthetic
environment of the Township and fully integrate home-based
occupations into the community.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof used exclusively for
residential purposes.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — The aggregate of the horizontal area
of all rooms used for habitation, such as living room, dining room,
kitchen, and bedroom(s), but not including hallways, stairways, cellars,
service rooms, utility rooms, bathrooms, closets, unheated areas, such
as enclosed porches, nor rooms without at least one window or skylight
opening onto an outside yard or court. At least 1/2 of the floor area of
every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven
feet and the floor area of that part of the room where ceiling height
is less than five feet shall not be considered part of the habitable floor
area.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a service character
conducted within a dwelling by the residents, which is secondary to
the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not change the
character thereof or have any exterior evidence of such secondary use
other than a small nameplate.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial
activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no
customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian,
pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises in excess
of those normally associated with residential use. The business or
commercial activity must satisfy the following requirements:
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
(1)
The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(2)
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling
or inventory of a substantial nature.
(3)
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including,
but not limited to, parking or lighting. No significant additional
vehicular or pedestrian traffic to the residence shall be created, nor
shall the use require delivery by tractor-trailer trucks.
(4)
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or
(5)
§ 325-76 RIDLEY CODE § 325-76
318:906
electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
(6)
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
(7)
(8) The business may not involve an illegal activity.
C. Home occupations shall be permitted as a special exception in the A
Residential, B Residential, C Residential, Apartment and Planned
Residential Districts.
D. Special exception shall not be granted when it appears to the Zoning
Hearing Board that the proposed home occupation will constitute a fire
hazard to neighboring residences, will adversely affect neighboring
property value or will constitute a nuisance or otherwise be detrimental
to the neighbors because of excessive traffic, noise, odor, or other
negative circumstances.
E. No-impact home-based businesses shall be a permitted use in any
zoning district.
F. Permitted home occupations, by special exception, shall include, but
not be limited to, the professions of doctor, surgeon, osteopath, dentist
or other practitioner of the healing arts for humans, engineer, architect,
attorney, artist, clergyman, musician, writer, teacher, data processor,
draftsman, sales representative, surveyor, accountant, secretary,
interior design, jeweler/watch repair, locksmith, mail order,
photographer, consultant, counselor, telemarketer, travel agent, typist/
word processor, computer programmer, computer data processor,
dressmaker, seamstress, and tailor. Also permitted by special exception
shall be the following craft home occupations: caterer, with no storage
of specialized vehicles on the lot; contractor, with no storage of
equipment on the lot; and electrical appliance repairman, excluding
major appliances such as refrigerators.
G. Upon application to the Zoning Hearing Board for a special exception,
the Zoning Hearing Board may permit a home occupation use that is not
listed above upon their decision that the requested use is similar in
nature to those listed as permitted home occupations and the use will
conform to the regulations for home occupations.
H. Prohibited home occupations shall include, but not be limited to:
automotive repair and inspections, bakeries, licensed day-care centers,
butchers, morticians, health care facilities, tourist home, convalescent
home, tearoom, real estate office, insurance office, and hair, nail and
tanning salons.
§ 325-76 WEAPONS § 325-76
318:907
I. In cases where the Zoning Officer determines that the proposed use is
not within the scope of the no-impact home based business criteria, the
decision of the Zoning Officer can be appealed to the Zoning Hearing
Board as authorized by § 325-116F(3) of this chapter.
J. Regulations for home occupations.
(1) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
(2) Services shall be provided on a one-to-one basis. Overlap of clients
shall not be permitted.
(3) The business shall employ no employees within the dwelling other
than family members residing in the dwelling. Nonresident
employees shall not use the residence as a meeting location prior to
traveling to another work site.
(4) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods. There shall be no
use of show windows or business display visible from outside the
dwelling.
(5) There shall be no stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.
Further, there shall be no outside stockpiling, inventory or storage
of other materials used by the occupant in performance of the
home occupation, whether performed on site or at another location.
(6) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including
lights.
(7) There shall be no significant additional vehicular or pedestrian
traffic to the residence, nor shall the use require delivery by
tractor-trailer trucks.
(8) A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided for
every 220 square feet of space devoted to the home occupation in
addition to providing the off-street parking as required by § 325-80
of this chapter.
(9) There shall be no use of equipment or process which creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television
reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
(10) The home occupation shall not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
(11) The home occupation shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
(12) The home occupation shall not involve any illegal activity.
§ 325-76 RIDLEY CODE § 325-76
318:908
§ 325-77. Public utility buildings.
Public utility buildings and facilities shall be approved in any district;
provided, however, that buildings and equipment used by these utilities
shall be subject to the following regulations:
§ 325-78. Demolition.
(13) Only the following sign shall be permitted: one nonilluminated sign
with a maximum sign area of one square foot on each of two sides,
with a maximum height of eight feet. Such sign shall not be located
within the existing right-of-way of a street, unless it is attached to a
mailbox. Such sign shall only display black and white colors or
earth tone colors.
(14) There shall be no materials which decompose by detonation
allowed in conjunction with a home occupation.
A. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the
regulations of the district in which the building is located.
B. Height of building shall be as required by the district regulations.
C. In residential districts, the permitted public facilities shall not include
the storage of vehicles or equipment used in the maintenance of any
utility and no equipment causing unreasonable noise, vibration, smoke,
odor, or hazardous effect shall be installed.
D. Unhoused equipment shall be enclosed with a fence or wall not less
than six feet in height which shall be so constructed as not to have
openings, holes or gaps larger than six inches in any dimension.
E. Screen planting. The required fence for unhoused equipment in
residential districts shall be surrounded by plantings approved by the
Planning Commission.
F. Housed equipment. When the equipment is totally enclosed within a
building, no fence or screen planting shall be required and the yard
shall be maintained in conformity with the district in which the facility
is located.
A. Demolition of any structure must be completed within three months of
the issuance of a permit. Completion consists of tearing the structure
down to grade, filling any resulting cavity to grade and removing all
resulting materials from the lot.
B. A structure may be partly demolished only if a building remains and the
demolition of the part is completed as aforesaid.
C. All evidence of the structure which was demolished must be removed
from the exterior surfaces of the building remaining.
§ 325-76 WEAPONS § 325-78
318:909
§ 325-79. Visibility at corner lots.
§ 325-80. Parking and loading regulations. [Amended 3-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 1758; 2-25-1998 by Ord. No. 1780; 4-23-2003 by Ord. No.
1837; 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1905]
D. No demolition of any structure or part thereof shall be done without a
permit.
A. On any corner lot, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected or
maintained, and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be planted,
grown or maintained, which may cause danger to vehicular traffic by
obscuring the view or in any other way be a source of danger.
B. In residential districts, where a lot is located at the intersection of two
streets, no obstruction of any kind whatsoever of a height greater than
24 inches shall be maintained or permitted within a triangle the legs of
which measured from the intersection of the curb lines at the corner
shall be 25 feet.
C. The Township shall have the right to declare any obstruction to vision
within the line of the sight triangle to be a safety hazard and shall direct
the owner of the property to have it removed. If the owner fails to do so
within 30 days after written notice, the Township shall remove the
obstruction and bill the owner and lien the property for the expense
involved.
A. General parking regulations.
(1) Off-street parking spaces with proper and safe access from a street,
alley or driveway, shall be provided and maintained in accordance
with the requirements established below.
(2) Structures and uses in existence at the date of this amended
section of this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of
this section so long as the kind or extent of use is not changed, and
provided that any parking facility now serving such structures or
uses shall not in the future be reduced below the requirements of
this section.
(3) These standards shall apply when a use is established, an existing
building is altered or enlarged, a use is intensified by a change of
occupancy or by the addition of floor area or seating capacity and
will apply for as long as the use remains.
(4) The regulations in this section establish minimum parking
requirements. The property owner shall be responsible for
ensuring that adequate parking is provided for resident, guest,
customer, employee, delivery vehicle parking and/or company
vehicle parking if additional spaces in excess of the minimum
requirements are necessary.
§ 325-78 RIDLEY CODE § 325-80
318:910
(5) Unless otherwise specified, no part of any required front yard shall
be used for off-street parking purposes.
(6) Unless otherwise specified, any area subject to vehicular traffic
shall be paved.
(7) Unless otherwise specified, all parking areas must be paved and
striped, except that vehicle display areas need only be paved.
(8) Parking within unimproved or landscaped areas is prohibited.
(9) Driveway and parking areas for a one-lot single-family development
must also be paved.
(10) For temporary outdoor activities and seasonal sales, parking may
be temporarily reduced.
(11) Clear visibility for all interior drive aisles should be maintained to
avoid pedestrian/vehicular conflicts. The parking design should be
configured to reduce speed.
(12) Parking lots shall provide adequate lighting to ensure safety and
deter potential crime. All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent
properties.
(13) Except when provided by participation in a joint parking project or
management program, property used for required parking shall be
adjacent to and under the same ownership as the generating use.
(14) Except for emergency repairs only, no motor vehicle repair work
shall be permitted in required parking areas.
B. Parking requirements.
(1) Parking shall be provided in accordance with Table 325-80-1,
Schedule for Parking Requirements, unless a program, incentive,
or alternative is provided per § 325-80C.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall determine the number of spaces required
for analogous uses based on the parking required for similar uses.
Except for shopping centers where a combination of uses exists on
the same lot, the minimum required number of on-site parking
spaces shall be the sum of the requirements of the individual uses.
(3) The storage of unlicensed and inoperable vehicles is prohibited
within required parking spaces and public rights-of-way, or within
private streets or easements, and outside storage of such vehicles
shall only be in conjunction with a licensed business for such a use
or for automobile repair or storage.
(4) When calculations of the number of required spaces result in a
fraction, the space requirements shall be rounded upward to the
next whole space.
§ 325-80 WEAPONS § 325-80
318:911
(5) For the purpose of computing parking requirements based on the
number of employees, calculations shall be based on the largest
number of persons working on any single shift.
(6) When existing garages and covered parking areas which used to
satisfy on-site parking requirements are converted to living space,
the required off-street parking shall be provided elsewhere on site.
Table 325-80-1. Schedule of Parking Requirements
Use Minimum Parking Spaces
RESIDENTIAL
Single-family residences 1 per unit
Two-family residences 1.5 per unit
Multifamily dwellings:
Single-room occupancy unit
or one-bedroom unit
1.25 per unit
Two-bedroom unit 1.75 per unit
Units with more than two
bedrooms
2 per unit
Visitor parking 1 per 5 units
Manufactured home parks:
Dwellings 2 per unit
Visitor parking 1 per 5 units
Recreational vehicle or boat
parking
1 per 6 units
Recreational vehicle parks 1 per 5 units
Assisted- or independent-living
facility
1 per 6 beds, plus 1 per
employee
Bed and breakfast 1 per guest room, plus 2
Dormitory, boarding house 0.5 per room or 120 square
feet of floor area, whichever
is greater
Manager's residence 1 per unit
INSTITUTIONAL
Church (see place of worship)
Congregate care facility 1 per 3 beds, plus 1 per
employee
Hospitals 1.5 per bed
Medical/dental offices and clinics 4 per 1,000 square feet
§ 325-80 RIDLEY CODE § 325-80
318:912
Table 325-80-1. Schedule of Parking Requirements
Use Minimum Parking Spaces
Place of worship 10 per 1,000 square feet,
except for living quarters, 0.5
per bedroom; however,
facilities for the use of a
cloistered religious
community (monastery, etc.)
need only provide required
bedroom parking
COMMERCIAL/RETAIL
SERVICE
Adult theaters 1 per 90 square feet but not
less than 15
Adult bookstores and sex novelty
shops
3 per 1,000 square feet
Adult entertainment cabarets 10 per 1,000 square feet but
not less than 15
Automobile sales/automobile
auctions
2 per 1,000 square feet, plus
1 per 20 vehicle display
spaces provided
Automobile repair 5.5 per 1,000 square feet
office and repair, but not less
than 5
Automotive maintenance/service
stations
3 per service bay, plus 4 per
1,000 square feet accessory
retail sales
Bar/lounge/tavern 1 per 40 square feet
Car wash, automated (as a
principal use)
2, plus 1 per employee
Conference center 1 per 100 square feet
Financial services 4 per 1,000 square feet
Funeral home, mortuary 10 per 1,000 square feet but
not less than 20
Furniture, appliance, and carpet/
flooring stores
1 per 1,000 square feet up to
15,000 square feet, then 1.25
per 1,000 square feet
Grocery stores, convenience
markets
4 per 1,000 square feet
§ 325-80 WEAPONS § 325-80
318:913
Table 325-80-1. Schedule of Parking Requirements
Use Minimum Parking Spaces
Hotels, motels (including office,
lobby, and time-share, but not
including resort hotels)
1 per guest room up to 500,
plus 1 per 2 guest rooms over
500 up to 1,000, plus 1 per 4
guest rooms over 1,000, plus
1 per 65 square feet for
restaurants, plus 1 per 85
square feet of banquet area
on the same premises.
Office 4 per 1,000 square feet
Plant nurseries, building materials,
equipment rental or sales yards,
and similar uses
2 per 1,000 square feet, plus
1 per 2,500 square feet of
outdoor display
Resort hotels, includes time-share
and all accessory uses, including
convention facilities (except for
amusement parks and stadiums or
arenas)
(Requirement includes areas
accessing rooms) 1 per guest
room up to 500, plus 1 per 2
guest rooms over 500 up to
1,000, plus 1 per 4 guest
rooms over 1,000, plus 6 per
1,000 square feet for all
areas accessible to the public
except convention facilities,
plus 1 per 10,000 square feet
for convention facilities and
areas not accessible to the
public
Restaurant, counter service 1 per 85 square feet
Restaurant, fast food 1 per 50 square feet
Restaurant, outdoor cafe 1 per 85 square feet
Restaurant, sit-down 1 per 65 square feet, plus 1
per 85 square feet of banquet
area
Retail uses, such as shopping
centers, freestanding restaurants
or places of worship within a
shopping center, personal services,
banquet facilities, auctions,
showrooms in conjunction with
retail uses, appliance repair shops,
and amusement arcades
4 per 1,000 square feet
EDUCATIONAL
Child care or day care 4 per 1,000 square feet with
designated drop-off, and
stacking space
§ 325-80 RIDLEY CODE § 325-80
318:914
Table 325-80-1. Schedule of Parking Requirements
Use Minimum Parking Spaces
Elementary and middle schools 1 per classroom, plus 4 per
1,000 square feet of office
space
High schools 7 per classroom, plus 4 per
1,000 square feet of office
space,
or
1 per 90 square feet of
gymnasium/auditorium,
whichever is greater
Colleges/universities 1 space per 2 employees, plus
1 space per 3 students, based
on maximum enrollment,
or
1 per 90 square feet of
gymnasium/auditorium,
whichever is greater
Other, such as vocational, trade,
music, business, sports (karate)
2 per 1,000 square feet of
classroom area, plus 4 per
1,000 square feet of office
space
CULTURAL/ENTERTAINMENT
Amusement parks 1 per 600 square feet of all
acreage within the perimeter
wall, or 3 per hole for
miniature golf
Billiard halls 1 per 90 square feet
Bowling alleys 4.5 per lane
Club/lodge 10 per 1,000 square feet
Community or recreation buildings
not accessory to a residential use
4 per 1,000 square feet
Convention facilities, not in
conjunction with a resort hotel
2 per 1,000 square feet
Dance halls, skating rinks, and
similar recreational uses
10 per 1,000 square feet
Golf course 2.5 per 1,000 square feet in
main building, plus 1 per 2
tees in driving range, plus 4
per green in playing area
Health or fitness studio 5 per 1,000 square feet
§ 325-80 WEAPONS § 325-80
318:915
Table 325-80-1. Schedule of Parking Requirements
Use Minimum Parking Spaces
Library 3.3 per 1,000 square feet
Museums 3.3 per 1,000 square feet
Stadiums and arenas 1 per 4 seats, or 8 feet of
bench length
Tennis clubs as a principal use 3 per court in addition to
other uses
Theaters, movie theaters 1 per 4 seats, or 1 per 90
square feet of the entire
facility
TECHNICAL
Distribution centers (any building
within a complex not meeting the
definition shall meet the parking
requirements per the
manufacturing, industrial,
warehousing requirement)
1 per 1,000 square feet for up
to 125,000 square feet, 1 per
2,000 square feet if over
125,000 square feet
Manufacturing, industrial,
warehousing, including showrooms
in conjunction with industrial uses
2 per 1,000 square feet
including such as office uses
Outside storage, automobile
dismantling, salvage yards
1 per 7,000 square feet up to
42,000 square feet plus 1 for
every 42,000 square feet
additional, but no less than 3
spaces, in addition to spaces
required for offices
Warehouses, mini 5 spaces in the vicinity of the
leasing office and minimum
drive aisles of 27 feet
adjacent to all storage unit
doors
For all uses not listed, unless
similar to uses listed above
1 per 1,000 square feet
C. Programs and incentives to reduce parking requirements. The following
programs and incentives are provided where the basic parking
requirements of this chapter would be excessive or detrimental to the
land use or transportation goals and policies of the Township of Ridley
and the County of Delaware.
(1) Credit for bicycle or motorcycle parking facilities. The Zoning
Officer may authorize credit towards on-site parking requirements
for all uses, except residential uses, for the provision of bicycle or
motorcycle facilities subject to the following guidelines:
§ 325-80 RIDLEY CODE § 325-80
318:916
(a) Credit may be granted at a rate of one vehicular space per
every four spaces when the spaces are within a secured area.
(b) Wherever shower and changing facilities for bicyclists are
provided, credit may be granted at the rate of two vehicular
spaces per one shower in addition to the credit.
(c) The number of vehicular spaces required shall not be reduced
by more than 5% or 10 spaces, whichever is less.
(d) If provided, the parking facility shall be a minimum of two feet
by six feet in size, unless a premanufactured bicycle rack or
locker differs from this dimension, in which case the dimension
of the premanufactured rack or locker shall suffice.
(e) The area designated for bicycles shall be striped and/or signed.
(2) Mixed uses. Developments, including mixed-use developments,
which allow parking spaces to be shared by various land uses that
operate at different times from one another throughout the day, are
permitted per Table 325-80-2, Schedule of Parking Calculations,
below. A minimum of two uses is required to apply the calculations
established in Table 325-80-2.
(a) When residential development is established in conjunction
with nonresidential development, visitor parking is not
required with a shared parking agreement.
(b) Mixed-use developments may utilize off-site parking when a
clear and safe pedestrian connection links the use to the
parking area. The off-site parking area must be within 150 feet
of the development.
(c) Special uses, such as stadiums and arenas, may request
alternative parking standards per § 325-80C(3).
(d) On-street parking is allowed on private streets and may be
counted towards required parking for the development with a
shared parking agreement.
Table 325-80-2. Schedule of Parking Calculations.
Weekdays Weekends
Use:
Midnight-7:00
a.m.
7:00
a.m.-6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m.-
Midnight
Midnight-7:00
a.m.
7:00
a.m.-6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m.
Midnight
Office/
industrial
5% 100% 5% 0% 60% 10%
Retail 0% 100% 80% 0% 100% 60%
Residenti1a0l0% 55% 85% 100% 65% 75%
Restaura5n0t% 70% 100% 45% 70% 100%
§ 325-80 WEAPONS § 325-80
318:917
Table 325-80-2. Schedule of Parking Calculations.
Weekdays Weekends
Use:
Midnight-7:00
a.m.
7:00
a.m.-6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m.-
Midnight
Midnight-7:00
a.m.
7:00
a.m.-6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m.
Midnight
Hotel 100% 65% 90% 100% 65% 80%
Cinema/
theater
0% 70% 100% 5% 70% 100%
NOTE: How to use the parking schedule: calculate the number
of spaces required for each use if it were freestanding (refer
to Table 325-80-1, Schedule of Parking Requirements).
Applying the applicable general use category above to each
proposed use, use the percentages to calculate the number
of spaces required for each time period (six time periods per
use). Add the number of spaces required for all applicable
uses to obtain a total parking requirement for each time
period. Select the time period with the highest total parking
requirement and use that total as the shared parking
requirement.
(3) Alternative parking standards.
(a) An alternative quantity of required parking can only be
considered with an application to the Zoning Hearing Board for
a special exception for a waiver of standards. A traffic analysis
performed by a competent professional shall be submitted with
the application which documents how any reductions were
calculated and what assumptions such calculations were based
upon and substantiates that the proposed use will require
fewer spaces than required by Table 325-80-1. Upon approval
of a waiver of parking standards, the traffic analysis and any
conditions of approval of the analysis and waiver shall be
recorded against the property by the owner and shall be
disclosed to potential lessees of the property. Factors which
may justify the approval of such a waiver are:
[1] The adoption of transportation demand management
(TDM) techniques such as car pools, van pools, bicycles,
employer transit subsidies, compressed work hours, and
high occupancy vehicle (HOV) parking preferences.
[2] Appropriate site planning techniques to reduce
environmental problems and to facilitate the Township of
Ridley's and County of Delaware's compliance with the
Federal Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, such as, but
not limited to, pedestrian connections and reduced
impervious surfaces.
§ 325-80 RIDLEY CODE § 325-80
318:918
[3] Available off-site parking which is determined to be
available for the proposed use and may be accomplished
by an off-site parking agreement or an on-site reciprocal
parking agreement.
[4] Evidence within a parking study that demonstrates, based
on data and studies performed by organizations such as
the Institute of Traffic Engineers and/or on the study of
other similar uses within the community or within like
communities, that the number of required spaces is not
applicable to a particular situation.
D. Design and layout of parking.
(1) Parking space dimension minimums.
(a) Vehicular. Parking spaces shall meet the following minimums,
exclusive of drives, streets, alleys or aisles, giving ingress and
egress:
[1] Automobile, other accessible spaces, nine feet wide by 18
feet long.
[2] Recreational vehicle spaces, 10 feet wide by 22 feet long.
[3] Commercial vehicle spaces, 10 feet wide by 25 feet long,
with a minimum 14 feet of vertical clearance.
[4] Overhangs of up to one foot into landscaped areas, or over
private sidewalks five feet or more in width, may be
counted as part of the required length.
[5] For parking garages, carports, or similar structure, the
front or rear 1/3 of the space may have a one-foot side
intrusion for columns or similar structures.
(2) Vehicular parking layout. Minimum layout dimensions are
established in Table 325-80-3 which shall apply to all required onsite
parking areas.
(3) Design and improvement standards.
(a) If provided, spaces designated for carpools, vanpools, and
other high occupancy vehicles shall be located with priority
over all other vehicular parking except for mobility impaired
accessible parking.
(b) All parking, drive aisle, and other areas subject to vehicular
access or used for the parking, maneuvering, or storing of
motor vehicles, equipment, or materials shall be paved in
accordance with plans approved to ensure proper drainage.
(c) Except for single-family dwellings exiting onto local or private
streets, the parking space or lot shall be designed so that
§ 325-80 WEAPONS § 325-80
318:919
exiting vehicles will not be required to back out across any
sidewalk and onto a street.
(d) All on-site parking facilities shall have access to a street
through a system of drive aisles and/or easements.
(e) Required on-site parking shall not be located within a
dedicated state right-of-way unless approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
(f) No parking space shall be located so as to require the moving
of any vehicle on the premises in order to enter or leave any
other space, except in conjunction with single-family
residences, and valet parking in conjunction with commercial
uses, which can be approved if the development provides 150
or more parking spaces, no more than 30% of the total number
of required spaces are designed as tandem spaces (end-to-end
parking), and a valet parking attendant is on duty during
business hours.
(g) Except in single-family residential development, whenever
practical, parking in a drive aisle connecting the public rightof-
way with a parking area or garage shall not be permitted on
or adjacent to the drive aisle.
(h) Parallel spaces are to be discouraged and are permitted only
when another design is impractical due to the limited size and
configuration of the lot as approved by the Township of Ridley
Board of Commissioners in conjunction with any land use
application.
(i) Walls, fences or landscaping provided shall be adequately
protected from damage by vehicles using the parking lot and
shall be kept in good repair at all times.
(j) Vehicular spaces shall be designed in accordance with Table
325-80-3 and Figure 325-80-3 below.
(k) Dead end parking areas exceeding 20 spaces 10 per side of a
drive aisle) shall provide a standard size parking space, striped
and assigned "No Parking," for a turnaround or equivalent
design.
(l) A customer and/or employee entrance shall be provided for all
building face(s) adjacent to a particular parking area.
§ 325-80 RIDLEY CODE § 325-80
318:920
Table 325-80-3. Automobile Parking Layout
Parking
Angle
(degrees)
Stall
Width(feet)
Vehicle
Projection
(A)(feet)
Aisle
Width
(B) One
way/Two
way(feet)
Typical
Module
(C) One
way/Two
way(feet)
Overhang
(D)
(feet) (E)(feet)
Curb
Length
(F)(feet)
0
(parallel)
9 9 12/20 N/A N/A 0 21
45 9 19.09 13/20 51.2/
58.2
2.1 9 12.73
50 9 19.57 14/20 53.1/
59.1
2.3 7.55 11.75
55 9 19.91 15/20 54.8/
59.8
2.5 6.30 10.99
60 9 20.09 16/20 56.2/
60.2
2.6 5.20 10.39
65 9 20.12 17/20 57.2/
60.2
2.8 4.20 9.93
70 9 19.99 18.5/20 58.5/60 2.8 3.28 9.58
75 9 19.72 20/20 59.5/
59.5
2.9 2.41 9.32
90 9 18 24/24 60/60 0 0 9
NOTE: Overhangs of up to one foot into landscaped areas, or over private sidewalks
five feet or more in width, may be counted as part of the required stall length.
§ 325-80 WEAPONS § 325-80
318:921
E. Mobility impaired accessible spaces.
(1) Required spaces. In order to provide accessibility to facilities for
people with mobility impairments, accessible parking shall be
provided as shown on Table 325-80-4, Schedule of Accessible
Parking, except for residential buildings with fewer than three
dwelling units and for the following uses which shall provide the
specified percentage of accessible spaces of the total parking
spaces provided:
(a) Medical care occupancies specializing in the treatment of
persons with mobility impairments: 20%.
(b) Occupancies providing outpatient medical care facilities: 10%.
§ 325-80 RIDLEY CODE § 325-80
318:922
(c) Apartment buildings containing accessible or adaptable
dwelling units: 2%. Where parking is provided within or
beneath a building, accessible spaces shall also be provided
within or beneath the building.
(2) Accessible space and access design.
(a) Accessible parking spaces shall be located on the shortest
possible accessible route from adjacent parking to an
accessible building entrance. In facilities with multiple
accessible building entrances with adjacent parking,
accessible spaces shall be generally dispersed and located
near the accessible entrances. An exception is provided for van
accessible spaces, which may be located on one level of a
multilevel parking structure. The minimum width of said
accessible route shall be no less than three feet.
(b) Accessible exterior routes shall be provided from public
transportation stops, accessible parking, accessible passenger
loading zones, and public sidewalks to the accessible building
entrance they serve.
(c) When more than one building or facility is located on a site, at
least one accessible route shall connect accessible elements,
facilities, and buildings that are on the same site. The
accessible route between accessible parking and accessible
building entrances shall be the most practical direct route.
(d) Accessible spaces, van accessible spaces, access aisles, access
routes, and passenger loading zones shall be paved, and
designed and marked in accordance with the most current
adopted American National Standard published by the
American National Standards Institute.
(3) Interpretation. The Building Official shall interpret and enforce the
above § 325-80E(1) and (2) of this chapter.
(4) Waivers. No waivers or variances to this subsection are permitted.
Table 325-80-4. Schedule of Accessible Parking
Total Parking Spaces
Number of Accessible Spaces
Required*
Up to 100 1 per 25 spaces
101 to 200 1 per 50 spaces
201 to 500 1 per 100 spaces
501 to 1,000 2% of total spaces
Over 1,000 20, plus 1 per 100 spaces or
fraction thereof
§ 325-80 WEAPONS § 325-80
318:923
NOTES:
* One van accessible space with a minimum vertical clearance of
98 inches shall be provided for every eight accessible parking
spaces or fraction thereof.
F. On-Site loading requirements.
(1) Spaces required. Every use involving the receipt or distribution by
vehicle of material or merchandise shall provide adequate space
for standing, loading and unloading in order to avoid undue
interference with public use of streets in accordance with Table
325-80-5, Schedule of Loading Space Requirements, below.
(2) Design and improvement standards. Off-street loading areas shall
be developed in accordance with the standards in § 325-80D.
(a) The minimum size of a loading space shall be at least 10 feet in
width, 25 feet in length, with a fourteen-foot vertical clearance.
(b) Loading spaces shall be designed with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street in a manner which does not require
backing from or to the public right-of-way, will not interfere
with on-site traffic movement and which will not restrict the
access of surrounding uses. At a minimum, the following areas
for access and maneuvering shall be provided:
[1] Access aisles. A width of at least 18 feet shall be provided
for one-way aisles and 24 feet for two-way aisles.
[2] The loading berth shall be located adjacent, or as close as
possible, to the main structure.
[3] Loading areas shall be designed with loading docks
setback, screened and buffered to minimize noise and
disruption to adjacent residential uses. Screening shall be
of sufficient height and length to completely screen the
vehicles, consisting of wing walls, depressed loading
docks, increased landscaping, setback, walls, similar
structures, or any combination.
§ 325-80 RIDLEY CODE § 325-80
318:924
Table 325-80-5. Schedule of Loading Space
Requirements
Use
Loading Spaces Required
Per Square Footage of
Gross Floor Area
Hotels, motels, hospitals,
elementary/middle/high
schools, colleges/
universities, theaters
Under 12,000: 0
12,000 to 120,000: 1, plus 1
per 120,000 over 120,000
Assisted living congregate
care
Under 100,000: 0
100,000 to 200,000: 1, plus
1 per 200,000 over 200,000
Personal services 1 for first 12,000, plus 1
over 12,000
Restaurants Under 25,000: 1
25,000 to 40,000: 1
40,000 to 120,000: 1 plus 1
for each additional 200,000
Retail sales Under 5,000: 0
5,000 to 15,000: 1
15,000 to 40,000: 1, plus 1
for each additional 50,000
Industrial, warehouse Under 5,000: 0
5,000 to 12,000: 1
12,000 to 30,000: 1
30,000 to 120,000: 1, plus 1
for each additional 120,000
Office Under 30,000: 0
30,000 to 120,000: 1, plus 1
for each additional 120,000
G. Alternative loading standards. An alternative layout and number of
required loading facilities shall only be considered with a special
exception waiver of standards application to the Zoning Hearing Board.
A site operations study, performed by a registered civil engineer
licensed to practice in the State of Pennsylvania shall be submitted with
the application which documents the basis of any suggested reduction
in the number of loading facilities, and demonstrates how the
alternative layout will meet the site access and site buffering
§ 325-80 WEAPONS § 325-80
318:925
§ 325-81. Amusement centers.
Amusement centers, including but not limited to bowling alleys, skating
rinks, dance halls and similar uses, shall provide proper parking areas with
vehicular circulation designed so as to minimize traffic congestion, shall not
be closer than 10 feet to any property line, shall provide adequate screening
from any residential or apartment district, and shall prevent offensive noise,
vibration and lighting.
§ 325-82. Animal hospitals and similar uses.
No animal hospital, veterinary clinic and kennel shall be located closer than
100 feet to any residential or apartment district, or existing restaurant,
hotel, motel or apartment. Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent
offensive noise and odor.
§ 325-83. Animals in residential and apartment districts.
Farm animals other than customary pets shall not be kept in residential or
apartment districts. Household pets shall be limited to four combined per
family in residential and apartment districts, except for household pet litters
which are exempt for a six-month period.
§ 325-84. Billboards (advertising signs).
requirements of this chapter. Factors which may justify the approval of
such a waiver are:
(1) The ability of the proposed design to adequately buffer adjacent
development and street views of the loading area.
(2) The ability of the proposed design to accommodate anticipated
loading requirements of the use.
(3) Evidence that demonstrates that the number and layout of the
loading area as required by this chapter is not applicable to this
particular situation based upon the study of similar uses within the
community or like communities.
(4) Evidence of the unique characteristics of an individual site,
including those created by the shape and location of property,
design of existing or proposed structures, the operation of the uses
proposed for the site or its ownership which require the application
of alternative standards.
A. Adjacent to selected uses or districts. No billboard shall be permitted
within 1,000 feet of any area designated A Residential District, B
Residential District, or C Residential District or facing any public or
parochial school, library, church, hospital or similar institutional use of
closer than 200 feet.
§ 325-80 RIDLEY CODE § 325-84
318:926
§ 325-85. Gasoline service stations. [Amended 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1906]
B. Spacing. No two billboards shall be located closer to one another than
120 feet.
C. Size. The total surface area of any billboard, exclusive of structural
supports and trim, shall not exceed 700 square feet.
D. Height. No billboard shall project above the height limit of structures in
the district in which it is located.
E. Maintenance. All billboards shall be maintained in good condition, as
determined by the Zoning Officer. Otherwise they shall be ordered
removed, after due notice.
F. Illumination and movement. If illuminated, the light shall be confined to
the surface of the billboard which shall be located and arranged as to
avoid glare or reflection onto any portion of any street or highway or
into the path of oncoming vehicles, or into adjacent properties. Flashing
or moving billboards shall not be permitted in any district.
A. Legislative intent. Gasoline service stations are a necessity for the
continued economic function of the Township. However, responsible
legislation is necessary to properly integrate such stations into the local
community and the Township's land use patterns and to regulate station
development and design to preserve and advance the public health,
safety and welfare. The Ridley Township Board of Commissioners seeks
to regulate the location, design and use of current and future gasoline
service stations. The regulations are intended to conserve property
values, create a more attractive and effective economic and business
climate, prevent blight, encourage the most appropriate use of current
and future gasoline station sites, improve the aesthetic environment of
the Township and fully integrate gasoline stations into the community.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AUTOMOTIVE ACCESSORY ITEMS — Products directly related to the
maintenance of vehicles designed and/or used, in whole or in part, for
travel upon public and private roadways, such as oil, transmission fluid,
brake fluid, polish, wax, fuel additives and treatments, wipers, tires,
batteries, windshield washing fluid, cleaning fluids and/or substantially
similar items.
CONVENIENCE STORE — An establishment offering the retail sale of
household consumer merchandise. A maximum size for a convenience
store shall be 5,500 square feet with a maximum of 5,000 square feet
of retail area.
FUELING POSITION — A location at which a single vehicle may be
fueled from a product dispenser.
§ 325-84 WEAPONS § 325-85
318:927
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Any establishment in which the sale
or storage of automotive fuel is the principal activity and/or constitutes
a substantial or significant portion of the goods offered and/or service
rendered.
KIOSK — A building no larger than 10 feet in height and 144 square feet
in floor space which is used exclusively for the retail sales transaction
of automotive fuel, kerosene and automotive accessory items and/or
storage. If a kiosk constitutes the principal building on site, a maximum
size of 300 square feet of floor space may be constructed.
MAJOR COMMERCIAL THOROUGHFARE — Any roadway possessing a
state and/or county route number. A roadway possessing a state and/or
county route number for a portion of its course shall be considered a
major commercial thoroughfare only with regard to such portion.
MINOR REPAIRS — Incidental maintenance of a vehicle, such as the
addition of vehicular fluids, replacement of wiper blades or
substantially similar activity.
PRODUCT DISPENSER — A device that dispenses automotive fuel and/
or kerosene. A product dispenser may contain multiple hoses or be
capable of serving more than one fueling position simultaneously.
PUBLIC GARAGE — A building or portion thereof, other than a private
garage, designed or used for equipping, repairing, renting, parking or
storing motor vehicles.
PUMP ISLAND — A concrete platform measuring a minimum of six
inches in height from the paved surface on which product dispensers
are located.
C. Regulations for gasoline service stations.
(1) Premises occupied as a gasoline service station shall conform with
the following criteria:
(a) The parcel shall be located at intersections along major
commercial thoroughfares.
(b) The zoning classification for the parcel is C-2 General
Commercial, I Industrial and/or IHC Industrial Heritage
Corridor.
(c) The parcel possesses a minimum lot area of 7,500 square feet.
(d) The parcel possesses a minimum street frontage of 100 feet
along the abutting major commercial thoroughfare and 100
feet along the abutting street.
(2) Any parcel occupied as a gasoline service station shall be
prohibited from conducting any use/or operation except:
(a) The storage and retail sale of automotive fuel and kerosene.
§ 325-85 RIDLEY CODE § 325-85
318:928
(b) The retail sale of automotive accessory items.
(c) Minor repairs.
(d) The retail sale of over-the-counter consumer merchandise that
shall be limited to 12 square feet.
(e) Secondary use or uses duly approved as a special exception.
(3) Further, in addition to other nonpermitted uses, the following
activities shall be strictly prohibited on any parcel containing a
gasoline service station:
(a) The sale, lease, storage or display of new or used vehicles.
However, the outdoor storage of a vehicle awaiting minor
repairs is permissible in designated areas for a period of not
more than 24 hours.
(b) Outdoor storage and/or display of new and/or used
automobiles, boats, automobile parts or other merchandise
except for small sample displays of automotive accessory
items, not including batteries or tires, located adjacent to the
principal building or on the pump islands.
(c) Outdoor storage of tires and/or trash. An area enclosed by a
wall, fence or vegetative material and screened from view of
adjoining properties shall be provided whenever outdoor
storage is required. No materials may be stored so as to create
a fire hazard.
(d) Any outdoor use involving fire, sparks or a high level of heat, or
any use involving fuel from portable fuel tanks.
(e) The sale and/or display of any merchandise out of a trailer or
truck.
(f) Junkyards and/or parts scavenging services.
(g) Outdoor storage and/or display of vending machines, except
those located directly adjacent to the walls of the principal
building. A total number of four vending machines shall be
permitted per site. Vending machines shall not include public
telephones or air dispensers.
D. Secondary uses.
(1) Secondary uses shall be permitted only as a special exception
granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. Such secondary uses shall
be limited to:
(a) Public garages.
(b) Facilities for washing and/or waxing vehicles.
§ 325-85 WEAPONS § 325-85
318:929
(c) Convenience stores.
(2) In order to apply to conduct one secondary use on a parcel
occupied as a gasoline service station, such parcel must contain a
minimum lot area of 7,500 square feet.
(3) In order to apply to conduct more than one secondary use on a
parcel occupied as a gasoline service station, such parcel must
contain a minimum lot area of 12,500 square feet.
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the authority to impose such
reasonable conditions and restrictions as are related to and
incidental to the proposed special exception use(s). Such
conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of this
chapter and shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any
adverse impact such relief may have on the neighborhood or
community, and to protect, preserve and advance the intent of this
chapter.
E. Dimension requirements. A parcel occupied as a gasoline service
station must conform to the following restrictions:
(1) There shall be a minimum front yard setback of 30 feet along each
street, with the exception of canopies, which must be set back a
minimum of 20 feet.
(2) There shall be a minimum rear yard setback of 30 feet and a
minimum side yard setback of 20 feet. However, if the parcel
borders a residential district or property occupied with a
residential use, there shall be a minimum rear yard or side yard
setback of 50 feet.
(3) No building shall be greater than one story or 25 feet in height. No
accessory structure, including canopies, shall be greater than 20
feet in height.
(4) The principal building shall occupy no more than 15% of the lot. If a
secondary use is performed on the site, the principal building shall
occupy no more than 25% of the lot. There shall be a total building
area limit of 30% of the lot. However, the area covered by any
canopy shall not be included in these calculations of lot coverage,
provided that the canopy covers only the pump islands, product
dispensers, fueling positions, kiosk and/or the area between the
fueling positions and the principal building.
(5) Fuel tanks shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any building
and/or structure, including the product dispensers and pump
islands. Fuel tanks shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from any
property line and/or right-of-way.
(6) All product dispensers shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from
any other product dispenser located on parallel pump islands, as
§ 325-85 RIDLEY CODE § 325-85
318:930
well as from the primary building and any building containing
any secondary use. Such distance shall be measured from pump
island to parallel pump island, and from pump island to the curbing
surrounding the building or to the building itself, whichever is
nearer. However, product dispensers need only be set back four
feet from a kiosk located on the same pump island.
(7) All product dispensers shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from
all product dispensers located along the same line of vehicular flow.
Such distance shall be measured from center of product dispenser
to center of product dispenser.
(8) If kerosene and/or diesel fuel is sold on the premises, the service
pump dispensing kerosene and/or diesel fuel shall dispense
kerosene and/or diesel fuel only.
F. Buffers and landscaping.
(1) The minimum landscaped area shall be a ten-foot-wide suitable
planted strip running along the front yards of the site.
(2) There shall be a planted buffer along the border with any parcel
zoned or used for residential purposes. The planted buffer shall be
a minimum of 30 feet wide and shall contain evergreens that are at
least six feet in height when planted and set six feet apart.
G. Parking and vehicular access.
(1) The following criteria shall exist as additional requirements for any
driveways provided and maintained on any parcel used as a
gasoline service station:
(a) Driveways shall have a minimum offset of 25 feet from the
intersection of street right-of-way lines.
(b) Driveways shall have a minimum offset of 10 feet from any side
lot line.
(c) Driveways shall have a minimum width of 12 feet and a
maximum width of 35 feet.
(d) Driveways on the same lot shall have a minimum separation of
25 feet.
(2) The following criteria shall exist as additional requirements for any
parking spaces provided and maintained on any parcel used as a
gasoline service station:
(a) A parcel that contains no secondary uses shall provide one
parking space for each 200 square feet of building area, with a
minimum of three parking spaces.
§ 325-85 WEAPONS § 325-85
318:931
(b) A parcel that contains a convenience store shall provide one
parking space for each 200 square feet of building area, with a
minimum of four parking spaces.
(c) A parcel that contains a public garage shall provide one
parking space for each 200 square feet of building area, with a
minimum of five parking spaces.
(d) A parcel that contains a convenience store and a public garage
shall provide one parking space for each 200 square feet of
building area, with a minimum of six parking spaces.
(e) A fully automated car wash shall not require any additional onsite
parking. However, a fully automated car wash must
provide a minimum of two vehicular stacking spaces outside
the entrance to the car wash.
H. Lighting. Any and all lighting shall be designed to shine away from any
other property and/or be suitably shielded. No more than one footcandle
from any and all lighting shall intrude into residentially zoned or
used property measured 10 feet onto the residentially zoned or used
property.
I. Signs. The following criteria shall exist as additional requirements on
any sign erected or maintained on a parcel used as a gasoline service
station:
(1) The price/grade signs must at all times accurately reflect the actual
price of automotive fuel and kerosene being offered for sale.
(2) Signs bearing the corporate insignia and/or brand name of the
gasoline sold and/or type of services available on site (i.e., fullservice
and/or self-service) shall be the only signs permitted on the
canopy.
(3) Signs affixed to or incorporated into the canopy shall not face
residentially zoned or residentially developed properties.
(4) One additional sign, measuring no larger than 24 inches by 24
inches or four square feet, and having a depth of no more than one
inch, shall be allowed at each product dispenser which identifies
said product dispenser and/or pump island as providing full-service
and/or self-service.
J. Alterations of nonconforming gasoline service stations.
(1) A parcel used as a gasoline service station and which meets the
following criteria, but does not satisfy the criteria specified in
Subsections C through J above, may only be altered, reconstructed
and/or modified pursuant to a special nonconforming alteration
permit issued by the Zoning Hearing Board. Such permit shall be
issued if the Zoning Hearing Board finds the following:
§ 325-85 RIDLEY CODE § 325-85
318:932
(a) The underlying zoning classification for such parcels is C-1
Neighborhood Commercial, C-2 General Commercial, I
Industrial and/or IHC Industrial Heritage Corridor;
(b) The parcel is located at an intersection along a major
commercial thoroughfare and possesses a minimum of 100 feet
of frontage along the major commercial thoroughfare:
(c) The parcel is not less than 7,500 square feet in area;
(d) The parcel remains of a size, shape and location as to
reasonably accommodate the use thereof as a gasoline service
station and any proposed secondary use;
(e) The use as a gasoline service station and any proposed
secondary use will not prevent the orderly and reasonable use
of adjacent properties or of properties in adjacent use districts;
(f) The use as a gasoline service station and any proposed
secondary use will not prevent the orderly and reasonable use
of permitted or legally established uses in the district wherein
the proposed use is to be located or of permitted or legally
established uses in adjacent use districts;
(g) The safety, health, welfare, comfort, convenience or order of
the Township will not be adversely affected by the proposed
use as a gasoline station and any proposed secondary use and
its location; and
(h) The use as a gasoline station and any proposed secondary use
will be in harmony with and promote the general purposes and
intent of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the authority to impose such
reasonable conditions and restrictions as are related to and
incidental to the proposed use of the property as a gasoline service
station and any proposed secondary use. Such conditions shall be
consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter and shall be
imposed for the purpose of minimizing any adverse impact such
relief may have on the neighborhood or community, and to protect,
preserve and advance the intent of this chapter.
K. Discontinuation of permitted gasoline service stations. Should the use
of any parcel as a gasoline service station cease or be discontinued for
six months or more or be abandoned for 30 days or more, any structure
related to the use as a gasoline service station, including but not limited
to fueling dispensers, storage tanks, freestanding ground signs,
canopies and kiosks, shall be removed within 30 days after such
cessation or discontinuance. However, such shall not be deemed to
require the removal of any building and/or structure which may be
converted to a legal conforming use, provided that such conversion is
significantly initiated within 30 days of cessation or discontinuance and
§ 325-85 WEAPONS § 325-85
318:933
§ 325-86. Outdoor recreation uses.
is completed within six months. The Zoning Hearing Board for good
cause shown may grant an extension of the time frames set forth in this
subsection, not to exceed an additional one year.
L. Discontinuation of nonconforming gasoline service stations.
(1) Should the nonconforming use of any parcel as a gasoline service
station cease or be discontinued for six months or more or be
abandoned for 30 days or more, such nonconforming use shall be
deemed to have expired and may not be reinstated.
(2) Any building and/or structure relating to the use as a gasoline
service station, including but not limited to fueling dispensers,
canopies, storage tanks, freestanding ground signs and kiosks,
shall be removed within 30 days as to such cessation or
discontinuance. However, such shall not be deemed to require the
removal of any building and/or structure which may be converted
to a legal conforming use, provided that such conversion is
significantly initiated within 30 days of cessation or discontinuance
and completed within six months. The Zoning Hearing Board for
good cause shown may grant an extension of the time frames set
forth in this subsection, not to exceed an additional one year.
(3) Any building or structure which as been damaged by fire or other
cause to the extent of more than 50% of its value, exclusive of
foundations, or 50% of its total building area shall be repaired or
rebuilt only in conformity with the regulations of this chapter and
the Building Code and all other applicable laws, rules and
regulations.
A. Illumination. Where an outdoor recreational use adjoins or is in a
residential zone and uses lighting, it must be so located and shielded
that no objectionable glare or illumination is cast upon adjoining
residential properties.
B. Screens. Where an outdoor recreational use, other than a golf course,
adjoins or is in a residential zone, trees or shrubs must be planted on
the site of this use so as to form an effective visual barrier between the
outdoor recreational use and adjoining residential properties.
C. Swimming pool. Every outdoor swimming pool must conform to
applicable requirement of state law and in addition must be completely
surrounded by a fence or or wall not less than four feet in height, which
shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger
than six inches in any dimension. All gates or doors openings through
such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching
device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when
not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which forms a
part of the enclosure need not be so equipped.
§ 325-85 RIDLEY CODE § 325-86
318:934
§ 325-87. Adult entertainment uses. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 1808]
See Article XVIII, Adult Entertainment.
§ 325-88. Projections into required setbacks.
No principal building or part thereof shall be erected within or shall project
into any required yard in any district, except for one-story bay windows,
eaves, chimneys, buttresses, cornices, steps, or ramps; and none of these
or similar projections shall encroach more than three feet into the required
yard.
§ 325-89. Accessory structures.
D. Private swimming pool. No private swimming pool shall be constructed
closer than five feet to a property line, nor shall it be constructed in the
front yard of any property. For the purposes of this subsection, a front
yard is any area between a building and a street line. Accessory
buildings such as locker rooms, bath houses, cabanas, shower rooms,
toilets and other physical facilities or equipment incident to the
operation of any private swimming pool shall conform to the
requirements of the Ridley Township Building Code208 and this chapter.
E. Recreational ramps. [Added 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 1852]
(1) Hours of operation shall be limited from 9:00 a.m. to 30 minutes
after sunset. No lighting is permitted.
(2) This use shall not be constructed closer than five feet to a property
line nor shall it be constructed in the front yard of any property.
(3) No ramps shall exceed six feet in height.
(4) Screening by use of trees or shrubs must be planted on the site of
this use so as to form an effective visual barrier between this use
and adjoining residential properties.
(5) The construction of a recreational ramp shall not create any
adverse effect of drainage on adjoining properties.
(6) Noise shall be kept at such level as to comply in all respects with
the Code of the Township of Ridley.
(7) Plans must be approved and a building permit issued by the
Building Inspector prior to construction.
A. No garage or accessory building that is separated from the main
building shall hereafter be located on a corner lot unless the same be
set back at a distance of five feet greater than the distance prescribed
for a dwelling house, said distance to be measured from the front
208. Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Building Construction and Floodplain Management.
§ 325-86 WEAPONS § 325-89
318:935
property line forming the long side of the lot. In the case where a
dwelling has been set back at a distance greater than that prescribed
under the provisions of this chapter, the front of the garage or
accessory building shall not extend beyond the front line of the dwelling
on the long side of the lot.
B. All garages, carports and accessory buildings which are separated from
the main building on any lot shall be placed not less than three feet
from any side or rear lot line and behind the rearmost portion of the
principal building and shall not encroach within the area known as the
front building line.
C. All garages and carports which are separated from the principal
building on any lot shall be no more than one story and shall not exceed
15 feet in height in the case of a peaked roof and 10 feet in height in the
case of a flat roof. There shall be no dormers.
D. Lot coverage. [Amended 4-20-1995 by Ord. No. 1735]
(1) The total area of all accessory structure buildings, including
garages and carports, which are separated from the principal
building on any lot shall not cover more than the following
percentage of lots:
District
Maximum Percentage of Lot
Covered
(included within the
maximum percentageof lot
area coverage)
A Residential 11%
B Residential 13%
C Residential 13%
(2) Under no circumstances shall the width of the accessory structure
be less than 1/2 of its length.
E. All accessory buildings, except garages and carports, which are
separated from the principal building on any lot shall not exceed a
maximum of 10 feet in height. [Amended 4-20-1995 by Ord. No.
1735]
F. No private garage and no accessory building which is separated from
the principal building on any lot shall contain or have installed central
heating systems or plumbing systems which involve a tie-in to the
sanitary sewer system.
G. No prefabricated metal structure larger than 10 feet by 12 feet and
used as a garage or accessory building shall be installed or erected in a
residential district. [Added 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1930]
§ 325-89 RIDLEY CODE § 325-90
318:936
§ 325-90. Satellite antennas. [Amended 4-22-1998 by Ord. No.
1782]
The following provisions shall regulate satellite antennas in the Township.
§ 325-91. Child day-care facilities.209
A. General regulations. All satellite dishes erected in the Township of
Ridley, regardless of size, shall comply with the following regulations:
(1) Satellite dishes shall not be erected in the Township of Ridley
without first obtaining a building permit pursuant to the
regulations in § 325-110B of this chapter.
(2) Satellite dishes shall not be erected on fire escapes or erected in
such a way as to impede any fire escape route from a dwelling.
(3) To ensure the structural integrity and protect the public health,
safety and welfare, satellite dishes must comply with all applicable
state and local building and electrical codes, as well as all
applicable standards published by the Electronic Industries
Association as amended from time to time. The Code Enforcement
Officer may require submission of any and all manufacturer's
instructions, specifications and other installation requirements to
ensure proper safety standards are observed.
(4) Satellite dishes shall be painted a neutral color so as to reduce the
visual obtrusiveness, provided that said painting does not interfere
with reception of the equipment.
B. Small satellite dishes. Satellite dishes 39 inches in diameter or smaller
are permitted by right as an accessory use to a dwelling in the Township
of Ridley, subject to the general regulations contained in § 325-90A.
C. Large satellite dishes. The following regulations shall apply only to
satellite dishes greater than 39 inches in diameter.
(1) Satellite dishes greater than 39 inches in diameter shall not be
installed on the roof of any dwelling or other building.
(2) Satellite dishes greater than 39 inches in diameter shall be
permitted only in the rear yard of lots of at least 5,000 square feet,
at least 10 feet from the rear property line and shall not exceed 10
feet in diameter.
(3) All satellite dishes greater than 39 inches in diameter shall be
screened by an appropriate shrubbery barrier or decorative fence.
A. The following provisions shall regulate family day-care homes:
209. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 108, Day-Care Homes.
§ 325-90 WEAPONS § 325-91
318:937
(1) A family day care home shall provide care for no more than six
children at any time during part of the twenty-four-hour day, not
including the licensee's own and foster children.
(2) No family day care home shall provide care for more than two
children less than two years of age, including the licensee's own
and foster children.
(3) The family day care home shall be licensed or registered by the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare (DPW) and by any other
appropriate agencies.
(4) Only single-family detached dwellings shall qualify for use as a
family day care home.
(5) Minimum lot size shall be 750 square feet per child, and in no case
shall the lot size be less than that required by the district in which
the facility is located.
(6) There shall be no structural change to the exterior of the dwelling
to accommodate the family day care home.
(7) Not less than 40 square feet of indoor play area per child shall be
provided, excluding bathrooms, hallways and other areas not
suited for play.
(8) There shall be no sign visible from the exterior of the dwelling for
the family day care home.
(9) Not less than 75 square feet of outdoor play area per child shall be
provided, excluding parking areas, garage areas or other areas not
suited for play.
(10) Outdoor play activities shall be limited to the hours between 8:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(11)No structured area for active play or play structures shall be
located in a front yard.
(12)No play structures shall be located within 10 feet of a side or rear
lot line.
(13) A fence at least 48 inches high shall be installed so as to completely
enclose the outside play area. Such fences must reach the ground
to prevent children from crawling underneath.
(14) Besides the required parking for the dwelling unit, one off-street
parking space is required for the family day-care use and one offstreet
parking space is required for each caregiver who is not a
resident of the dwelling. None of the required off-street parking
shall be located within the required front yard.
(15) Besides the required parking for the family day-care use, a
minimum of one off-street dropoff/pickup area shall be provided.
§ 325-91 RIDLEY CODE § 325-91
318:938
The off-street dropoff/pickup area shall have a minimum dimension
of nine feet by 18 feet upon a paved driveway access to the
required off-street parking area and may be located within the
required front yard setback.
(16) Where the above regulations differ from those of the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare (DPW) and any other applicable state
and local building and fire safety codes, the more stringent
regulation shall apply.
B. The following provisions shall regulate group day-care homes:
(1) A group day care home shall provide care for no more than 12
children at any time during part of the twenty-four-hour day, not
including the licensee's own and foster children.
(2) The group day care home shall be licensed or registered by the
Pennsylvania Department of Welfare (DPW) and by any other
appropriate agencies.
(3) Only single-family detached dwellings shall qualify for use as a
group day care home. The portion of the residence where the
children have access shall be used exclusively for children during
the hours the group day care home is in operation or shall be
separate from the usual living quarters of the family of the licensee.
(4) Not less than 40 square feet of indoor play area per child shall be
provided, excluding bathrooms, hallways and other areas not
suited for play.
(5) Minimum lot size shall be 750 square feet per child, and in no case
shall the lot size be less than that required by the district in which
the facility is located.
(6) There shall be no structural change to the exterior of the dwelling
to accommodate the group day care home.
(7) There shall be a limit of one nonilluminated sign for the group day
care home. The sign shall not exceed six inches by 18 inches in
dimension.
(8) Not less than 75 square feet of outdoor play area per child shall be
provided, excluding parking areas, garage areas or other areas not
suited for play.
(9) Outdoor play activities shall be limited to the hours between 8:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(10)No structured area for active play or play structures shall be
located in a front yard.
(11)No play structures shall be located within 10 feet of a side or rear
lot line.
§ 325-91 WEAPONS § 325-91
318:939
(12) A solid fence at least six feet high shall be installed so as to
completely enclose the outside play area. Such fences must reach
the ground to prevent children from crawling underneath.
(13) Besides the required parking for the dwelling unit, one off-street
parking space is required for the group day-care use and one offstreet
parking space is required for each caregiver who is not a
resident of the dwelling. None of the required off-street parking
shall be located within the required front yard.
(14) Besides the required parking for the family day-care use, a
minimum of two off-street dropoff/pickup areas shall be provided.
Each off-street dropoff/pickup area shall have a minimum
dimension of nine feet by 18 feet upon a paved driveway access to
the required off-street parking area, and may be located within the
required front yard setback.
(15) Where the above regulations differ from those of the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare (DPW) and any other applicable state
and local building and fire safety codes, the more stringent
regulation shall apply.
C. The following provisions shall regulate child day-care centers:
(1) A child day care center shall provide care for children at any time
during part of the twenty-four-hour day, not including the licensee's
own and foster children.
(2) The child day care center shall be licensed or registered by the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare (DPW) and by any other
appropriate agencies as a family day care home or group day care
home.
(3) Only premises other than residential dwellings shall qualify for use
as a child day care center.
(4) No part of a facility may be located within 200 feet of gasoline
pumps or underground storage tanks or any other storage area for
explosive or hazardous materials.
(5) Minimum lot size shall be 750 square feet per child, and in no case
shall the lot size be less than that required by the district in which
the facility is located.
(6) Not less than 40 square feet of indoor play area per child shall be
provided, excluding bathrooms, hallways and other areas not
suited for play.
(7) Not less than 75 square feet of outdoor play area per child shall be
provided, excluding parking areas, garage areas or other areas not
suited for play.
§ 325-91 RIDLEY CODE § 325-91
318:940
§ 325-92. Community residential facilities.
The following provisions shall regulate community residential facilities:
(8) Outdoor play activities shall be limited to the hours between 8:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(9) No structured area for active play or play structures shall be
located in a front yard.
(10)No play structures shall be located within 10 feet of a side or rear
lot line.
(11) A solid fence at least six feet high shall be installed so as to
completely enclose the outside play area. Such fences must reach
the ground to prevent children from crawling underneath.
(12) Signage, if any, shall comply with the requirements of this chapter
for the zoning district in which the child day care center is located.
(13) Besides the required parking for any other uses located upon the
lot, two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the day care
center use, and one off-street parking space shall be provided for
each on-duty staff person. None of the required off-street parking
shall be located within the required front yard.
(14) A paved unobstructed off-street dropoff/pickup area with adequate
stacking area shall be provided. One dropoff/pickup space shall be
required for every 10 persons, based upon the day-care center's
regulated capacity, with a minimum of four spaces shall be
provided in addition to standard driveway and parking
requirements. Each off-street dropoff/pickup space shall have a
minimum dimension of nine feet by 18 feet.
(15) A safe pedestrian walkway system through parking areas to the
building entrance, with a safety zone a minimum of 15 feet in width
between parking spaces and the front of the building entrance,
shall be provided in addition to standard driveway and parking
requirements.
(16) All pedestrian pathways shall be adequately lit for safety and
security if utilized during nondaylight hours. Specific areas for
lighting are entrance ways, pedestrian access to the outdoor play
areas, sidewalks used in nondaylight hours, dropoff areas,
merchandise delivery areas and all parking lots.
(17) Where the above regulations differ from those of the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare (DPW) and any other applicable state
and local building and fire safety codes, the more stringent
regulation shall apply.
A. Twenty-four-hour supervision shall be available by adults qualified in
the field for which the facility is intended.
§ 325-91 WEAPONS § 325-92
318:941
B. Community residential facilities should be located within a half-mile
distance of public transportation, community facilities, shopping
facilities and community services.
C. A record of all community residential facilities and their locations shall
be maintained by the Township Code Enforcement Officer.
D. No community residential facility shall be located within 1,500 feet
from another, measured from dwelling unit to dwelling unit, except as
noted below:
E. Family-based community residential facilities shall be permitted in
apartment buildings and/or developments which are located in the APT
Apartment District and in the MH Multiple Type Housing District, and
which contain a minimum of 40 units, even though such apartment
buildings and/or developments are located within 1,500 feet of an
existing community residential facility which is located in a building
other than an apartment.
F. In the case of apartment buildings and/or developments which contain
a minimum of 10 units, the maximum number of residents who are part
of a family-base community residential facility shall not exceed 10% of
the number of units in an apartment building and 10% of the number of
units in the entire apartment development or complex. This density
limitation shall not apply to apartments with less than 10 units.
G. Each facility shall have one off-street parking space for each employee
on the greatest shift and one off-street parking space for every four
residents.
H. All new facilities shall meet all dimensional requirements of the district
in which they are located.
I. Buffering and/or screening along the side and rear yards of the
community residential facilities is required. This buffering may consist
of fencing or vegetative planting at least five feet wide and five feet
high.
J. Any alterations or additions to the exterior of a community residential
facility shall be compatible with the existing structure and in keeping
with the neighborhood character, excluding safety required
modifications. Upon the closing of a community residential facility all
safety required modifications shall be removed.
K. Each facility must receive all pertinent approvals and/or licenses from
the appropriate state agencies prior to special exception approval.
L. All other applicable requirements of this chapter, Building Code, Fire
Code210 and all other applicable Township codes and state regulations
and statutes shall be met.
210. Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Building Construction and Floodplain Management, and Ch.
135, Fire Prevention, respectively.
§ 325-92 RIDLEY CODE § 325-92
318:942
§ 325-93. Flag lot conditions and standards.
M. All facilities must supply the Township (and keep current) the name of a
person responsible for responding to a complaint filed by the Township.
N. All community residential facilities will be available for reasonable
periodic inspections by appropriate Township Officials.
A. Flag lots may be created only upon the express finding by the Township
Planning Commission that subdivision of a portion of the lands into flag
lots is in conjunction with an overall development plan for the entire
tract of which the flag lot is a part, and no remaining portion of the
subject tract shall, as a result of flag lot subdivision, become landlocked
or not practically feasible for development. The developer shall
demonstrate a need, consistent with good planning principles, for the
creation of flag lots and shall further demonstrate that normal
subdivision techniques in accordance with the requirements of the zone
are not practical or feasible because of topography, unusual shape or
land configurations or other physical characteristics of the land related
to the proposed development concept. The developer shall additionally
demonstrate that the proposed location, topography and physical
conditions of the land lying within the confines of the flag lot access
strip or staff are sufficient to permit the installation and maintenance of
any access driveway within the confines of the flag lot access strip or
staff suitable for uninterrupted access to the proposed location for the
construction of the principal structure within the flag lot building area
by conventional and emergency vehicles at all times of the year.
B. The flag lot building area of each flag lot created shall be at least the
minimum lot area required for a conventional lot in the zoning district
in which the flag lot is to be located exclusive of land lying within the
flag lot access strip or staff.
C. In order to protect the privacy and aesthetic character of neighboring
lots, buffer planting strips shall be provided on all such lots on both
sides of the required access strip or staff, as well as along the property
line parallel with the street line that separates the interior lot from the
front lot.
D. The following standards shall apply to interior lots:
(1) Access to interior lots shall be held in fee simple. No access
easements shall substitute for fee simple ownership.
(2) Access to interior lots shall have a minimum width of 20 feet with a
cartway at least 12 feet side.
(3) The front yard measurement shall be taken from the lot line which
is closest to parallel with the street line, dependent upon how the
dwelling or other building is to be situated.
§ 325-92 WEAPONS § 325-93
318:943
§ 325-94. Vehicle impoundment and storage yards. [Added
9-22-1993 by Ord. No. 1706]
§ 325-95. Wireless telecommunications towers and antennas.211
[Added 1-18-1996 by Ord. No. 1745; amended 2-25-1998 by Ord. No.
1170]
(4) No interior or flag lots shall be formed which access along the
turnaround of a cul-de-sac street, or within 200 feet of the
turnaround of a cul-de-sac street or street intersections.
(5) A minimum of four road frontage lots shall be located between
interior or flag lot accessways. No contiguous flag lot accessways
shall be created.
(6) Interior of flag lots are prohibited along collector and arterial roads
as identified in the Township of Ridley Comprehensive Plan.
(7) Motor vehicle parking within the access strip or staff shall be
prohibited.
(8) The interior lot shall provide paved parking for two more vehicles
than required for off-street parking on the lot excluding land lying
within the flag lot access strip or staff.
A. No such yard shall be placed less than 1,000 feet from any residential,
apartment or multiple type housing district.
B. No such yard shall be placed less than 1,000 feet from an existing
vehicle impoundment and storage yard.
C. The minimum area for such yard shall be five acres.
D. To the extent possible, access to such yards shall be by way of collector
or arterial roads.
E. Such yard shall be completely enclosed by an opaque privacy type fence
not less than 10 feet in height. The Board of Commissioners may
require a planting screen in the form of a hedge of evergreen trees
which shall be not less than six feet tall at time of planting.
F. All vehicles shall be arranged so as to permit access by fire-fighting
equipment, and to prevent accumulation of water. No vehicles shall be
stacked on other vehicles nor shall any vehicle have a height of more
than eight feet.
G. No vehicles shall be stored within 50 feet of an adjacent property or
public road and such setback area shall be free of weeds and scrub
growth.
211. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 282, Telecommunications, Art. I, Facilities.
§ 325-93 RIDLEY CODE § 325-95
318:944
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines
for the siting of wireless communications towers and antennas, so as
to:
(1) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community
through joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary
option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
(2) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal, through careful design, siting, landscape
screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques;
(3) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently;
(4) Consider the public health and safety of communication towers;
and
(5) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — man-made trees, clock towers,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers.
ANTENNA — Any transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that transmit or
receive electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals or other communication signals.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT — The C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
District, the C-2 General District and the SC Shopping Center District.
COMMITTEE — The Telecommunications Committee of the Township
of Ridley.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, means the
distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest
point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any
antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower
or antenna for which a building permit or variance has been properly
issued prior to the effective date of this section, including permitted
§ 325-95 WEAPONS § 325-95
318:945
towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such
approval is current and not expired.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — Includes the A, B, and C Residential
Districts, the APT Apartment District and the PRD Planned Residential
Development District.
TOWER — Any structure that is designated and constructed primarily
for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio
and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio
and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier
towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the
like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto.
C. Applicability.
(1) New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in the
Township of Ridley shall be subject to these regulations, except as
provided in § 325-95C(2) through (4), inclusive.
(2) Amateur radio station operators/receive only antennas. This
chapter shall not govern tower, or the installation of any antenna,
that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a
federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used
exclusively for receive-only antennas.
(3) Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
chapter, other than the requirements of § 325-95F(4), (5) and (9).
(4) AM array. For purposes of implementing this chapter, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground
system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be
considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation
distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers
included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added
within the perimeter of the AM array by right.
D. Permitted uses.
(1) A tower and/or antenna is a permitted use in the Municipal Use
District, provided that any and all licenses and/or a lease
authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the
Township of Ridley; and towers permitted under this section must
comply with § 325-95F(4), (5), (7), (9) and (12), and § 325-95J(1).
(2) Uses permitted as special exceptions. A special exception shall be
required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an
antenna in the following districts:
(a) I Industrial District.
E. Special exceptions: procedure.
§ 325-95 RIDLEY CODE § 325-95
318:946
(1) Applications for a special exception under this section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of Article XVI of this
chapter, except as modified in this section. In addition to referring
the application to the Planning Commission as required in
§ 325-115C, the Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the
Committee for review. The Committee shall review the application
and determine if the proposed use complies with this chapter. The
Committee shall provide a written recommendation for approval or
disapproval at least 48 hours prior to the Zoning Hearing Board
Hearing, stating with specificity its findings.
(2) Applications under this section shall also be referred to the
Township Engineer, who shall make recommendations to the
Board.
(3) An applicant for a special exception shall submit the information
set forth in § 325-95G of this chapter and a nonrefundable fee as
described in § 325-116E(2) of this chapter.
(4) All requests to locate towers and antennae must receive
subdivision/land development approval as well as all other
approvals prior to construction of the facility.
F. General requirements.
(1) Antenna height. Any antenna which is attached to an existing
structure shall not exceed the height of the existing structure by
more than 15 feet.
(2) Tower height. Any tower which is erected in the Township of Ridley
shall not exceed 150 feet in height.
(3) Engineer's certification. Any information of an engineering nature
that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical,
shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer.
(4) State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority
to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations
are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed
by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six
months of the effective date of such standards and regulations,
unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
(5) Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
§ 325-95 WEAPONS § 325-95
318:947
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association, or the
Telecommunications Industry Association, as amended from time
to time. If, upon inspection, the Township of Ridley concludes
that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and
constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being
provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days
to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure
to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense.
(6) Not utilities. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted
pursuant to this chapter and shall not be regulated or permitted as
public utilities or private utilities.
(7) Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers and antennas shall
certify that all franchises or licenses that may be required by law
for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communication
system in the Township of Ridley have been obtained and shall file a
copy of all required franchises with the Zoning Officer.
(8) Public notice. For purposes of this section, any special exception
request shall require public notice pursuant to the requirements of
this chapter.
(9) Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower, with the
exception of identification signs and danger/hazard signs.
(10) Multiple antenna/tower plan. The Township of Ridley encourages
the users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for
approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for
approval of multiple sites shall be given priority in the review
process.
(11) Collocation. In order to reduce the number of towers in Ridley
Township in the future, the proposed tower, if required by the
Board, shall be designed to accommodate future other
communication users, including commercial wireless
communication companies, local police, fire and ambulance
companies.
(12) Service to the Township. A provider of telecommunications services
within Ridley Township shall make its services available to the
Township at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users,
unless otherwise provided for in a lease, license or franchise
agreement.
G. Contents of applications. In addition to any information required for
applications for a special exception pursuant to Article XVI of this
§ 325-95 RIDLEY CODE § 325-95
318:948
chapter, applicants for a special exception for a tower or antenna shall
submit the following information:
(1) A scaled plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the
proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses
and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities),
Comprehensive Plan classification of the site and all properties
within the applicable separation distances set forth in this section,
adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from
property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any
other structures, topography, parking, and other information
deemed by the Zoning Officer to be necessary to assess compliance
with this chapter.
(2) Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
(3) An inventory of the applicant's existing towers, antennas, or sites
approved for towers or antennae, that are either within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Ridley or within one mile of the
border thereof, including specific information about the location,
height, and design of each tower, The Zoning Officer may share
such information with other applicants applying for a special
exception or variances under this chapter or other organizations
seeking to locate antennae within the jurisdiction of the Township
of Ridley; provided, however that the Zoning Officer is not, by
sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting
that such sites are available or suitable.
(4) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(5) Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method
of camouflage and illumination.
(6) A description of compliance with § 325-95F(4), (5), (7) and (9), and
§ 325-95J(1) through (6) and (8), and all applicable federal, state or
local laws.
(7) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction
of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas
for future users.
(8) The applicant must demonstrate, using accepted technological
evidence, that the antenna and/or tower must be located where
proposed in order to satisfy its function in the applicant's grid
system.
(9) A written statement demonstrating compliance with § 325-95I.
(10) The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and
unplatted residentially zoned properties.
§ 325-95 WEAPONS § 325-95
318:949
(11)Written evidence that the applicant has contacted the owners of
tall structures within a 1/4 mile radius from the proposed site,
requested permission to install the antenna on those structures,
and was denied for reasons other than economic ones. Tall
structures shall include, but not be limited to, smoke stacks, water
towers, buildings in excess of six stories, other telecommunications
towers and other similar structures.
H. Factors considered in granting approvals for towers. In addition to any
standards for consideration for a special exception pursuant to Article
XVI of this chapter, the Board shall consider the following factors in
determining whether to approve an application:
(1) Height of the proposed tower;
(2) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
(3) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(4) Surrounding topography;
(5) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(6) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness;
(7) Proposed ingress and egress; and
(8) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures, as discussed in § 325-95I of this section.
I. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative
technology. No special exception for a new tower shall be approved
unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Board that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the
applicant's proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information
requested by the Board related to the availability of suitable existing
towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted
to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative
technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may
consist of any of the following and shall be sealed by a registered
professional engineer:
(1) No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area which meet applicant's engineering requirements.
(2) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
§ 325-95 RIDLEY CODE § 325-95
318:950
(3) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable
microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/
receivers attached to a wireline system is unsuitable. Costs of
alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna
development shall not be presumed to render the technology
unsuitable.
J. General standards. All towers and antennas in the Township of Ridley
shall conform with the following general standards:
(1) Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers in the Township of Ridley:
(a) Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 100% of
the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
(b) Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
(2) Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
(a) Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower
to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated areas as
specified in Table 1, except as otherwise provided in Table 1.
(b) Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards established in Table 1.
Table 1
Off-Site Zoning
Classification Separation Distance
Residential 300 feet or 150% height of
tower, whichever is greater
Commercial 100 feet or 100% height of
tower, whichever is greater
Industrial 50 feet or 50% height of tower,
whichever is greater
(3) Separation distances between towers. Separation distances
between towers shall be applicable for and measured between the
proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation distances
shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between
the base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a
site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in
linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2.
§ 325-95 WEAPONS § 325-95
318:951
Table 2
Existing Towers - Types
Lattice Guyed
Monopole
75 Ft in
Height or
Greater
Monopole
Less Than
75 Ft in
Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole
75 ft in
height or
greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole
less than 75
ft in height
750 750 750 750
(4) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not
less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an
appropriate anticlimbing device.
(5) Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(b) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into
the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
(c) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment
must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
(6) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority, if lighting is required to
satisfy FAA or other applicable regulatory authorities, only dual
lighting arrangements shall be permitted; no red painting of the
tower structure shall be allowed. The dual lighting shall consist of a
daytime strobe light of the lowest permitted intensity and a night
time red flashing light. Switching between day and night operation
shall be automatic. The lighting alternatives and design chosen
must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
§ 325-95 RIDLEY CODE § 325-95
318:952
(7) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a special exception is
required in the Township of Ridley.
(a) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences. The standard
buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide
outside the perimeter of the compound.
(b) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or
waived.
(c) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some
cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural
growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
(8) Equipment storage. The equipment cabinet or structure used in
association with antennas and towers shall comply with the
following:
(a) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 100
square feet of gross floor area or be more than eight feet in
height, and shall not exceed the height of the existing structure
by more than 10 feet. In addition, where antennae are to be
erected on a building, the related unmanned equipment
structure shall be located on the roof of the building, unless a
certified, licensed professional engineer determines that such
location is not structurally feasible.
(b) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
(c) If located on the ground, the structure or cabinet shall be
screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at
least eight feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
(9) Removal of abandoned antennas, towers and structures. Any
antenna, tower or structure that is not operated for a continuous
period of six months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner
of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within 60 days of
receipt of notice from the Township of Ridley notifying the owner of
such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna,
tower or structure within said 60 days shall be grounds to remove
the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
(10) Not expansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are constructed
and antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of
this section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a
nonconforming use or structure.
§ 325-95 WEAPONS § 325-95
318:953
(11) Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance shall be
permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than
routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 325-95 RIDLEY CODE § 325-95
318:954
ARTICLE XIV
Planned Residential Developments
§ 325-96. Purpose; applicability.
§ 325-97. Conditions of eligibility.
No application for a planned residential development shall be considered or
approved unless the following conditions are met:
A. The Planned Residential Development (PRD) District is designed for the
following purposes:
(1) To encourage innovations in residential and nonresidential
development so that the growing demand for housing may be met
by greater variety in type, design and layout of dwellings and by the
conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary to said
dwellings.
(2) To encourage more efficient allocation and maintenance of open
space for conservation and active and passive recreation.
(3) To provide greater opportunities for better housing and recreation
for all who are or will be residents of the Township.
(4) To encourage a more efficient use of land and public services and to
reflect changes in the technology of land development so that the
economies so secured may inure to benefit of those who require
housing.
(5) To encourage sensitive land development which will respect and
conserve such natural features and resources of the land as flood
hazard and flood prone areas, steep and very steep slopes,
watercourses and water bodies, terrestrial and aquatic wildlife
habitats, historic and cultural sites, visual resources, and other
features of importance to the vitality of natural and cultural
resources.
(6) To provide a procedure which can relate the type, design and layout
of residential and nonresidential development to the particular site
and to the particular demand for housing existing at the time of
development in a manner consistent with the preservation of the
property values within existing residential areas, and to assure that
the increased flexibility of regulations over land development
established hereby is carried out pursuant to sound, expeditious
and fair administrative standards end procedures.
B. The housing type, minimum lot area, yard, height and accessory uses
shall be determined by the requirements and procedures set out below,
which shall prevail over conflicting requirements of this chapter or the
regulations governing the subdivision of land.
§ 325-96 WEAPONS § 325-97
318:955
§ 325-98. Procedure; tentative approval.
A. The tract proposed for a planned residential development shall contain
not less than 10 contiguous acres of land.
B. The entire tract shall be located within any A, B, or C Residential
Zoning District(s). The tract may be located within more than one of the
above residential districts.
C. The development will be served by public sewer and public water
systems which shall be constructed and operational and have the
assured capacity to serve the development at the time of occupancy of
the structures in the development. The feasibility of such construction
and operation shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Board of
Commissioners at the time of application for tentative plan approval.
D. The tract must have frontage on a collector or arterial road.
A. An application for tentative approval of planned residential
development must be made to the Ridley Township Board of
Commissioners.
(1) An application for tentative approval of the development plan for a
planned residential development shall be filed by or on behalf of the
landowner.
(2) All ownership interests shall be disclosed as part of the application
for tentative approval.
(3) The application for tentative approval shall be filed with the
Township Manager/Secretary by the landowner on an application
form provided by the Township, along with payment of all
application fees as set forth by resolution of the Ridley Township
Board of Commissioners.
(4) All planning, zoning and subdivision matters relating to the plating,
use and development of the planned residential development and
subsequent modifications of the regulations relating thereto, to the
extent such modification is vested in the municipality, shall be
determined and established by the Ridley Township Board of
Commissioners.
(5) The application for tentative approval shall contain the following
information:
(a) A legal description of the property under consideration, which
also shows that such property is at least 10 acres in area.
(b) A fully dimensioned map of the land, including topographic
information at a contour interval of not less than two feet.
§ 325-97 RIDLEY CODE § 325-98
318:956
(c) A site plan showing the location of all existing and proposed
principal and accessory buildings and structures, parking lots,
buffer strips, plantings, streets, public ways and curb cuts.
(d) Proposed reservations for parks, parkways, playgrounds,
school sites and other open spaces with indication of structure
of organization proposed to own and maintain the common
open space.
(e) A vicinity map and zoning classification showing the location of
the site in relation to the surrounding neighborhood.
(f) Architectural sketches, at an appropriate scale, showing
building height, bulk, interior layout and proposed use.
(g) The feasibility of proposals for the disposition of sanitary waste
and storm water.
(h) The substance of covenants, grants of easement or other
restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land,
buildings and structures, including proposed easements or
grants for public utilities.
(i) The required modifications in the land use regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property.
(j) The feasibility of proposals for energy conservation and the
effective utilization of renewable energy sources.
(k) In the case of development plans which call for development
over a period of years, a schedule showing the proposed times
within which applications for final approval of all sections of
the planned residential development are intended to be filed
and this schedule must be updated annually, on the
anniversary of its approval, until the development is completed
and accepted.
(l) A written statement by the landowner setting forth the reasons
why, in his opinion, a planned residential development would
be in the public interest and would be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan for the development of the Township.
(6) The application for and tentative and final approval of a
development plan for a planned residential development
prescribed in this article shall be in lieu of all other procedures or
approvals otherwise required by this chapter and by Chapter 268,
Subdivision and Land Development.
B. The Ridley Township Board of Commissioners shall refer the application
to the Township Planning Commission and the County Planning Agency
for study and recommendation. The County and Township Planning
Agencies shall be required to report to the Ridley Township Board of
Commissioners within 30 days or forfeit the right to review.
§ 325-98 WEAPONS § 325-98
318:957
C. The Ridley Township Board of Commissioners shall hold a public
hearing within 60 days after the filing of the application for tentative
approval in the manner prescribed in Article XVI for the enactment of
an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance. The Ridley Township Board of
Commissioners may continue the hearing from time to time; provided,
however, that in any event, the public hearing or hearings shall be
concluded within 60 days after the date of the first public hearing.
D. Grant or denial.
(1) After a study of the application and within 60 days following the
conclusion of the public hearings the Ridley Township Board of
Commissioners shall, by official written communication, to the
landowner, either:
(a) Grant tentative approval of the development plan as submitted;
(b) Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not
included in the development plan as submitted; or
(c) Deny tentative approval to the development plan.
(2) Failure to so act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant of
tentative approval of the development plan as submitted. In the
event, however, that tentative approval is granted subject to
conditions, the landowner may, within 30 days after receiving a
copy of the official written communication of the Ridley Township
Board of Commissioners notify the Ridley Township Board of
Commissioners of his refusal to accept all said conditions, in which
case, the Ridley Township Board of Commissioners shall be deemed
to have denied tentative approval of the development plan. In the
event that the landowner does not, within said period, notify the
Ridley Township Board of Commissioners of his refusal to accept all
said conditions, tentative approval of the development plan, with
all said conditions, shall stand as granted.
E. The granting or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include conclusions and findings of fact related to
the specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons for the grant, with
or without conditions, or for the denial, and said communication shall
set forth with particularity in what respects the development plan
would or would not be in the public interest, including, but not limited
to, findings of fact and conclusions on the following:
(1) In those respects in which the development plan is or is not
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
Township.
(2) The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including, but not limited to, density, bulk and use, and
§ 325-98 RIDLEY CODE § 325-98
318:958
the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in
the public interest.
(3) The purpose, location and amount of the common open space in the
planned residential development; the reliability of the proposals for
maintenance and conservation of the common open space; and the
adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common
open space as related to the proposed density and type of
residential development.
(4) The physical design of the development plan and the manner in
which said design does or does not make adequate provision of
public services; provide adequate control over vehicular traffic;
and further the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment.
(5) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed planned
residential development to the neighborhood in which it is
proposed to be established.
(6) In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents
of the planned residential development in the integrity of the
development plan.
F. In the event that a development plan is granted tentative approval, with
or without conditions, the Ridley Township Board of Commissioners
may set forth in the official written communication the time within
which and application for final approval of the development plan shall
be filed or, in the case of a development plan which provides for
development over a period of years, the periods of time within which
applications for final approval of each part shall be filed. Except upon
the consent of the landowner, the time so established between grant of
tentative approval and an application for final approval shall not be less
than three months and, in the case of developments over a period of
years, the time between applications for final approval of each part of
the plan shall be not less than 12 months.
G. The official written communication provided for in this article shall be
certified by the Ridley Township Manager/Secretary and filed in his
office, and a certified copy shall be mailed to the landowner. Where
tentative approval has been granted, it shall be deemed an amendment
to the Ridley Township Zoning Map, effective upon final approval, and
shall be noted on the Zoning Map.
H. Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of the
planned residential development for recording nor authorize
development of the issuance of any building permits. A development
plan which has been given tentative approval as submitted, or which
has been given tentative approval with conditions which have been
accepted by the landowner (and provided that the landowner has not
§ 325-98 WEAPONS § 325-98
318:959
§ 325-99. Procedure; final approval.
defaulted nor violated any of the conditions of the tentative approval),
shall not be modified or revoked nor otherwise impaired by action of
the Township pending an application or applications for final approval,
without the consent of the landowner, provided that an application or
applications for final approval is filed or, in the case of development
over a period of years, provided that applications are filed, within the
periods of time specified in the official written communication granting
tentative approval.
I. In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval and
thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to
abandon said development plan and shall so notify the Ridley Township
Board of Commissioners in writing or in the event the landowner shall
fail to file application or applications for final approval within the
required period of time or times, as the case may be, the tentative
approval shall be deemed to be revoked and all the area included in the
development plan for which final approval has not been given shall be
subject to this chapter and Chapter 268, Subdivision and Land
Development, as otherwise applicable thereto as they may be amended
from time to tine, and the same shall be noted on the Zoning Map and in
the records of the Ridley Township Manager/Secretary.
A. The application for final approval may be for all the land included in the
development or, to the extent set forth in the tentative approval, for a
section thereof. Said application shall be made to the Ridley Township
Manager/Secretary within the time or times specified by the official
written communication granting tentative approval. The application for
final approval shall meet all requirements and contain all enclosures
specified for the final plan of subdivision within Chapter 268,
Subdivision and Land Development, including any drawings,
specifications, convents, easements, performance bond, as well as any
conditions set forth in the official written communication at the time of
tentative approval. A public hearing on an application for final approval
of the development plan, or part thereof, shall not be required provided
the development plan, or part thereof, submitted for final approval, is in
compliance with the development plan theretofore given tentative
approval and with any specified conditions attached thereto.
B. In the event that the application for final approval has been filed,
together with all drawings, specifications and other documents in
support thereof, and as required by this article and the official written
communication of tentative approval, the Ridley Township Board of
Commissioners shall, within 45 days of such filing, grant such
development plan final approval.
C. In the event that the development plan as submitted contains variations
from the plan given tentative approval, the Ridley Township Board of
Commissioners may refuse to grant final approval and shall, within 45
days from the filing of the application for final approval, so advise the
§ 325-98 RIDLEY CODE § 325-99
318:960
landowner in writing of said refusal, setting forth in said notice the
reasons why one or more of said variations are not in the public
interest.
(1) In the event of such refusal, the landowner may either:
(a) Refile his application for final approval without objected
variations objected; or
(b) File a written request with the Ridley Township Board of
Commissioners that it hold a public hearing on his application
for final approval.
(2) If the landowner wishes to take either such alternate action he may
do so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for final
approval, or within 30 additional days if the time for applying for
final approval shall have already passed at the time when the
landowner was advised that the development plan was not in
substantial compliance. In the event the landowner shall fail to take
either of these alternate actions within said time, he shall be
deemed to have abandoned the development plan. Any such public
hearing shall be held pursuant to public notice within 30 days after
request for the hearing is made by the landowner, and the hearing
shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in this article for
public hearings on applications for tentative approval. Within 30
days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Ridley Township Board
of Commissioners shall by official written communication either
grant final approval to the development plan or deny final approval.
The grant or denial of final approval of the development plan shall,
in cases arising under this section, be in the form and contain the
findings required for an application for tentative approval set forth
in this article.
D. A development plan, or any part thereof, which has received final
approval shall be certified without delay by the Ridley Township Board
of Commissioners and shall be filed of record forthwith in the Delaware
County office of the Recorder of Deeds before any development shall
take place in accordance therewith. Upon the filing of record of the
development plan the zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise
applicable to the land included in such plan shall cease to apply thereto.
Pending completion, in accordance with the time provisions stated in
Section 508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended by Act 1988-170,212 of said planned residential development
or of that part thereof, as the case may be, that has been finally
approved, no modification of the provisions of said development plan, or
part thereof, as finally approved, shall be made except with the consent
of the landowner. Upon approval of a final plat, the developer shall
record the plat in accordance with the provisions of Section 513(a)213
212. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
213. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10513(a).
§ 325-99 WEAPONS § 325-99
318:961
§ 325-100. Planned development standards.
and post financial security in accordance with Section 509 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended by Act
1988-170.214
E. In the event that a development plan, or a section thereof, has been
given final approval and thereafter the landowner shall abandon such
plan or section thereof that has been finally approved, and shall so
notify the Ridley Township Board of Commissioners in writing; or, in the
event the landowner shall fail to commence and carry out the planned
residential development in accordance with the time provisions stated
in Section 508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended by Act 1988-170, after final approval has been granted, no
development or further development shall take place on the property
included in the development plan until after the said property is
reclassified by enactment of an amendment to this Zoning Chapter.
A. Permitted uses. In planned residential developments, land, building or
premises shall be used only for the following uses:
(1) Single-family attached dwelling.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwelling.
(3) Townhouses (single-family attached dwellings.).
(4) Manufactured homes. [Amended 11-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1712]
(5) Recreational or community use for the benefit of the entire
population of the Township.
(6) Office, in connection with on-site recreational or community use.
(7) Public utility structures, as regulated by Article XIII of this chapter.
(8) Zero lot line single-family detached dwelling. [Added 3-10-1992
by Ord. No. 1686]
B. Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as a
special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) Church or other place of worship.
(2) Professional, administrative, business, government rental or
nonprofit office building or office.
(3) Home occupations and professional offices in dwellings, as defined
in Article II of this chapter, and subject to the regulations in Article
XIII of this chapter.
214. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
§ 325-99 RIDLEY CODE § 325-100
318:962
(4) Installation or erection of a satellite dish antenna as an accessory
use to a dwelling, subject to the regulations in Article XIII of this
chapter.
(5) Day-care home, as an accessory use to a dwelling, subject to the
regulations in Article XIII of this chapter.
(6) Family-based community residential facilities, subject to the
regulations in Article XIII of this chapter.
(7) Retail store, including general merchandise store, hardware store,
variety store, gift shop, food store, confectionery. bakery,
restaurant, delicatessen, sandwich or pizza shop, pharmacy or
similar establishment.
(a) No drive-in or drive-through establishments shall be permitted.
(b) Total of all lot areas for commercial uses shall occupy not more
than 5% of the area of the PRD.
(c) Commercial uses shall be permitted only when a minimum of
100 units are proposed or existing in the PRD.
C. Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) Private garage and off-street parking as required in Article XIII of
this chapter.
(2) Utility/tool shed and similar accessory structure subject to the
requirements of Article XIII of this chapter.
(3) Private swimming pool and other recreational use subject to the
requirements of Article XIII of this chapter.
(4) Fence, when erected and maintained subject to the requirements of
Article XIII of this chapter.
(5) Cafeteria, recreational area, or similar facilities for the exclusive
use of employees.
(6) Storage, in conjunction with a permitted use.
(7) Any accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted above and not detrimental to the
neighborhood.
(8) Signs, subject to the regulations in Article XII of this chapter.
D. Performance standards. All uses permitted in Planned Residential
Districts shall be in compliance with the performance standards set
forth in Article XI of this chapter.
E. Density and intensity of land use.
§ 325-100 WEAPONS § 325-100
318:963
(1) Residential development. The maximum allowable average gross
density for the PRD shall be six dwelling units per acre. [Amended
3-4-1993 by Ord. No. 1701]
(a) Each PRD shall consist of not less than two of the dwelling
types listed in § 325-100 of this article.
(b) In all cases, single-family detached dwellings shall constitute
one of the two required dwelling types and shall consist of a
minimum of 15% of the total units in the PRD.
(c) The maximum number of dwelling units contained in
manufactured homes shall not exceed 10% of all dwelling units
in the PRD. [Amended 11-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1712]
(2) Commercial development. Commercial development shall be
allowed in an amount of square footage not exceeding 10% of the
gross floor area of residential structures. Commercial
development, including accessory uses, shall not occupy acreage in
excess of 5% of the total site.
(3) Common open space and recreation facilities. A minimum of 25% of
the total area of the PRD shall be designated as and devoted to
common open space and not less than 80% of such common open
space shall be kept free of structures and improvements. Wherever
possible, the common open space shall be assigned as a contiguous
area, easily accessible to all residents of the PRD.
F. Area and bulk regulations.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(a) Lot area. A lot area of not less than 5,000 square feet shall be
provided for every dwelling hereafter erected.
(b) Lot width. The lot for each dwelling hereafter erected shall
have a width to the front building line of not less than 50 feet.
(c) Minimum yard requirements.
[1] Front yard. There shall be a front yard the depth of which
shall be not less than 20 feet.
[2] Side yards. There shall be two side yards, one on either
side of each dwelling, which shall have an aggregate width
of not less than 20 feet, and neither side yard shall be less
than eight feet.
[3] Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard which shall be not
less than 25 feet in depth.
[4] Corner lot setbacks. In the case of a corner lot, a setback
of not less than 20 feet shall be required from the front
street line which the lot abuts and a setback of not less
§ 325-100 RIDLEY CODE § 325-100
318:964
than 15 feet shall be required from the street line of the
side street which the lot abuts.
(d) Building coverage. The aggregate area of all buildings on a lot
shall not exceed 30% of the lot area.
(e) Height regulation. No building shall have a height exceeding
35 feet with a maximum of three stories above grade.
(f) Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be as required by
Article XIII of this chapter.
(g) Accessory structures. No garage or accessory building that is
separated from the main building shall hereafter be located at
a distance of less than 20 feet from any portion of the dwelling,
nor less than 10 feet from any portion of any other building on
the lot. All accessory structures shall comply with regulations
contained in Article XIII of this chapter.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(a) Lot area. A lot area of not less than 3,000 square feet per
dwelling shall be provided for every dwelling hereafter
erected.
(b) Lot width. The lot for each dwelling hereafter erected shall
have a width at the front building line of not less than 30 feet.
(c) Minimum yard requirements.
[1] Front yard. There shall be a front yard the depth of which
shall be not less than 20 feet.
[2] Side yard. For every single-family semidetached dwelling,
there shall be one side yard which shall be not less than 10
feet in width.
[3] Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard which shall be not
less than 20 feet in depth.
[4] Corner lot setbacks. In the case of a corner lot, a setback
of not less than 20 feet shall be required from the front
street line which the lot abuts and a setback of not less
than 15 feet shall be required from the street line of the
side street which the lot abuts.
(d) Building coverage. The aggregate area of all buildings on a lot
shall not exceed 30% of the lot area.
(e) Height regulation. No building shall have a height exceeding
35 feet with a maximum of three stories above grade.
(f) Off-street parking. As required by Article XIII of this chapter.
§ 325-100 WEAPONS § 325-100
318:965
(g) Accessory structures. No garage or accessory building that is
separated from the main building shall hereafter be located at
a distance of less than 20 feet from any portion of the dwelling,
nor less than 10 feet from any portion of any other building on
the lot. All accessory structures shall comply with regulations
contained in Article XIII of this chapter.
(3) Manufactured homes. [Amended 11-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1712]
(a) A lot area of not less than 5,000 square feet shall be provided
for every manufactured home.
(b) Lot width. The lot for each manufactured home shall have a
width to the front building line of not less than 40 feet.
(c) Minimum yard requirements:
[1] Front yard. There shall be a front yard the depth of which
shall be not less than 20 feet.
[2] Side yards. There shall be two side yards, one on either
Side of each manufactured home, which shall have an
aggregate width of not less than 25 feet, and neither side
yard shall be less than 10 feet.
[3] Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard which shall be not
less than 20 feet in depth.
[4] Corner lot setbacks. In the case of a corner lot, a setback
of not less than 20 feet shall be required from the front
street line which the lot abuts and a setback of not less
than 15 feet shall be required from the street line of the
side street which the lot abuts.
(d) Building coverage. The aggregate area of all buildings on a lot
shall not exceed 30% of the lot area.
(e) Height regulations. No building shall have a height exceeding
15 feet with a maximum of one story above grade.
(f) Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be as required by
Article XIII of this chapter.
(g) Accessory structures. No garage or accessory building that is
separated from the main building shall hereafter be located at
a distance of less than 20 feet from any portion of the
manufactured home, nor less than 10 feet from any portion of
any other building on the lot. All accessory structures shall
comply with regulations contained in Article XIII of this
chapter.
(4) Townhouses (single-family attached dwellings).
§ 325-100 RIDLEY CODE § 325-100
318:966
(a) Lot area. A lot area of not less than 1,800 square feet shall be
provided for every dwelling unit.
(b) Lot width. The lot for each dwelling unit hereafter erected shall
have a width at the building line of not less than 18 feet.
(c) Attached units. The number of attached units in any townhouse
structure shall not be less than four nor more than six units in a
row.
(d) Minimum yard requirements.
[1] Front yard. There shall be a front yard the depth of which
shall be not less than 25 feet.
[2] Side yards. Each group of townhouse units shall have two
side yards, with each side yard having a width of not less
than 15 feet.
[3] Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard which shall be not
less than 15 feet in depth.
[4] Corner lot setbacks. In the case of a corner lot, a setback
of not less than 25 feet shall be required from the front
street line which the lot abuts and a setback of not less
than 15 feet shall be required from the street line of the
side street which the lot abuts.
(e) Building coverage. The aggregate area of all buildings on a lot
shall not exceed 45% of the lot area.
(f) Variation in setback and design. No more than two consecutive
dwelling units in any townhouse structure shall have the same
front setback line. In addition, each dwelling unit shall be
distinguished from the adjacent dwelling unit in some
appropriate manner such as by varying unit width, use of
different exterior materials, or varying arrangements of
entrances or windows.
(g) Height regulation. No building shall have a height exceeding
35 feet with a maximum of three stories above grade.
(h) Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be as required by
Article XIII of this chapter, with the exception that any part or
all of the required front yard may be used for off-street
parking.
(i) Accessory structures. No garage or accessory building that is
separated from the main building shall hereafter by located at
a distance of less than 10 feet from any portion of the dwelling
unit or any other building on the lot. All accessory structures
shall comply with regulations contained in Article XIII of this
chapter.
§ 325-100 WEAPONS § 325-100
318:967
(5) Nonresidential uses.
(a) Lot area. A lot area of not less than 3,150 square feet shall be
provided for every principal building hereafter erected.
(b) Lot width. The lot for each principal building hereafter erected
shall have a width at the building line of not less than 30 feet.
(c) Minimum yard requirements.
[1] Front yard. There shall be a front yard the depth of which
shall be not less than 15 feet, unless existing buildings on
abutting lot(s) have lesser front yards. In such cases the
front yard may be equal to or greater than that of one of
the existing buildings.
[2] Side yards. There shall be two side yards, one on each side
of the building or row of attached buildings, each of which
shall have a width of not less than five feet.
[3] Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard which shall be not
less than 25 feet in depth.
(d) Building coverage.
[1] In the case of detached buildings, the aggregate area of all
buildings on a lot shall not exceed 60% of the lot area.
[2] In the case of semidetached buildings or three or more
attached buildings, the aggregate area of all buildings on a
lot shall not exceed 70% of the lot area.
(e) Height regulation. No building shall have a height exceeding
35 feet with a maximum of three stories above grade.
(f) Parking. Off-street parking shall be as required by Article XIII
of this chapter.
(6) Zero lot line single-family detached dwellings. [Added 3-10-1992
by Ord. No. 1686]
(a) Lot area. A lot area of not less than 2,500 square feet shall be
provided for every dwelling hereafter erected.
(b) Lot width. The lot for each dwelling hereafter erected shall
have a width at any point of not less than 15 feet and shall have
a width of not less than 30 feet on any portion of the lot where
a dwelling is erected. It is intended that this subsection shall
supersede any definition or interpretation of "lot width"
located in or based upon any other part of this Zoning Chapter.
(c) Minimum yard requirements.
§ 325-100 RIDLEY CODE § 325-100
318:968
[1] Front yard. There shall be a front yard the depth of which
shall be not less than 15 feet.
[2] Side yards. There shall be one side yard the depth of which
shall be not less than six feet.
[3] Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard the depth of which
shall be not less than 15 feet.
[4] Corner lot setbacks. In the case of a corner lot, a setback
of not less than 15 feet shall be required from all street
lines which the lot abuts.
(d) Building coverage. The aggregate area of all buildings on a lot
shall not exceed 45% of the lot area.
(e) Height regulation. No building shall have a height exceeding
35 feet with a maximum of three stories above grade.
(f) Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be as required by
Article XIII of this chapter.
(g) Accessory structures. No garage or accessory building that is
separated from the main building shall hereafter be located at
a distance of less than 20 feet from any portion of the dwelling,
nor less than 10 feet from any portion of any other building on
the lot. All accessory structures shall comply with regulations
contained in Article XIII of this chapter.
G. General design standards. The following regulations and standards
shall apply to planned residential development.
(1) All housing and other areas shall be planned, designed,
constructed, and made maximally usable, operable and habitable
with regard to the topography and natural features of the tract. The
effects of prevailing winds and solar orientation on the physical
layout and form of the proposed buildings and other structures
shall be reflected in the development plan.
(2) Variations in location of buildings and other structures shall be
provided where necessary to create architectural interest and/or
preserve areas of environmental concern and to further amenities
of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment. All dwelling units
shall be based on a common architectural theme.
(3) Every building and other structure shall be located and situated to
promote pedestrian and visual access to common open space to the
extent possible.
(4) The physical design of the development plan shall make adequate
provisions for public services and provide adequate control over
vehicular traffic.
§ 325-100 WEAPONS § 325-100
318:969
(5) All housing shall be sited so as to enhance privacy and ensure
natural light for all principal rooms.
(6) All utilities shall be placed underground unless such placement is
deemed not feasible by the Board of Commissioners.
(7) Fire hydrants shall be installed by the developer to meet the
requirements of the Middle Atlantic Fire Underwriters Association
and the Township Fire Marshal.
(8) Refuse stations to serve residential and recreational areas shall be
designed with suitable screening and located so as to be convenient
for trash removal and not offensive to nearby residential areas.
H. Building design standards.
(1) No building shall be less than 33 feet from access roads or parking
areas.
(2) No building shall exceed the length of 175 feet in any single
direction.
(3) Development near the perimeter of the tract shall be designed to
be harmonious with neighboring areas and shall be screened from
such areas with landscaping unless such screening is deemed not
feasible by the Board of Commissioners.
I. Common open space. In this section relating to common open space,
the term "open space" shall be construed to mean "common open
space."
(1) General regulations.
(a) Areas agreed by the developer and the Township to be set
aside for common open space shall be suitable for that purpose
and consistent with the Township policy and plan for future
land use.
(b) Open space areas shall contain no major structures other than
those related to the purpose of the open space.
(c) Open space areas shall be arranged and located to serve the
residents of the development adequately and conveniently,
taking into consideration the characteristics of the site, and to
preserve and enhance desirable natural features.
(d) Any land designated as common open space shall be restricted
to continue as such by an appropriate method approved by the
Board of Commissioners.
(2) Common open space design standards.
(a) A minimum of 25% of the gross tract area of the tract shall be
devoted to common open space.
§ 325-100 RIDLEY CODE § 325-100
318:970
(b) Not less than 60% of the total common open space areas shall
be outside the floodplain areas and areas with slopes of 25% or
more.
(c) Open space areas shall be not less than 70 feet wide and not
less than 15,000 square feet of contiguous area, except when
part of a trail system or pathway network or tot lot.
(d) Open space areas shall be undivided by any road crossings,
except where necessary for proper traffic circulation, and then
only upon recommendation of the Township Engineer and
Township Planning Commission.
(e) Such areas shall be suitably landscaped by retaining existing
natural cover and wooded areas and/or by a landscaping plan
which is consistent with the purposes of this section and which
minimizes maintenance costs.
(3) Performance bond.
(a) Designated planting and recreation facilities within the open
space area shall be provided by the developer. A performance
bond or other security shall be required to cover costs of
installation.
(b) An appropriate portion of the performance bond or other
security will be forfeited by the developer should he fail to
install the planting or recreational facilities.
(4) Ownership and maintenance of common open space.
(a) An essential element of the tentative plan is a written
description and plan for the disposition of ownership of
common open space land designating those areas to be offered
for dedication or to be owned by the successor organization
proposed.
(b) The Board of Commissioners may, at any time and from time to
time, accept the dedication of designated land and/or any
interest therein for public use and maintenance, but the Board
of Commissioners need not require as a condition of the
approval of a PRD that land proposed to be set aside for
common open space be dedicated or made available to public
use.
(c) In the event that common open space is not dedicated or made
available to public use, the landowner shall provide for and
establish an organization for the ownership and maintenance
of the common open space, and such organization shall not be
dissolved nor shall it dispose of the common open space, by
sale or otherwise (except to an organization conceived and
established to own and maintain the common open space),
§ 325-100 WEAPONS § 325-100
318:971
except by dedication of the same to the public. Such
agreements shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Commissioners and contain provisions respecting the right to
lien property owners for maintenance charges incurred by the
Township in event of default. In any case, the organization
provided for the ownership of open space land not dedicated
for public use shall be constituted of the property owners
within the PRD. The plan may provide that the property
owners' association may lease back open space lands to the
developer, his heirs or assigns, or to any other qualified person
or corporation for operation and maintenance of open space
lands, but such a lease agreement shall provide:
[1] That the residents of the PRD shall at all times have access
to the open space lands contained therein.
[2] That the common open space to be leased shall be
maintained for the purpose set forth in this chapter.
[3] That the operation of open space facilities may be for the
benefit of the residents only, or may be open to the general
public in accordance with prior commitments to the Board
of Commissioners.
(d) The form of the lease shall be subject to the approval of the
Board of Commissioners, and any transfer or assignment of the
lease shall be further subject to the approval of the Board of
Commissioners. Lease agreements shall be recited in the deed
and shall be recorded with the recorder of deeds of Delaware
County within 30 days of their execution, and a copy of the
recorded lease shall be filed with the Secretary of the
Township.
(e) The plan to provide for the ownership and maintenance of
common open space shall include:
[1] A complete description of the organization to be
established for the ownership of open space, if any, and the
methods by which this organization shall be established
and maintained.
[2] A method reasonably designed to give adequate notice to
property owners within the PRD in the event of the sale or
other disposition of common open space lands and in the
event of assumption of the maintenance of common open
space lands by the Township as hereinafter provided.
(f) In the event that the organization established to own and
maintain common open space, or any successor organization,
shall at any time after establishment of the PRD fail to maintain
the common open space in reasonable order and conditions in
accordance with the development plan, the Board may proceed
§ 325-100 RIDLEY CODE § 325-100
318:972
as provided in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code215 to demand that deficiencies of maintenance be
corrected or the Township will enter upon and maintain
common open space. Notice to the affected property owners
in accordance with the provisions of the master plan shall be
deemed to be adequate notice by the Township. The cost of
such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed ratably
against the properties within the PRD that have a right of
enjoyment of the common open space, and shall become a lien
on said properties. The Township, at the time of entering upon
said common open space for the purpose of maintenance, shall
file a lien in the office of Judicial Support of Delaware County
upon the properties affected by the lien within the planned
residential development.
215. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 325-100 WEAPONS § 325-100
318:973

ARTICLE XV
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
§ 325-101. Continuance.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the lawful use of land or
buildings existing at the date of the adoption of this chapter may be
continued, although such use of building does not conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the zone in which such land or
building is located; provided, however, that no nonconforming lot shall be
further increased in size.
§ 325-102. Cessation of use.
A nonconforming use shall be adjudged as terminated when there occurs an
abandonment of any such use or activity by an apparent act or failure to act
on the part of the tenant or owner to reinstate such use within a period of
six months from the date of cessation or abandonment. Such use shall not
hereafter be reinstated, and the structure shall not be reoccupied except in
conformance with this chapter.
§ 325-103. Restoration.
If any nonconforming use shall be destroyed by reason of windstorm, fire,
explosion or other act of God or the public enemy to an extent of more
than 50% of the building, then such destruction shall be deemed complete
destruction and the structure may not be rebuilt, restored or repaired
except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. Nothing in this
chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any
wall, floor or roof which has been declared unsafe by the Building Inspector.
§ 325-104. Reversion.
No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be
changed back again into a nonconforming use.
§ 325-105. Alterations.
A. Upon application for a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board
may approve the expansion or alteration of a use of land or buildings
which is not in conformance with the provisions of this chapter,
provided such expansion or alteration of use is restricted to an
additional area not exceeding 35% of those existing buildings,
structures, parcels, lot or tracts of land devoted to the nonconforming
use and existing on the effective date of this chapter or any amendment
thereto creating the nonconformity. However, such approved expansion
or alteration of a nonconforming use shall not create new dimensional
nonconformities except upon the approval of a variance by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
§ 325-101 WEAPONS § 325-105
318:975
§ 325-106. Effect on previously approved construction.
Nothing herein contained shall require any changes in plans, construction
or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been
heretofore issued and the construction of which shall have been diligently
prosecuted within three months of the date of such permit and ground story
framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall have been
completed within six months of the date of the permit and which entire
building shall be completed according to such plans as filed within one year
from the date of this chapter.
§ 325-107. District changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one district to another district of a different classification, the
foregoing provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing
therein or created thereby.
§ 325-108. Discontinued nonconforming use of open land.
All nonconforming signs, billboards, junk storage areas, storage areas and
similar nonconforming use of open land not involving a substantial
investment in permanent buildings, when abandoned or damaged to an
extent of 50% or more of replacement costs, shall not be continued or
reconstructed.
B. A dimensional nonconformity may be altered or expanded only if such
alteration or expansion is in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter; however, upon issuance of a special exception, additions or
improvements may be made, provided that such additional or
improvement does not create new dimensional nonconformities or
future increase existing dimensional nonconformities.
C. With the exception of unenclosed decks which may, by right, extend the
existing nonconforming side yards of the principal building without
further encroaching into any required yard setbacks. [Added
4-20-1995 by Ord. No. 1735]
§ 325-105 RIDLEY CODE § 325-108
318:976
ARTICLE XVI
Enforcement and Administration
§ 325-109. Empowerment of official.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by a
Zoning Officer appointed by the Township Commissioners who shall have
the power to administer the Zoning Ordinance in accordance with its literal
terms, as well as the power to make inspection of buildings or premises
necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 325-110. Certificates and permits.
A. Zoning permits. Zoning permits shall hereafter be secured from the
Zoning Officer's office prior to the issuance of a building permit for the
construction, erection or alteration of structure or sign or part of a
structure or upon a change in the use of a structure or land. The fee for
said permit shall be included in the building permit fee. Except for
accessory buildings, private garages and carports having a building
area of less than 500 square feet, which will require the payment of a
zoning permit fee equal to the cost of a building permit fee, as well as
any other applicable permit fees. [Amended 8-25-2004 by Ord. No.
1869]
B. Building permits. For the construction, alteration, demolition or
relocation or any structure, a building permit must be obtained from
the Zoning Office. A building permit shall become void in 90 days from
the date of issuance unless actual construction has begun by that date
on the project described therein.
(1) The permit application must be accompanied by a site plan, in
duplicate, showing as necessary to demonstrate conformity to this
chapter:
(a) Lot. The location and dimensions of the lot.
(b) Streets. Names and widths of abutting streets and highways.
(c) Structures and yards. Locations, dimensions, and use of
existing and proposed structures and yards on the lot and, as
practical, of any existing structures within 100 feet of the
proposed structure but off the lot.
(d) Improvements. Proposed off-street parking and loading areas,
access drives, with walks. Proposed sewerage disposal system.
(e) Orientation. The North direction must be shown.
(2) A site plan is not required for projects which are concerned only
with maintenance of or repair to existing structures.
C. Temporary use permits. It is recognized that it may be in accordance
with the purpose of this chapter to permit temporary activities for a
§ 325-109 WEAPONS § 325-110
318:977
§ 325-111. Special exceptions.
§ 325-112. Variances.
limited period of time, which activities may be prohibited by other
provisions of this chapter.
(1) If such uses are of such a nature and are so located that, at the time
of petition, they will:
(a) In no way exert a detrimental effect upon the uses of land and
activities normally permitted in the zone; or
(b) Contribute materially to the welfare of the Township,
particularly in a state of emergency, under conditions peculiar
to the time and place involved;
(2) Then, the Zoning Hearing Board may, subject to all regulations for
the issuance of special exception elsewhere specified, direct the
Zoning Officer to issue a permit for a period not to exceed six
months. Such permit may be extended not more than once for an
additional period of six months.
D. Certificate of occupancy. It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of
any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, located,
erected, changed, converted or enlarged wholly or partly until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued for that premises, certifying
that the structure or use complies with the provisions of this chapter.
Such occupancy permits shall be granted or denied within 45 days from
the date that a written application is filed with the Zoning Officer. In the
event that the issuance of a certificate of occupancy is denied upon
application therefore, the Zoning Officer shall notify the Zoning
Hearing Board in writing his action and the specific reasons therefore.
Any construction or use of premises contrary to the certificate of
occupancy or the approved plans authorizes the Zoning Officer to
revoke such permit or certificate and halt the construction or use on the
premises.
A. In addition to the information required on the building permit
application, the special exception application must show:
(1) Ground floor plans and elevation of proposed structures.
(2) Names and addresses of adjoining owners.
B. Unless otherwise specified or extended by the Zoning Hearing Board, a
special exception authorized by the Board expires if the applicant fails
to obtain, where required to do so, a building permit within six months
of the date of the authorization of the special exception.
A. Filing of variance application; expiration. An application may be made
to the Zoning Hearing Board for a variance where it is alleged that the
§ 325-110 RIDLEY CODE § 325-112
318:978
§ 325-113. Conditional use.
provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant. The application must be on a form provided for that purpose
by the Zoning Officer. It must be filed with the Board and copies
given to the Zoning Officer and Township Planning Commission. The
applicant must provide all the information and data that may be
required to advise the Board on the variance, whether such information
is called for by the official form or not.
B. Unless otherwise specified or extended by the Board, a variance
authorized by it expires if the applicant fails to obtain a building permit
or use certificate within six months from the date of authorization of the
variance.
A. Procedures. Applications for conditional uses permitted by this chapter
shall be made in writing to the Zoning Officer by the owner or
authorized agent on a form supplied by the Zoning Officer. The Zoning
Officer shall simultaneously refer such application to the Planning
Commission and the Township Commissioners. The Planning
Commission shall review the application, within 30 days of receipt,
submit its recommendations to the Township Commissioners for
decision. At its next regular meeting following receipt of the Planning
Commission's recommendations or expiration of the thirty-day period,
whichever is sooner, the Township Commissioners shall review the
application and, indicating its approval or disapproval thereof, return
the application to the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer in turn shall,
within 10 days of decision by the Township Commissioners, forward, if
approved, an approved building permit or occupancy permit, as
appropriate, to the applicant; if disapproved, so notify the applicant.
B. Criteria. The recommendations of the Planning Commission and the
decision of the Township Commissioners shall be based on, but not
limited to, the following standards and criteria.
(1) Compatibility. The proposed use will be reviewed as to its
relationship to and effect upon surrounding land uses and existing
environmental conditions regarding the pollution of air, land and
water; noise; potential of hazards and congestion; illumination and
glare; restrictions to natural light and circulation of air.
(2) Purpose. The intended purpose of the proposed use as it relates to
the area's development objectives established in the
Comprehensive Plan and this chapter will be reviewed.
(3) Suitability. The nature of activity and population served, numbers
of participation population, frequency of use, adequacy of space
and spatial requirements, potential generation and impact of
congestion will be reviewed as suitably related to the proposed
location of potential use.
§ 325-112 WEAPONS § 325-113
318:979
§ 325-114. Fees.
Whenever the owner or owners of any property in the Township of Ridley,
or any other persons, presents to the Board of Township Commissioners,
in accordance with this chapter, a petition requesting an amendment,
supplement, change, modification or repeal of the regulations prescribed
by this chapter, or of any Zoning Map made a part of this chapter, the
said petitioner shall defray all costs of advertising, notes of testimony and
other costs of the hearing, and said petitioner shall file with said petition
as deposit, cash or a certified check in the sum (sum to be established by
Township resolution) as part payment of such costs. In the event that the
costs are less than said sum, the excess shall be returned to petitioner; if the
costs are in excess of said sum, no decision shall be given until said excess
be paid. The Board of Township Commissioners may refuse to act upon said
petition unless and until said sum is so deposited.
§ 325-115. Zoning Officer.
(4) Accessibility. Ingress and egress to the site of the proposed use,
circulation and movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic,
parking requirements and accessibility to the exiting and proposed
area highway system will be reviewed.
(5) Serviceability. Review will be made as to the adequacy and
availability of utility services and facilities such as sanitary and
storm sewers, water, trash and garage collection and disposal and
the ability of the area to supply such services.
A. Appointment and powers. For the administration of this chapter, a
Zoning Officer, who shall not hold any elective office in the Township,
shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners. The Zoning Officer
shall meet qualifications established by the Township and shall be able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township a working knowledge
of municipal zoning. The Zoning Officer shall administer this chapter in
accordance with its literal terms, and shall not have the power to permit
any construction or any use or change of use which does not conform to
this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall be authorized to institute civil
enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting
within the scope of his employment.
B. Forms. The Zoning Officer must provide a form or forms prepared by
the Township Solicitor for:
(1) Zoning permits.
(2) Building permits.
(3) Special exceptions.
(4) Certificates of occupancy.
(5) Variances.
§ 325-113 RIDLEY CODE § 325-115
318:980
(6) Appeals.
C. Transmittal of papers. Upon receipt of an application for a special
exception, variance or a notice of appeal, the Zoning Officer must
transmit to the Secretary of the Zoning Hearing Board and to the
Township Planning Commission, copies of all papers constituting the
record upon the special exception, variance, conditional use or appeal.
D. Action on building permits. Within 60 days, except for holidays, after
receipt of an application for a building permit, the Zoning Officer must
grant or refuse the permit. If the application conforms to the applicable
requirements of the building permit ordinance and this chapter, the
Zoning Officer must grant a permit. If the permit is not granted, he
must state in writing the grounds of his refusal.
E. Action on certificates of occupancy. Within 45 days, except for holidays,
after receipt of an application for a certificate of occupancy, the Zoning
Officer must grant or refuse the certificate. In the event that the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy is denied upon application
therefor, the Zoning Officer must state in writing the grounds of his
refusal.
F. Violations.
(1) Upon determining that a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter exists, the Zoning Officer must serve notice on the person
committing or permitting the same that:
(a) A complaint has been filed with the Zoning Hearing Board; and
(b) The Board will hold a hearing on the complaint not more than
30 days following notice.
(2) Following the hearing, he must take the action necessary to
terminate the violation, include recourse to a court of record.
G. Records.
(1) The Zoning Officer must keep a record of:
(a) All applications for building permits and use certificates and all
actions taken on them together with any conditions imposed by
the Zoning Hearing Board.
(b) All complaints of violations of provisions of this chapter and the
action taken on them.
(c) All plans submitted.
(2) All records and plans are available for public inspection.
H. Reports. The Zoning Officer shall prepare a monthly report for the
Township Commissioners summarizing for the period since his last
previous report all zoning permits issued and certificates countersigned
§ 325-115 WEAPONS § 325-115
318:981
§ 325-116. Zoning Hearing Board.
by him and all complaints of violations and the action taken by him
consequent thereon. A copy of each such report shall be filed with the
Office of the Chief Assessor of Delaware County at the same time it is
filed with the Township Commissioners.
A. Membership of Board.
(1) The membership of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be five
residents of the Township appointed by the Board of
Commissioners. The terms of office shall be five years and shall be
so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each
year. The Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Board of
Commissioners of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill
vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
Members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold no other office in
the Township, including membership on the Planning Commission
and Zoning Officer.
(2) The Board of Commissioners may appoint at least one but no more
than three residents of the Township to serve as alternate members
of the Zoning Hearing Board. The term of office of an alternate
member shall be three years. When seated pursuant to the
provisions of § 325-116C of this chapter, an alternate shall be
entitled to participate in all proceedings and discussions of the
Zoning Hearing Board to the same and full extent as provided by
law for Zoning Hearing Board members, including specifically the
right to cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings, and
shall have all the powers and duties set forth in this chapter and as
otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other office in
the Township, including membership on the Planning Commission
and Zoning Officer. Any alternate may participate in any
proceeding or discussion of the Zoning Hearing Board but shall not
be entitled to vote as a member of the Board nor be compensated
pursuant to § 325-116D of this chapter unless designated as a
voting alternate member pursuant to § 325-116C of this chapter.
B. Removal of members. Any Zoning Hearing Board member may be
removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for
other just cause by a majority vote of the Board of Commissioners,
taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the
intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the
vote if the member shall request it in writing.
C. Organization of Board.
(1) The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who
shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For
the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum
shall be not less than a majority of all the members of the Board,
§ 325-115 RIDLEY CODE § 325-116
318:982
but the Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own
membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf and the parties
may waive further action by the Board as provided in § 325-116E of
this chapter.
(2) If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum
is not reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many
alternate members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be
needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate member of the Board
shall continue to serve on the Board in all proceedings involving the
matter or case for which the alternate was initially appointed until
the board has made a final determination of the matter or case.
Designation of an alternate pursuant to this section shall be made
on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining seniority
among all alternates.
(3) The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws of
the commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its
business, which records shall be the property of the Township, and
shall submit a report of its activities to the Board of Commissioners
as requested by the Board of Commissioners.
D. Expenditures for services. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall
receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as fixed by
the Board of Commissioners, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of
compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the Board of
Commissioners. Alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall
receive compensation, as fixed by the Board of Commissioners, for the
performance of their duties when designated as alternate members
pursuant to § 325-116C of this chapter, but in no case shall such
compensation exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to
the members of the Board of Commissioners.
E. Hearings. The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make
decisions in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer, such other persons the Zoning
Hearing Board shall designate by its rules and to any person who
has made timely request for the same. Written notices shall be
given at such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by
rules of the Zoning Hearing Board. In addition to the written notice
prescribed herein, written notice of said hearing shall be
conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week
prior to the hearing.
(2) The Board of Commissioners shall prescribe reasonable fees with
respect to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said
hearings shall include compensation for the secretary and
members of the Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs
§ 325-116 WEAPONS § 325-116
318:983
and necessary administrative overhead connected with the
hearing. The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the
Zoning Hearing Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or
other technical consultants or expert witness costs.
(3) The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the
applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time.
(4) The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may
appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where no
decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board;
however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in
addition to the Township, may, prior to the decision of the hearing,
waive decision or findings by the Board and accept the decision or
findings of the hearing officer as final.
(5) The parties to the hearing shall be the Township of Ridley, any
person affected by the application who has made timely
appearance of record before the Board, and any other person
including civic or community organizations permitted to appear by
the Board. The Board shall have power to require that all persons
who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on
forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
(6) The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing
officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses
and documents requested by the parties.
(7) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(8) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial,
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(9) The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the
Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board
if the transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall
be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the Board if
such appeal is made, and in either event the cost of additional
copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies.
In other cases the party requesting the original transcript shall
bear the cost thereof.
(10) The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with
§ 325-116 RIDLEY CODE § 325-116
318:984
any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all
parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication,
reports, staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from
their solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to
contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party
or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to
be present.
(11) The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is
contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by
findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with the
reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code216 or of any Township
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed
appropriate in the light of the facts found. If the hearing is
conducted by a hearing officer, and there has been no stipulation
that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall make his
report and recommendations available to the parties within 45 days
and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations
thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and
the Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the
report of the hearing officer. Where the Board fails to render the
decision within the period required by this section, or fails to hold
the required hearing within 60 days from the date of the applicant's
request for a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been
rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed
in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision
has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of
the Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided,
the Board shall give public notice of said decision within 10 days
from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same
manner as provided in this section. If the Board shall fail to provide
such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this section shall
prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal
the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(12) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him not later than the day following its date. To all other persons
who have filed their name and address with the Board not later
than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or
otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement
of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
216. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 325-116 WEAPONS § 325-116
318:985
F. Jurisdiction. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction
to hear and render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the Board of Commissioners pursuant
to §§ 325-120B and 325-121A(2) of this chapter.
(2) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said
ordinance.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including,
but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to
act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist
order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot.
(4) Appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard provisions within a land use ordinance.
(5) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter pursuant
to § 325-116G of this chapter.
(6) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter pursuant to
§ 325-116H of this chapter.
(7) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provisions of this chapter.
(8) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under § 325-122
of this chapter.
(9) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same related to
development not involving subdivision and land development or
planned residential development applications.
G. Zoning Hearing Board's functions; variances.
(1) The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that
the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant. The Board shall by rule prescribe the form of application
and may require preliminary application to the Zoning Officer. The
Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following
findings are made where relevant in a given case:
§ 325-116 RIDLEY CODE § 325-116
318:986
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable
the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible to the regulation in issue.
(2) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code217
and this chapter.
H. Zoning Hearing Board's functions; special exception.
(1) The Board shall hear requests for special exceptions pursuant to
this chapter. The Board shall by rule prescribe the form of
application and may require preliminary application to the Zoning
Officer. The Board in granting or denying requests for special
exceptions shall consider the following factors where appropriate:
(a) That the proposed use is appropriate for the site in question in
terms of size, topography, natural features, drainage, sewage
disposal, water supply, accessibility, and availability of public
services, and that adequate provisions will be made to protect
sensitive environmental features such as streams, lakes,
wetlands, slopes, and mature trees.
(b) That the proposed use is compatible with the character of the
surrounding neighborhood and will not interfere with or
detract from legitimate uses and adjacent properties, and that
217. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 325-116 WEAPONS § 325-116
318:987
adequate measures will be provided through building design,
site layout, landscaping, planting, and operational controls to
minimize any adverse impacts caused by noise, lights, glare,
odors, smoke, fumes, traffic, parking, loading, and signage.
(c) That the proposed special exception will serve the best interest
of the Township, the convenience of the community, and the
public health, safety and welfare.
(d) That the proposed use is consistent with the Ridley Township
Comprehensive Plan.
(e) That the proposed use promotes orderly development, proper
population density, and the provision of adequate community
facilities and services, including police and fire protection.
(f) That the proposed use is suitable in terms of its effect on
highway safety and traffic circulation, and that access, on-site
circulation, and parking are adequate in view of anticipated
traffic.
(g) That the proposed use will provide for adequate off-street
parking as required in Article XIII of this chapter.
(2) In cases where uses permitted by special exception are not
accompanied by standards for such uses, the following standards
shall apply:
(a) In residential districts, the area and bulk regulations shall be
not less than those for single-family detached dwellings in the
applicable residential district.
(b) In nonresidential districts, the area and bulk regulations shall
be not less than those for the use which requires the greatest
dimensions in the applicable nonresidential district.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board may require more stringent but
reasonable dimensional standards than those listed in
§ 325-116H(2) above, provided that the Board makes one or more
of the following three determinations:
(a) That the required standards [as noted in § 325-116H(2) above]
are clearly insufficient to accommodate the proposed building,
facility, or use, and that larger dimensional requirements
would substantially alleviate that conditions.
(b) That the required standards are clearly insufficient to provide
adequate area for parking and loading, as required by Article
XIII of this chapter, and that larger dimensional requirements
would substantially alleviate that condition.
(c) That the required standards are clearly insufficient in
providing for lot areas and dimensions necessary to protect the
§ 325-116 RIDLEY CODE § 325-116
318:988
adjacent area from the potential adverse impacts of the
proposed use, such as noise, vibration, air pollution and similar
impacts, and that larger dimensional requirements would
substantially alleviate that condition.
(4) Financial hardship shall not be construed as a basis for granting
special exceptions.
(5) In granting any special exception, the Board may attach reasonable
conditions and safeguards in addition to those expressed in this
chapter as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code218 and this chapter,
which conditions and safeguards may relate to, but not be limited
to, screening, lighting, noise, safety, aesthetics and the
minimization of noxious, offensive or hazardous elements. Each
special exception shall be clearly authorized by a provision in this
chapter and shall comply with the more specific standards relating
to such special exception contained in sections of this chapter
relating to uses by special exception.
I. Parties appellant before the Zoning Hearing Board.
(1) Appeals under § 325-116E(1), (2), (3), (4), (7), (8) and (9) of this
chapter may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board in writing by
the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Township, or
any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance under § 325-116G
and for special exception under § 325-116H may be filed with the
Board by any landowner or any tenant with the permission of such
landowner.
(2) No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board
later that 30 days after an application for development, preliminary
or final, has been approved by an appropriate Township officer,
agency or body if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or
to limit the approval in any manner unless such person alleges and
proves that he had no notice, knowledge, or reason to believe that
such approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his
interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of
his predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone other than the
landowner to appeal from an adverse decision by the Zoning Officer
on a challenge to the validity of an ordinance or map pursuant to
§ 325-122 of this chapter shall preclude an appeal from final
approval except in the case where the final submission
substantially deviates from the approved tentative approval.
(3) All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowners shall be
filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the
determination is issued.
218. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 325-116 WEAPONS § 325-116
318:989
§ 325-117. Township Engineer.
Powers and duties shall be as follows:
§ 325-118. Planning Commission.
Powers and duties shall be as follows:
J. Stay of proceedings. Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in
§ 325-116I(1) of this chapter and during its pendency before the Board,
all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or
approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body, and all official
action thereunder, shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any
other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts indicating
that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which
case the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by
the Court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice
to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When an
application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly
approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are
filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant, the applicant
may petition the Court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order
such persons to post bond as condition to continuing the proceedings
before the Board. The Court is required to act upon the petition as
prescribed in Section 915.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.219
A. Drainage. At the request of the Zoning Officer or the Zoning Hearing
Board, the Township Engineer must review site plans or other data to
ascertain that provision for surface water drainage will be adequate.
B. Buildings adjacent to drainage channels and watercourses. The
Township Engineer shall review plans for buildings adjacent to
drainage channels or watercourses to ascertain that the buildings will
be an adequate distance from the high water line.
C. Zoning Hearing Board cases. Where the exercise of the above powers
and duties involves an application or appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board, the Township Engineer shall make recommendations to the
Board. The approving authority in such cases shall be the Zoning
Hearing Board and not the Township Engineer.
A. Zoning Hearing Board cases. Within 30 days of receiving an application
for a special exception or variance from the Zoning Hearing Board, the
Township Planning Commission must give written report on it to the
Board.
219. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10915.1.
§ 325-116 RIDLEY CODE § 325-118
318:990
§ 325-119. Board of Township Commissioners.
B. The Township Planning Commission may recommend amendments to
the regulations and provisions of this chapter to the Township
Commissioners. For a proposed amendment stemming from other
sources, the Commission must review it and make a recommendation
regarding it to the Township Commissioners within 30 days after
receipt of the proposal. At least 30 days prior to the Township
Commissioners hearing on the amendment to the ordinance, the
Township Planning Commission, shall submit the proposed amendment
to the ordinance to the Delaware County Planning Commission for
recommendation.
C. Screens where commercial and industrial abut residential districts. In
reviewing plans for fences or hedges, where commercial or industrial
districts abut a residential district, the Township Planning Commission
must accept or refuse the plans, depending on their adequacy for this
purpose.
A. Appointments.
(1) Zoning Officer. The Board of Commissioners must appoint a Zoning
Officer pursuant to the provisions of § 325-115A of this chapter.
(2) Zoning Hearing Board. The Board of Commissioners must appoint a
Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to the provisions of § 325-116A of
this chapter.
B. Jurisdiction. The Board of Commissioners shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications in the following
matters:
(1) All application for approvals of planned residential developments
under Article XIV of this chapter.
(2) Applications for conditional use under the express provisions of this
chapter.
(3) Applications for curative amendment to this chapter pursuant to
§ 325-120 of this chapter.
C. Board of Commissioners functions; conditional uses.
(1) The Board of Commissioners shall hold hearings on and decide
requests for conditional uses in accordance with standards and
criteria pursuant to § 325-113 of this chapter.
(2) In granting a conditional use, the Board of Commissioners may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to
those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.220
§ 325-118 WEAPONS § 325-120
318:991
§ 325-120. Amendments.
A. The Board of Commissioners may from time to time on its own motion,
or on petition or on recommendation of the Township Planning
Commission, amend, supplement or repeal any of the regulations and
provisions of this chapter.
(1) Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to
public notice. In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a
Zoning Map change, notice of said public hearing shall be
conspicuously posted by the Township at points deemed sufficient
by the Township along the perimeter of the tract to notify
potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be
posted at least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the
Township Planning Commission, the Board of Commissioners shall
submit each such amendment to the Township Planning
Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such proposed
amendment to provide the Township Planning Commission an
opportunity to submit recommendations.
(3) The Township shall submit any proposed amendment to the
Delaware County Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the Delaware
County Planning Commission an opportunity to submit
recommendations.
(4) If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially, or is revised, to include land
previously not affected by it, the Board of Commissioners shall hold
another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before
proceeding to vote on the amendment.
(5) Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of
proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in this section,
and shall include the time and place of the meeting at which
passage will be considered, a reference to a place within the
Township where copies of the proposed amendment may be
examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than
the cost thereof. The Board of Commissioners shall publish the
proposed amendment once in one newspaper of general circulation
in the Township not more than 60 days nor less than seven days
prior to passage. Publication of the proposed amendment shall
include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary,
prepared by the Township Solicitor and setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included a copy
thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general circulation in
220. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 325-120 RIDLEY CODE § 325-120
318:992
the Township at the time the public notice is published and an
attested copy of the proposed amendment shall be filed in the
county law library or other county office designated by the County
Commissioners.
(6) In the event that substantial amendments are made in the proposed
amendment before voting upon enactment, the Board of
Commissioners shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment
readvertise, in one newspaper of general circulation in the
Township, publish a brief summary setting forth all the provisions
in reasonable detail together with a summary of the amendments.
(7) Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the Delaware County Planning
Commission.
B. Procedure for landowner curative amendments.
(1) A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this chapter or Zoning Map or any provision thereof,
which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which
he has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the Board
of Commissioners with a written request that his challenge and
proposed amendment be heard and decided as provided in
§ 325-121 of this chapter. The Board of Commissioners shall
commence a hearing thereon within 60 days of the request as
provided in § 325-121 of this chapter. The curative amendment and
challenge shall be referred to the planning agencies as provided in
§ 325-120A of this chapter and notice of the hearing thereon shall
be given as provided in § 325-120A.
(2) The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with § 325-116E of
this chapter and all references therein to the Zoning Hearing Board
shall, for the purposes of this section, be references to the Board of
Commissioners. If the Township does not accept a landowner's
curative amendment brought in accordance with this subsection
and a court subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the
court's decision shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for this
entire chapter and Zoning Map, but only for those provisions which
specifically relate to the landowner's curative amendment and
challenge.
(3) The Board of Commissioners which has determined that a validity
challenge has merit may accept a landowner's curative
amendment, with or without revision, or may adopt an alternative
amendment which will cure the challenged defects. The Board of
Commissioners shall consider the curative amendments, plans and
explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall also
consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
§ 325-120 WEAPONS § 325-120
318:993
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of this
chapter or Zoning Map;
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and
any adverse environmental impacts; and
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
C. Procedure for municipal curative amendments. If the Township
determines that this chapter or any portion thereof is substantially
invalid, it shall take the following actions:
(1) The Township shall declare by formal action, this chapter or any
portions thereof substantively invalid and propose to prepare a
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days
following such declaration and proposal the Board of
Commissioners shall begin to prepare and consider a curative
amendment to this chapter to correct the declared invalidity and
shall by resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of this chapter which may include:
(a) References to specific uses which are either not permitted or
not permitted in sufficient quantity;
(b) Reference to a class of use or uses which require revision; or
(c) Reference to this entire chapter which requires revisions.
(2) Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Township shall enact a curative amendment to validate, or reaffirm
the validity of, this chapter pursuant to the provisions required by
§ 325-120A of this chapter in order to cure the declared invalidity
of this chapter.
(3) Upon the initiation of the procedures, as set forth in § 325-120A of
this chapter, the Board of Commissioners shall not be required to
entertain or consider any landowner's curative amendment filed
under § 325-120B of this chapter, nor shall the Zoning Hearing
Board be required to give a report requested under §§ 325-116F or
§ 325-120 RIDLEY CODE § 325-120
318:994
§ 325-121. Validity of ordinance; substantive questions.
325-121 of this chapter subsequent to the declaration and proposal
based upon the grounds identical to or substantially similar to
those specified in the resolution required by § 325-120C(1) of this
chapter. Upon completion of the procedures as set forth in
§ 325-120A(1) and (2) of this chapter, no rights to a cure pursuant
to the provisions of § 325-120B or 325-121 of this chapter shall,
from the date of the declaration and proposal, accrue to any
landowner on the basis of the substantive invalidity of this
unamended chapter for which there has been a curative
amendment pursuant to this section.
D. The Township having utilized the procedures as set forth in
§ 325-120A(1) and (2) of this chapter may not again utilize said
procedure for a thirty-six-month period following the date of the
enactment of a curative amendment, or reaffirmation of the validity of
this chapter, pursuant to § 325-120C(2) of this chapter; provided,
however, if after the date of declaration and proposal there is a
substantially new duty or obligation imposed upon the Township by
virtue of a Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision, the Township may
utilize the provisions of this section to prepare a curative amendment to
this chapter to fulfill said duty or obligation.
A. A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the
validity of this chapter or Zoning Map or any provision thereof which
prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an
interest shall submit the challenge either:
(1) To the Zoning Hearing Board under § 325-116F of this chapter; or
(2) To the Board of Commissioners under § 325-119B of this chapter,
together with a request for a curative amendment under
§ 325-120B of this chapter.
B. Persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the land of
another by an ordinance or map, or any provision thereof, who desires
to challenge its validity on substantive grounds shall first submit their
challenge to the Zoning Hearing Board for a decision thereon under
§ 325-116F(1) of this chapter.
C. The submissions referred to in § 325-121A and B of this chapter shall be
governed by the following:
(1) In challenges before the Zoning Hearing Board, the challenging
party shall make a written request to the Board that it hold a
hearing on its challenge. The request shall contain the reasons for
the challenge. Where the landowner desires to challenge the
validity of such ordinance and elects to proceed by curative
amendment under § 325-120B of this chapter, his application to the
Board of Commissioners shall contain, in addition to the
§ 325-120 WEAPONS § 325-121
318:995
requirements of the written request hereof, the plans and
explanatory materials describing the use or development proposed
by the landowner in lieu of the use or development permitted by the
challenged ordinance or map. Such plans or other materials shall
not be required to meet the standards prescribed for preliminary,
tentative or final approval or for the issuance of a permit, so long as
they provide reasonable notice of the proposed use or development
and a sufficient basis for evaluating the challenged ordinance or
map in light thereof. Nothing herein contained shall preclude the
landowner from first seeking a final approval before submitting his
challenge.
(2) If the submission is made by the landowner to the Board of
Commissioners under § 325-121A(2) of this chapter, the request
also shall be accompanied by an amendment or amendments to the
ordinance proposed by the landowner to cure the alleged defects
therein.
(3) If the submission is made to the Board of Commissioners, the
Township Solicitor shall represent and advise it at the hearing or
hearings referred to in § 325-119B of this chapter.
(4) The Board of Commissioners may retain an independent attorney to
present the defense of the challenged ordinance or map on its
behalf and to present their witnesses on its behalf.
(5) Based upon the testimony presented at the hearing or hearings, the
Board of Commissioners or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case
may be, shall determine whether the challenged ordinance or map
is defective, as alleged by the landowner. If a challenge heard by
the Board of Commissioners is found to have merit, the Board of
Commissioners shall proceed as provided in § 325-120B. If a
challenge heard by the Zoning Hearing Board is found to have
merit, the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall include
recommended amendments to the challenged ordinance which will
cure the defects found. In reaching its decision, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall consider the amendments, plans and explanatory
material submitted by the landowner and shall also consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable to classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of the
ordinance or map;
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
§ 325-121 RIDLEY CODE § 325-121
318:996
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and
any adverse environmental impacts; and
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
(6) The Board of Commissioners or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the
case may be, shall render its decision within 45 days after the
conclusion of the last hearing.
(7) If the Board of Commissioners or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the
case may be, fails to act on the landowner's request within the time
limits referred to in § 325-121C(6) of this chapter, a denial of the
request is deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close
of the last hearing.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Commissioners, as the case may
be, shall commence its hearings within 60 days after the request is filed
unless the landowner requests or consents to an extension of time.
E. Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of the
ordinance or map is in question and shall have the place where and the
times when a copy of the request, including any plans, explanatory
material or proposed amendments, may be examined by the public.
F. The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Commissioners, as the case
may be, fails to commence the hearing within the time limits set
forth in § 325-121D of this chapter;
(2) The Board of Commissioners notifies the landowner that it will not
adopt the curative amendment;
(3) The Board of Commissioners adopts another curative amendment
which is unacceptable to the landowner; or
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Commissioners, as the case
may be, fails to act on the request 45 days after the close of the last
hearing on the request, unless the time is extended by mutual
consent by the landowner and municipality.
G. Where, a curative amendment proposal is approved by the grant of
curative amendment application by the Board of Commissioners
pursuant to § 325-119B of this chapter or a validity challenge is
sustained by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 325-116F of this
chapter or the court acts finally on appeal from denial of a curative
amendment proposal or a validity challenge, and the proposal or
challenge so approved requires a further application for subdivision or
§ 325-121 WEAPONS § 325-121
318:997
§ 325-122. Procedure to obtain preliminary opinion.
In order not to unreasonably delay the time when a landowner may secure
assurance that the ordinance or map under which he proposes to build is
free from challenge, and recognizing that the procedure for preliminary
approval of his development may be too cumbersome or may be unavailable,
the landowner may advance the date from which time for any challenge to
this chapter or Zoning Map will run under § 325-116I(2) of this chapter by
the following procedure:
land development, the developer shall have two years from the date
of such approval to file an application for preliminary or tentative
approval pursuant to Chapter 268, Subdivision and Land Development,
or Article XIV of this chapter. Within the two-year period, no subsequent
change or amendment in this chapter, Chapter 268, Subdivision and
Land Development, or other governing ordinance or plan shall be
applied in any manner which adversely affects the rights of the
applicant as granted in the curative amendment or the sustained
validity challenge. Upon the filing of the preliminary or tentative plan,
the provisions of Section 508(4) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code221 shall apply. Where the proposal appended to the
curative amendment application or the validity challenge is approved
but does not require further application under Chapter 268,
Subdivision and Land Development, the developer shall have one year
within which to file for a building permit. Within the one-year period,
no subsequent change or amendment to this chapter, Chapter 268,
Subdivision and Land Development, or other governing ordinance or
plan shall be applied in any manner which adversely affects the rights
of the applicant as granted in the curative amendment or the sustained
validity challenge. During these protected periods, the court shall
retain or assume jurisdiction for the purpose of awarding such
supplemental relief as may be necessary.
A. The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing his
proposed use or development to the Zoning Officer for a preliminary
opinion as to their compliance with the applicable ordinances and
maps. Such plans and other materials shall not be required to meet the
standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for
the issuance of a building permit so long as they provide reasonable
notice of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for a
preliminary opinion as to its compliance.
B. If the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinion is that the use or
development complies with the ordinance or map, notice thereof shall
be published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall include a
general description of the proposed use or development and its
location, by some readily identifiable directive, and the place and times
221. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
§ 325-121 RIDLEY CODE § 325-122
318:998
§ 325-123. Applicability of judicial remedies.
Nothing contained in this Article XVI of this chapter shall be construed to
deny the appellant the right to proceed directly to court where appropriate,
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure No. 1091 (relating to
action in mandamus).
where the plans and other materials may be examined by the public.
The favorable preliminary approval under § 325-116I(2) of this chapter
and the time therein specified for commencing a proceeding with the
Zoning Hearing Board shall run from the time when the second notice
thereof has been published.
§ 325-122 WEAPONS § 325-123
318:999

ARTICLE XVII
Legal Provisions
§ 325-124. Effect on former provisions.
It is intended that this chapter shall be an amendment to Ordinance Nos.
1441, 1327 and 237 (as previously supplemented and amended), and is
not intended to be a new zoning code, but that the repeal, abrogation or
annulment of certain sections of Ordinance Nos. 1441, 1327 and 237 (as
previously supplemented and amended), shall only be operative in such
sections where the provisions of the instant ordinance are inconsistent
with or contrary to the terms of Ordinance Nos. 1441, 1327 and 237 (as
previously supplemented and amended), and in all such cases in which
such provisions of Ordinance Nos. 1441, 1327 and 237 (as previously
supplemented and amended) are contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
§ 325-124 WEAPONS § 325-124
318:1001

ARTICLE XVIII
Adult Entertainment222
[Added 10-26-1994 by Ord. No. 1727]
§ 325-125. Legislative intent and purpose.
§ 325-126. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion-producing devices are maintained to
show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time or where
the image is so displayed or distinguished or characterized by depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
ADULT CABARET, ADULT DANCE HALL, ADULT CLUB, ADULT BAR,
ADULT TAVERN, NIGHT CLUB, RESTAURANT OR SIMILAR COMMERCIAL
ESTABLISHMENT — Offering "adult entertainment"; any cabaret, dance
hall club, tavern, bar, night club, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment offering entertainment used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," for
observation by patrons therein whether or not liquor is sold on the
premises. Such presentation or material may be live or through films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproduction
A. It is hereby determined that adult entertainment uses, as defined by
this chapter, tend to bring with them secondary concerns that impact on
the health, safety and general welfare concerns of the Township of
Ridley. These associated concerns include difficulties for law
enforcement, municipal maintenance, trash, deleterious effects on
business and residential property values, increased crime, particularly
corruption of the morals of minors and prostitution, and encourage
residents and businesses to move elsewhere.
B. With these goals in mind, the Township of Ridley is amending this
chapter to restrict or limit the location of where said activities can
locate within the bounds of the Township of Ridley. The Township of
Ridley has concluded that a permitting and/or licensing process is a
legitimate and reasonable means of accountability to ensure that the
operators of adult entertainment uses comply with reasonable
regulation and do not knowingly allow their establishments to be used
as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation. The Township of Ridley
also does not intend by this chapter to affect or suppress any activities
protected by the First Amendment but instead address these secondary
effects.
222. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 62, Adult Uses.
§ 325-125 WEAPONS § 325-126
318:1003
depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas."
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Live or non-live entertainment containing
"specified sexual activities" or displaying or presenting "specified
anatomical areas." This definition is a broad overall definition which
includes the activities adult cabaret, adult dance hall, adult club, adult bar,
adult tavern, adult materials sales, adult mini-motion-picture theater, adult
motion-picture theater and peep shows as part of its definition for adult
entertainment.
ADULT MATERIALS RENTAL AND SALES —
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — Any enclosed or
semienclosed or unenclosed building which houses a commercial
establishment with the capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting
or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas,"
for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
Book, video, magazine rentals, other printed matter, photographs,
films, motion-picture video or production slides or other visual
representation and/or sales where the locations offer the showing or
displaying of matter depicting or describing "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons on the
premises. This does not apply to the availability for sale of any material
displayed in such a way that only the name of the book or magazine
appears. This also does not include rentals and/or sales for use of such
materials off the premises of said establishment.
A.
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas."
B.
Such a commercial establishment as listed in Subsection A and B may
have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering
for sale or rental of material depicted or describing "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be characterized
as adult material sales. Such other business purposes will not serve
to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as
adult material sales so long as one of its principal business purposes
is the offering for sale or rental for consideration in specified materials
used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting or describing "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas."
C.
Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons of closed circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
A.
§ 325-126 RIDLEY CODE § 325-126
318:1004
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — Any enclosed or partially enclosed
or unenclosed building which houses a commercial establishment with the
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation
by patrons therein.
APPLICANT — A person who applies by filling out an application for a
permit for an "adult entertainment" business.
CERTIFICATION — A department and/or agency of the Township after
inspection of the premises for adult entertainment writes a report to the
Code Zoning Officer regarding compliance or noncompliance.
ESTABLISHMENT —
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of the specified
anatomical areas without any coverings on the body area.
PEEP SHOWS — Any enclosed or semienclosed or unenclosed building/
enclosure which houses a commercial establishment with the capacity for
one person used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting or describing "specified sexual activity" or
"specified anatomical areas" for observation by parties therein.
PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE — A person or persons who has a permit
and/or license to operate an adult entertainment has been issued, as well
as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for
permit and/or license.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE OR SEMINUDITY — State of dress in which clothing partially
or opaquely covers specified anatomical areas.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that as one of its primary business purposes offers for any form of
consideration:
reproduction which are used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
The opening or commencement of any adult entertainment as a new
business;
A.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult
entertainment, to an adult entertainment business;
B.
The additions of any adult entertainment business to any other existing
adult entertainment business; or
C.
D. The relocation of any adult entertainment business.
§ 325-126 WEAPONS § 325-126
318:1005
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL —
§ 325-127. Uses.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
B.
A. Human genitals, pubic region; anus; or
B. Buttocks; or
Female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola
and/or female breast(s) partially or completely covering the areola; or
C.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
D.
A. Human genitals in state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or
Acts or simulated acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse,
sodomy or oral copulation; or
B.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breast(s); or
C.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A through C above.
D.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of a business;
The transfer of securities which constitutes a controlling interest in the
business whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar device which transfers
the ownership or control of the business except for transfer by a
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing
the ownership or control.
C.
A. Only in the industrial districts, in addition to those uses by special
exception stated in Article IX, § 325-111, the land, buildings or
premises shall be by special exception only for the following additional
uses:
(1) Adult arcade.
(2) Adult cabaret, adult dance hall, adult club, adult bar, adult tavern,
night club, restaurant or similar commercial establishment.
(3) Adult entertainment.
§ 325-126 RIDLEY CODE § 325-127
318:1006
§ 325-128. Permit process.
(4) Adult material rental and sales.
(5) Adult mini-motion-picture theater.
(6) Adult motel.
(7) Adult motion-picture theater.
(8) Peep shows.
(9) Sexual encounter center.
B. The above additional uses are allowed by permit only in the Industrial
District if the property line of this use is greater than 650 feet from the
property lines of a:
(1) School; or
(2) House of worship; or
(3) Township owned park; or
(4) Residential district; or
(5) Any other adult use establishment as listed above.
C. For purposes of this chapter, measures shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises
where an adult entertainment business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of a school, house of worship, Township-owned park and/
or residential district.
A. The Zoning Officer upon submission to the Township of an application
shall present the applicant with a building permit for adult
entertainment business(s) as follows:
(1) In the Industrial Districts, a permit shall be issued only if the
applicant is successful in obtaining a special exception for the
proposed type of adult entertainment and the application
successfully meets all health, use and occupancy and/or building
permit requirements as defined in the pertinent ordinances and
their amendments/revisions and the location of said use is
demonstrated to comply with § 325-127 above.
B. The application for a permit to operate an adult entertainment business
must be made on the form provided by the Zoning Officer of the
Township. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram
showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of the
total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need
not be professionally prepared, but at least be drawn to a designated
§ 325-127 WEAPONS § 325-128
318:1007
scale or drawn with marked dimensions on the interior and exterior of
the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
C. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in
compliance with the law by the Zoning Officer, the Fire Marshal and the
Police.
D. If a person wishes to operate an adult entertainment business as an
individual, he (she) must sign the application for permit as an applicant.
If a person who wishes to operate an adult entertainment business is
other than an individual, each individual that has 10% or greater
interest in the business must sign the application for permit as an
applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of an adult entertainment
business or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business, each
individual having a direct or indirect interest of 10% or greater in the
corporation must sign the application for permit as an applicant.
E. The fact that a person possesses other types of Township permit(s) does
not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining an adult
entertainment business permit.
F. The Zoning Officer shall approve the issuance of a permit to an
applicant within 30 days after applicant is awarded a special exception
by the Zoning Hearing Board of the Township of Ridley and will not
approve a permit if the Zoning Officer finds one or more of the following
to be true:
(1) Applicant is under 18 years of age.
(2) Applicant or applicant's spouse is overdue on his or her payment to
the Township of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him
or her or imposed upon him or her in relation to an adult
entertainment business.
(3) Applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form.
(4) Permit to be used for the adult entertainment business has been
reviewed and has been disapproved by either the Zoning Officer,
the Fire Marshal or the police as not being in compliance with the
applicable laws and ordinances.
(5) The permit fee required by this chapter has not been paid or the
permit fees for health, use, occupancy and/or building permits have
not been complied with or the fees were not paid before.
(6) Applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not
in compliance with any of the provision of this chapter.
G. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of
§ 325-128 RIDLEY CODE § 325-128
318:1008
§ 325-129. Inspection.
§ 325-130. Fees. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 1808]
The annual fee for an adult entertainment business permit is as set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 325-131. Suspension.
The Zoning Officer shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed 30 days
if he determines that a permittee or an employee of the permittee has:
the adult entertainment business. The permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the adult entertainment
business so it can be read at any time.
H. The permit, if granted, shall have a life of one year from the date of
issuance. At that time, the applicant must file another application
before the expiration of the permit in order to continue doing business
without interruption. Application for renewal should be made at least
30 days before the expiration date. When an application is made less
than 30 days before the expiration date, the pendency of the application
will not prevent the expiration of the permit. Again, all of the above
rules listed in this section and the entire article must be complied with
as if a new permit is being issued.
I. The Zoning Officer, Fire Marshal and the police shall complete their
certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance
within 20 days of receipt of the application by the Zoning Officer. This
certification shall be promptly presented to the Zoning Officer.
J. If the Township Zoning Officer denies a renewal of a license, the
applicant shall not be issued a permit for one year from the date of
denial, except that after 90 days of lapse since the date of denial, the
applicant may be granted a permit if the Zoning Officer finds that the
basis for denial of the renewal permit has been corrected or abated.
A. An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the police,
Fire Marshal, Zoning Officer or other Township departments or
agencies to inspect the premises of an adult entertainment business for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time the adult
entertainment business is occupied or open for business. These
inspection departments/agencies shall certify in writing to the Code
Enforcement Officer whether compliance is achieved.
B. A person who operates an adult entertainment business or his agent or
employee violates this Zoning Chapter if he refuses to permit such
lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article or this
chapter.
§ 325-128 WEAPONS § 325-131
318:1009
§ 325-132. Revocation.
§ 325-133. Transfer of permit.
A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another person nor shall a
permittee operate an adult entertainment business under the authority
B. Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the adult
entertainment premises.
C. Refused to allow an inspection of the adult entertainment premises as
authorized by this chapter.
A. The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension set
forth in § 325-131 occurred and the permit has been suspended within
the preceding 12 months.
B. The Zoning Officer shall also have the power to revoke a permit if he
determines that:
(1) A permittee or any of the persons specified has given false or
misleading information or materials submitted to the Township
during the application process.
(2) A permittee or employee of the permittee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises as defined by the Pennsylvania Crime
Codes.
(3) A permittee or employee of the permittee knowingly operated the
adult entertainment business during a period of time when the
permittee's permit was suspended or revoked.
(4) A permittee or employee of the permittee knowingly allowed any
action of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation
or other sexual conduct to occur in or on the permitted premises.
(5) A permittee is delinquent in payment of the Township or state for
any taxes or fees past due.
C. When the Zoning Officer revokes the permit, the revocation shall
continue for one year and the permittee shall not be issued an adult
entertainment business permit for one year from when the date of
revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the Zoning
Officer finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or
abated, the applicant may be granted a permit if at least 90 days have
elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
D. After denial of an application or denial of a renewal of an application or
suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or licensee or
permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative
action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative action
shall be promptly reviewed by the court.
§ 325-131 RIDLEY CODE § 325-133
318:1010
of a permit at any place other than the address designated within the
application.
§ 325-134. Exemption.
It is a defense to prosecution under this article that a person appearing in a
state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated as follows:
§ 325-135. Injunction.
A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult entertainment
business without a valid permit or in violation of this article is subject to an
action in equity or a suit for injunction as well as citations for violations of
this Zoning Chapter.
§ 325-136. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in § 325-4D of this chapter.
A. By a proprietary school licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation.
B. By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to any college,
junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
§ 325-133 WEAPONS § 325-136
318:1011
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1806 9-27-2000 Erosion and sediment
control amendment
Ch. 124
1807 9-27-2000 Police pension amendment Rescinded
1808 10-25-2000 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
1809 12-7-2000 Police Civil Service
Commission amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1845
1810 12-7-2000 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 268
1811 12-18-2000 2001 budget NCM
1812 12-18-2000 2001 tax levy NCM
1813 7-25-2001 Signs and billboards
amendment
Ch. 249
1814 8-22-2001 Street dedication NCM
1815 8-22-2001 Street dedication NCM
1816 9-26-2001 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 135
1817 9-26-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 299
1818 10-24-2001 Street dedication NCM
1819 12-20-2001 2002 budget NCM
1820 12-20-2001 2002 tax levy NCM
1821 12-19-2001 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 268
1822 1-23-2002 Street dedication NCM
1823 2-27-2002 Towing of vehicles Ch. 306
1824 3-27-2002 Street vacation NCM
1825 3-27-2002 Street dedication NCM
1826 3-27-2002 Health code amendment Ch. 155
1827 5-22-2002 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 205
1828 5-22-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 299
§ 325-136 RIDLEY CODE § DL-1
318:1012
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1829 8-28-2002 Street vacation NCM
1830 8-28-2002 Massage establishments Chs. 62; 180
1831 12-18-2002 2003 budget NCM
1832 12-18-2002 2003 tax levy NCM
1833 11-20-2002 Bond NCM
1834 12-18-2002 Police pension fund See Ord. No. 1875
1835 1-22-2003 Municipal Marina Authority Repealed by Ord.
No. 1984
1836 2-26-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 299
1837 4-23-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1838 4-23-2003 Outdoor cafes Ch. 195
1839 4-23-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1840 5-28-2003 Solid waste: collection Ch. 253, Art. VII
1841 8-27-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1842 9-24-2003 Noise amendments Chs. 190; 325
1843 9-24-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 299
1844 9-24-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 299
1845 11-13-2003 Police civil service rules and
regulations
Ch. 45, reference
only
1846 12-17-2003 Removal and storage of
vehicles amendment
Chs. 299; 303
1847 12-17-2003 Outdoor cafes amendment Ch. 195
1848 12-17-2003 Signs and billboards
amendment
Ch. 249
1849 12-29-2003 2004 budget NCM
1850 12-29-2003 2004 tax levy NCM
1851 12-17-2003 Occupational privilege tax
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1873
1852 2-25-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1853 2-25-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1854 3-24-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 299
1855 3-24-2004 Electrical standards Ch. 120, Art. I
§ DL-1 WEAPONS § DL-1
318:1013
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1856 6-23-2004 Uniform Construction Codes
enforcement
Ch. 105
1857 6-23-2004 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 92, Art. II
1858 6-23-2004 Energy conservation Ch. 122
1859 6-23-2004 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 120, Art. I
1860 6-23-2004 Existing building
construction standards
Ch. 92, Art. III
1861 6-23-2004 Fire prevention Ch. 135, Art. IV
1862 6-23-2004 Fuel gas standards Ch. 140, Art. IV
1863 6-23-2004 Mechanical standards Ch. 181
1864 6-23-2004 Plumbing Ch. 216
1865 6-23-2004 One- and two-family
dwelling standards
Ch. 92, Art. IV
1866 6-23-2004 Urban-wildland interface
standards
Ch. 135, Art. V
1867 6-23-2004 Solid waste amendment Ch. 253
1868 7-28-2004 Construction Board of
Appeals
Ch. 9, Art. IX
1869 8-25-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1870 8-25-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
NCM
1871 9-22-2004 Street vacation NCM
1872 11-17-2004 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 209
1873 12-29-2004 Emergency and municipal
services tax
Ch. 275, Art. III
1874 12-29-2004 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 209
1875 2-23-2005 Police pension fund revised
amendment
Ch. 41 Art. II,
editor's note only
1876 12-29-2004 2005 budget NCM
1877 12-29-2004 2005 tax levy NCM
1878 12-29-2004 Solid waste: receptacles and
bins
Ch. 253, Art. VIII
1879 12-29-2004 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 264, Art. VIII
§ DL-1 RIDLEY CODE § DL-1
318:1014
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1880 1-26-2005 General obligation note NCM
1881 2-23-2005 Stormwater management Repealed by Ord.
No. 1988
1882 2-7-2005 Compensation of Treasurer Ch. 50, Art. II
1883 5-25-2005 Central Delaware County
Authority amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I
1884 6-22-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 299
1885 7-27-2005 Portable home storage units Ch. 202, Arts. IV
and VI
1886 7-27-2005 Secondhand metals and
gems amendment
Ch. 232, Art. II
1887 11-16-2005 Commercial vehicles Ch. 299
1888 7-27-2005 Police civil service rules and
regulations amendment
See Ch. 45
1889 9-28-2005 Street acceptance NCM
1890 11/17/2005 Rental dwelling units Ch. 92 (footnote
only); repealed by
Ord. No. 1900
1891 10-26-2005 Police pensions amendment NCM
1892 12-17-2005 2006 budget NCM
1893 12-27-2005 2006 tax rate NCM
1894 12-27-2005 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 237
1895 12-27-2005 Solid waste collection
amendment
Ch. 253, Art. VII
1896 2-22-2006 Street vacation NCM
1897 2-22-2006 Street vacation NCM
1898 1-25-2006 Rental dwelling units
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1900
1899 3-22-2006 Rental dwelling units
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1900
1900 7-26-2006 Rental dwelling units Ch. 225
1901 9-26-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1902 9-26-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1903 9-26-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1904 12-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1905 9-26-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1906 9-26-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
§ DL-1 WEAPONS § DL-1
318:1015
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1907 9-26-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1908 9-26-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1909 Zoning amendment Not adopted
1910 Zoning amendment Not adopted
1911 12-15-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1912 Scenic byway signs Not adopted
1913 7-26-2006 Fire prevention: consumer
fireworks
Ch. 135, Art. VI
1914 9-27-2006 Realty transfer tax Ch. 275, Art. I
1915 12-20-2006 Street vacation NCM
1916 12-20-2006 Street vacation NCM
1917 12-20-2006 2006 International Codes
amendment
Chs. 92, Art. II, III
and IV; 120, Art. I;
122; 135, Arts. IV
and V; 140, Art. IV;
181; 216
1918 2-28-2007 Police civil service rules and
regulations amendment
See Ch. 45
1919 3-28-2007 Street vacation NCM
1920 4-25-2007 Solid waste: collection
amendment
Ch. 253, Art. VII
1921 5-23-2007 Municipal Retirement
System
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1999
1922 6-27-2007 Signs and billboards
amendment
Ch. 249
1923 8-22-2007 Towing of vehicles
amendment
Ch. 306
1924 9-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 299
1925 9-26-2007 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 268
1926 9-26-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1927 9-26-2007 Cable television Ch. 99
1928 12-21-2006 2007 budget NCM
1929 12-21-2006 2007 tax rate NCM
1930 9-26-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1931 11-29-2006 General obligation loan NCM
§ DL-1 RIDLEY CODE § DL-1
318:1016
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1932 11-28-2007 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 275, Art. III
1933 12-20-2007 2008 budget NCM
1934 12-20-2007 2008 tax rate NCM
1935 12-19-2007 Street vacation NCM
1936 1-23-2008 Sewers and sewage
disposal: rents and charges
amendment
Ch. 237, Art. III
1937 3-26-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 299
1938 4-23-2008 Street vacation NCM
1939 6-19-2008 Local economic
revitalization tax assistance
Ch. 275, Art. VI
1940 5-28-2008 Street vacation NCM
1941 7-23-2008 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 209
1942 7-23-2008 Street vacation NCM
1943 9-24-2008 Procurement: contract
eligibility standards
Ch. 46, Art. I
1944 9-24-2008 Recycling amendment Ch. 253, Art. VI
1945 11-19-2008 Street openings and
excavations amendment
Ch. 264, Art. IV
1946 11-19-2008 Local economic
revitalization tax assistance
amendment
Ch. 275, Art. VI
1947 12-18-2008 Property maintenance Ch. 224
1948 12-18-2008 2009 budget NCM
1949 12-18-2008 2009 tax rate NCM
1950 2-25-2009 Bond NCM
1951 7-22-2009 Police civil service rules and
regulations amendment
See Ch. 45
1952 8-26-2009 Towing of vehicles
amendment
Ch. 306
1953 9-23-2009 Curfew amendment Ch. 176, Art. I
1954 10-28-2009 Building construction and
floodplain management:
adoption of standards
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 92, Art. I; 325
§ DL-1 WEAPONS § DL-1
318:1017
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1955 10-28-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 299
1956 12-21-2009 2010 budget NCM
1957 12-21-2009 2010 tax rate NCM
1958 12-16-2009 International Residential
Code amendment
Ch. 92, Art. IV
1959 12-16-2009 International Building Code
amendment
Ch. 92, Art. II
1960 12-16-2009 Plumbing amendment Ch. 216
1961 12-16-2009 Mechanical standards
amendment
Ch. 181
1962 12-16-2009 International Fire Code
amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
1963 12-16-2009 Energy conservation
amendment
Ch. 122
1964 12-16-2009 Fuel Gas Code amendment Ch. 140, Art. IV
1965 12-16-2009 International Existing
Building Code amendment
Ch. 92, Art. III
1966 12-16-2009 International Urban-Wildlife
Interface Code amendment
Ch. 135, Art. V
1967 12-16-2009 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 224
1968 2-24-2010 Procurement: contract
eligibility standards
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. I
1969 12-20-2010 2011 budget NCM
1970 12-20-2010 2011 tax rate NCM
1971 2-23-2011 State or federal license
requirements
Ch. 173, Art. III
1972 3-23-2011 Fire insurance claims Ch. 163, Art. I
1973 5-25-2011 Portable home storage units
amendment
Ch. 202, Art. VI
1974 5-25-2011 Farm animals; exotic
animals
Ch. 77, Arts. III
and VI
1975 6-22-2011 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 209
1976 9-28-2011 Wastewater control and
treatment
Ch. 237, Art. V; see
Ch. 314
1977 9-28-2011 Health Code amendment Ch. 155
§ DL-1 RIDLEY CODE § DL-1
318:1018
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1978 11-16-2011 Deed of dedication NCM
1979 10-26-2011 Building construction and
floodplain management:
neighborhood blight
reclamation and
revitalization
Ch. 92, Art. V
1980 11-16-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 224
1981 12-28-2011 2012 budget NCM
1982 12-28-2011 2012 tax rate NCM
1983 Firewood Tabled
1984 2-22-2012 Municipal Marina Authority
termination
Ch. 5, Art. III,
reference only
1985 5-23-2012 Deed of dedication NCM
1986 5-23-2012 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 41, Art. II
1987 6-27-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 299
1988 7-25-2012 Stormwater management Ch. 260 (reference
only)
1989 9-26-2012 Flood damage prevention Repealed by Ord.
No. 2020
1990 9-26-2012 Police Civil Service
Commission amendment
See Ch. 45
1991 9-26-2012 Building constructiont:
adoption of standards
amendment
Ch. 92, Art. I
1992 11-28-2012 Street vacation NCM
1993 12-19-2012 2013 budget NCM
1994 12-19-2012 2013 tax levy NCM
1995 12-19-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
1996 12-19-2012 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 268
1997 12-19-2012 General obligation loan NCM
1998 1-23-2013 Building construction:
International Building Code
amendment
Ch. 92, Art. II
1999 3-27-2013 Municipal Retirement
System
Ch. 41, Art. III
§ DL-1 WEAPONS § DL-1
318:1019
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2000 3-27-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 299
2001 12-30-2013 2014 budget NCM
2002 12-30-2013 2014 tax levy NCM
2003 5-28-2014 Parks and recreation areas:
rules and regulations
amendment
Ch. 205, Art. III
2004 Zoning amendment Pending adoption
2005 Zoning amendment Pending adoption
2006 7-23-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 299
2007 7-23-2014 Brush, grass and weeds:
bamboo
Ch. 88, Art. III
2008 7-23-2014 Bond refinancing NCM
2009 10-22-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
2010 MGMRP LERTA Pending adoption
2011 10-22-2014 Signs and billboards
amendment
Ch. 249
2012 12-22-2014 2015 budget NCM
2013 12-22-2014 2015 tax levy NCM
2014 2-25-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 299
2015 2-25-2015 Licensing: plumbers
amendment
Ch. 173, Art. II
2016 2-25-2015 Removal of brush, grass and
weeds amendment
Ch. 88, Art. I
2017 2-25-2015 Health Code amendment Ch. 155
2018 2-25-2015 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 224
2019 6-24-2015 Seasonal sales: yard and
garage sales
Ch. 228, Art. II
2020 7-22-2015 Flood damage prevention Ch. 138
2021 8-26-2015 Police Civil Service
Commission amendment
See Ch. 45
2022 10-28-2015 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 138
2023 12-21-2015 2016 budget NCM
2024 12-21-2015 2016 tax levy NCM
§ DL-1 RIDLEY CODE § DL-1
318:1020
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2025 1-27-2016 Solid waste: solid waste
management amendment
Ch. 253, Art. V
2026 1-27-2016 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 224
2027 12-22-2016 2017 budget NCM
2028 12-22-2016 2017 tax levy NCM
2029 3-22-2017 Parks and recreation areas:
tobacco-free parks and
playgrounds
Ch. 205, Art. IV
§ DL-1 WEAPONS § DL-1
318:1021