The Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Assessments — See Ch. 9.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 25.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 39.
Financial policies — See Ch. 44.
Intergovernmental cooperation — See Ch. 50.
Records retention — See Ch. 72.
Wards — See Ch. 90.
C:1

ARTICLE I
Name and Powers of Government
§ 1.01. Name and boundaries.
The name of the home rule charter municipality governed by this Charter
shall be the Township of Radnor, hereinafter called "township." The
boundaries of the township shall be the same as those of the first class
township known as the Township of Radnor of Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 1.02. General powers.
The township shall have and may exercise any powers and perform any
functions not denied by the Constitution of the United States, by the
Constitution and applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
by this Charter. These powers and functions shall be vested in and exercised
by the Board of Commissioners of the township.
§ 1.03. Continuation of legislation.
All powers and functions contained in ordinances and resolutions of the
township in force on the effective date of this Charter and not inconsistent
herewith shall continue until such ordinances and resolutions are amended,
repealed, superseded or shall have expired by their own terms.
§ 1.04. Interpretation. [Amended 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-201]
The powers of the Township shall be construed liberally in favor of the
Township. Any specific powers enumerated in this Charter shall not be
construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the Township
as stated in this Article. All references to the Township website shall be
understood to include, when and if current website technology is replaced,
any succeeding form of general communication with the public that is
adopted by the Board. All references to days shall be understood to mean
calendar days unless specified otherwise.
§ 1.05. Form of government.
The form of government of the township shall be Commissioner-Manager,
as set forth in this Charter.
1. Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
§ 1.01 CHARTER § 1.05
C:3

ARTICLE II
Board of Commissioners
§ 2.01. Governing body; membership.
The Board of Commissioners of the township, hereinafter referred to as
the "Board," shall be the governing body of the township. The Board shall
consist of seven (7) Commissioners, each one of whom shall be elected
from one (1) of seven (7) representative districts, hereinafter referred to as
"wards."
§ 2.02. Qualifications.
No person shall be eligible for nomination or appointment to the office of
Commissioner unless such person shall have been a resident and registered
elector of the ward in and for which such person is nominated or appointed
for a period of not less than one (1) year immediately prior to such
nomination or appointment and shall not otherwise be qualified to serve
as Commissioner by this Charter or by the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. However, a duly elected or appointed Commissioner who
ceases to be a resident of the ward in and for which elected or appointed,
as a result of redistricting according to law, shall be eligible to continue to
serve as the Commissioner for such ward for the balance of the elected or
appointed term so long as said Commissioner continues to live within the
boundaries of the ward in effect when elected or appointed.
§ 2.03. Election and terms of office. [Amended 1-7-2013 by Ord. No.
2012-202]
A. The township shall consist of 7 electoral districts (Wards), each of which
shall as nearly as possible: (a) be equal in population, (b) be formed of
compact and contiguous territory, and (c) follow existing governmental,
natural geographic, and/or major manmade boundaries and barriers,
with boundary lines running down the middle of streets. No later than
ten months following the public release of the decennial U.S. Census
reports, the Board shall by ordinance draw new ward lines according to
the above criteria. If in any such redistricting a commissioner is
removed from his/her ward, he/she shall continue to represent such
ward until the conclusion of his/her term in office.
B. The Commissioner for each Ward shall be elected by the electors of the
Ward in a municipal election in accordance with the election laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the provisions of this Charter. All
Commissioners representing even numbered Wards shall be elected at
the municipal election held in 2013 and shall be elected thereafter at 4
year intervals. All Commissioners representing odd numbered Wards
shall be elected at the municipal election held in 2015 and shall be
elected thereafter at 4 year intervals.
2. Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
§ 2.01 CHARTER § 2.04
C:5
§ 2.04. Vacancies. [Amended 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-203]
§ 2.05. Filling of vacancies.
Whenever a vacancy exists in the office of Commissioner, the vacancy shall
be filled in accordance with the procedures which follow:
A. The office of a Commissioner shall become vacant upon death,
resignation, change in residence from Ward represented, or
determination of mental disability by a court of competent jurisdiction
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. A vacancy in the office of a
Commissioner might also occur upon the filing of a petition or
complaint by any Commissioner or any 5 registered electors of the
Ward and then upon final determination of forfeiture of office by any
court of competent jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
upon any of the grounds which follow.
(1) Lack, at any time during the term of office, of any qualification for
the office prescribed by this Charter or by law.
(2) Willful violation of any specific prohibition of this Charter at any
time during the term of office.
(3) Conviction of any crime punishable by imprisonment for a term
exceeding one year under the laws of this Commonwealth or
conviction of any comparable crime under the laws of any other
State or of the United States during the term of office.
A. The Board, by majority vote of its total membership, within thirty (30)
days from the time the office becomes vacant, shall make an interim
appointment of a qualified person to fill the vacancy.
B. If the Board shall refuse, fail, neglect, or be unable, for any reason
whatsoever, to fill such vacancy within 30 days after the vacancy
occurs, then the vacancy shall be filled within 15 additional days by the
Vacancy Board. The Vacancy Board shall consist of the Board of
Commissioners and one elector of the Township, who shall be appointed
by the Board at the Board's annual reorganization meeting or as soon
thereafter as practical. Said elector shall act as the Chairman of the
Vacancy Board. If the Vacancy Board fails to fill the position within 15
days, then the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, shall, upon petition of the Board of Commissioners or any
5 qualified electors of the Township, fill the vacancy in such office by
the appointment of a person meeting the qualifications of this Charter.
[Amended 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-204]
3. Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
4. Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
§ 2.04 RADNOR CODE § 2.05
C:6
§ 2.06. Compensation.
Members of the Board shall receive compensation at the rate of two
thousand one hundred dollars ($2,100.) per annum for the performance of
their duties. Members of the Board shall receive no other compensation,
direct or indirect, for the performance of their duties and shall not be
eligible for any township pensions, fringe benefits or insurance at township
expense (other than liability insurance related to their duties). However,
members of the Board shall be entitled to reimbursement for reasonable
and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties,
according to provisions specified in the Administrative Code.5
§ 2.07. Organization.
C. The person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve until a successor has
been elected and assumed the office.
D. At the next regularly scheduled primary, municipal or general election
which takes place at least sixty (60) days after the vacancy occurs, a
qualified person shall be elected by special election in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Election Code to fill the vacancy. A person elected to
fill a vacancy shall assume office at the start of the first regularly
scheduled meeting of the Board following election and certification by
the County Board of Elections and shall serve for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
A. The organization meeting of the Board shall be held in the Township
Building or in such other public place within the township as the Board
may designate at 7:30 p.m. local time on the first Monday of January of
each year. If the first Monday is a legal holiday, the meeting shall be
held the first following day which is not a legal holiday, at the same time
and place. At such meeting, the Board shall elect by majority vote of its
total membership one (1) of its number as President and one (1) as Vice
President who, as long as they continue to be Commissioners, shall hold
office until their successors are elected or appointed. The Board, by
majority vote of its total membership, shall appoint a registered
township elector as Township Secretary to serve at the pleasure of the
Board. The Board, by majority vote of its total membership, shall
establish all such standing committees of members of the Board as are
necessary for the conduct of its business.
B. If a majority of the number of Commissioners specified in § 2.01 fails to
attend the organization meeting, those present may adjourn the
meeting from day to day until such a majority attends. If a majority
attends but is unable to organize, the Board may also adjourn the
meeting from day to day until the organization is completed. The
organization meeting may be considered as a regular monthly meeting
for the transaction of such business as may come before it, but for the
first order of business shall be the organization of the Board.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government.
§ 2.05 CHARTER § 2.07
C:7
§ 2.08. Duties of President and Vice President.
The President or, in the President's absence, the Vice President shall
preside at all meetings of the Board, sign documents as designated officer
of the Board, appoint committees of the Board, call special meetings of the
Board and perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or
which may be prescribed by ordinance.
§ 2.09. Meeting procedures; administrative policy.
C. Should the Board, for any reason, fail to elect a President or Vice
President by the 15th day of January of any year, any court of competent
jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall, upon petition
of any Commissioner or any five (5) registered electors of the township,
designate a Commissioner to act as President or Vice President until
the Board elects a President or Vice President.
A. Quorum. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for all meetings. Voting by proxy or by any method other than in
person shall be prohibited. The Board shall take no formal action except
in the presence of a quorum. The action of a majority of the
Commissioners present shall be binding upon and constitute formal
action of the Board, provided that a quorum is present, except as
otherwise provided in this Charter. The phrase "majority of its total
membership," used elsewhere in this Charter, shall indicate actions
which must be taken by a majority of the total membership then in
office rather than by a majority of a quorum.
B. Regular meetings. The Board shall meet at least once each month in the
Township Building or in such other public place within the township as
the Board may designate, at a date and time which the Board shall
specify. All regular meetings shall be open to the public.
C. Special meetings. A special meeting shall be held upon the call of the
President or at the request of any three (3) members of the Board.
Written notice shall be provided to each Commissioner at least three (3)
days in advance of the meeting date. Such notice shall state the
purpose(s) of the special meeting as well as the date, place and time. In
the case of a special meeting called for the purpose of adopting an
emergency resolution or enacting an emergency ordinance, the
requirement for advance written notice shall not be required. Special
meetings shall be held in the Township Building or other public place
within the township as the Board may designate. All special meetings
shall be open to the public. Action by the Board and discussion by
citizens present at special meetings shall be confined to those agenda
items set forth in the notice of the meeting.
D. Executive sessions.
(1) Executive or closed sessions of the Board shall be held only in
accordance with the provisions and purposes defined by law and
§ 2.07 RADNOR CODE § 2.09
C:8
only when one (1) or more of the subjects which follow are under
consideration:
(a) Matters of litigation to which the township is a party.
(b) Personnel matters concerning any individual employee,
prospective employee or appointee.
(c) Acquisition or disposition of land by the township.
(d) Developing strategy for labor negotiations or other
negotiations to which the township is a party.
(2) An announcement shall be made at the next meeting of the Board
that an executive or closed session has been held, giving the date,
place and names of Commissioners attending and stating generally
the matters discussed.
E. (Reserved)6
F. Meeting Notices and Agenda. The Board shall announce a calendar of
regular meetings for the ensuing year at the organization meeting.
Public notice of the calendar shall be given in accordance with the
public notice requirements of this Charter. Five days in advance of the
date of a special meeting, public notice of the date, time, place, and
subject of the special meeting shall be given as provided in this Charter,
except in the case of a special meeting called for the purpose of
adopting an emergency resolution or enacting an emergency
ordinance. An individual Commissioner has the authority to add an item
to the agenda for Board consideration. The President of the Board shall
cause an agenda to be prepared for each regular meeting including
such items proposed by individual Commissioners and shall cause
copies of the agenda and supporting documentation or reports to be
prominently posted on the Township's website as well as to be made
available to the public at the Township building at least 5 days prior to
the day of the meeting. Any reports and documents submitted to and
discussed by the Board shall be made available for public distribution at
the meeting without charge or at a reasonable fee. Provision shall be
made at regular meetings of the Board for citizens to comment or raise
questions on any subject. [Amended 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-207]
G. Board actions. No formal action shall be taken by the Board except at a
regular or special meeting, with an opportunity provided for comments
and questions by the public prior to the vote. Formal actions by the
Board shall be taken only by ordinance, resolution or motion. Voting by
each Commissioner on ordinances and resolutions shall be recorded in
the minutes. A majority vote of its total membership shall be required
6. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, Board caucus, was repealed 1-7-2013 by Ord. No.
2012-20. This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority of the
qualified voters 5-21-2013.
7. Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
§ 2.09 CHARTER § 2.09
C:9
§ 2.10. Records. [Amended 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-208]
Written minutes and records of all regular and special meetings of the
Board shall be maintained by the Township Secretary and kept in the
Township Building. All such minutes and records shall be open for public
inspection during normal office hours, and shall be prominently posted on
the Township's website. Upon request, copies shall be made available to the
public without charge or at a reasonable cost.
§ 2.11. Reports.
for final adoption of all ordinances except as otherwise provided in this
Charter. Resolutions or motions may be adopted by a majority vote of
the members present except as otherwise specified in this Charter.
H. Administrative policy. It is the intent of this Charter that the Board act
as a body in relation to all township matters. No Commissioner, acting
individually, shall seek publicly or privately to direct the acts of
township officials and employees. However, nothing contained herein
shall prevent the Board from establishing committees of its members to
review the operation and administration of the departments, obtaining
information or reports from employees and township officials, referring
citizen complaints or inquiries to departments or assigning individual
Commissioners to liaison relationships with appointed boards,
commissions and authorities.
A. The Board shall make full and complete disclosure to Township
residents of its actions as well as of Township administrative operations
and activities, both actual and planned. The Board shall make provision
for periodic written reports from the Township Manager; Department
Heads; and the Boards, Commissions, and Authorities appointed by the
Board; such written reports shall be prominently posted on the
Township's website. These reports shall be made available to the public
on request without charge or at a reasonable cost. Within 120 days
after the end of the fiscal year the Board shall prepare and make
available to the public an annual written report of the results of its
operations during that year, accompanied by financial statements as
required by this Charter. Such report and financial statement shall be
prominently posted on the Township's website. [Amended 1-7-2013
by Ord. No. 2012-209]
B. A copy of each official report required by law to be filed with other
governmental agencies shall be kept in the Township Building and be
open for public inspection during normal office hours. Copies of such
documents shall be made available to township residents or interested
8. Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
9. Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
§ 2.09 RADNOR CODE § 2.11
C:10
§ 2.12. Investigations.
The Board may, by majority vote of its total membership, make
investigations into the affairs of the township and the conduct of any
township department, office, board, commission or authority, and for this
purpose, the Board may require township officials and employees to testify
under oath and produce records concerning the subject matter of the
investigation.
parties upon request. A reasonable fee may be established by the Board
for this service.
§ 2.11 CHARTER § 2.12
C:11

ARTICLE III
Ordinances
§ 3.01. Actions requiring ordinances.
In addition to those actions required by law or by this Charter to be taken by
ordinance, the Board actions which follow shall also be taken by ordinance:
§ 3.02. Form.
Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written form. No ordinance
may contain more than one (1) subject, which shall be expressed clearly in
the title. Any ordinance which repeals or amends an existing ordinance shall
indicate specifically the matter to be omitted, added or changed.
§ 3.03. Adoption procedure.
A proposed ordinance may be introduced by any Commissioner at any
regular or special meeting of the Board. Except as otherwise provided in
this Charter or by law, adoption of the proposed ordinance shall be in
accordance with the procedures which follow:
A. Establishing, levying and collecting taxes and increasing or decreasing
the rates of existing taxes.
B. Authorizing the borrowing of money except for revenue anticipation
loans.
C. Providing for a fine or other penalty or assessment or establishing a
rule or regulation for violation of which a fine or other penalty is
imposed.
D. Exercising the power of eminent domain.
E. Granting, renewing or extending a franchise or imposing licensing
requirements.
F. Establishing, altering or abolishing rates, charges or assessments for
any utility or other service or material supplied by the township.
G. Purchasing or conveying any real property, entering into a lease for real
property for three (3) or more years or accepting a gift of any real
property or any interest in real property.
H. Establishing or amending any zoning ordinance, subdivision procedure,
building regulation or any regulation for land development or land use.
I. Placing a question on the ballot for referendum.
J. Amending or repealing any ordinance previously enacted.
A. The Township Secretary shall cause copies of the proposed ordinance to
be distributed to each member of the Board and the Township Solicitor
and shall cause the proposed ordinance to be placed on the agenda of
§ 3.01 CHARTER § 3.03
C:13
§ 3.04. Publication; effective date; authentication.
Public notice of every ordinance, or a summary thereof, enacted by the
Board shall be given in accordance with the provisions of this Charter
within ten (10) days from the date of enactment, except as otherwise
provided in this Charter or by law. Except in emergencies or as otherwise
provided in this Charter or by law, every ordinance enacted by the Board
shall become effective on the 31st day following its enactment. All
ordinances shall be authenticated by the President of the Board and
attested to by the Township Secretary.
§ 3.05. Emergency resolutions and ordinances.
After the Board makes a finding by resolution that there is a substantial
public emergency affecting the life, health, property or peace of the
residents of the township, the Board may enact one (1) or more emergency
ordinances. Such ordinances shall not levy taxes or authorize the borrowing
of money except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by law. Emergency
ordinances shall be introduced in form for final adoption, shall be so
designated and shall state specifically the nature of the emergency.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Charter, prior public notice of
emergency resolutions or emergency ordinances or of the meetings at
the Board for introduction and initial consideration at its next regular
or special meeting. Copies shall be made available for the public at that
meeting.
B. When approved initially by a majority vote of the Board members
present, the Township Secretary shall cause copies of the proposed
ordinance to be posted as provided in this Charter. The Township
Secretary shall cause the proposed ordinance, together with a notice
stating the time and place for the meeting of the Board at which the
Board will take further action on the ordinance, to be advertised in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter not more than thirty (30)
days nor less than ten (10) days before the public meeting at which the
ordinance will receive further action of the Board. In the case of an
amendment to a zoning ordinance, zoning map or other ordinances
affecting property rights in only a small portion of the township, the
Administrative Code10 shall provide that reasonable written notice be
given to property owners of the areas affected.
C. Thereafter, the Board may enact the proposed ordinance by a majority
vote of the total membership, or it may postpone action until a later
meeting for which public notice of the date, time and place shall be
given as provided in this Charter. The Board may amend the proposed
ordinance before final adoption, but if the amendment changes the
substance of the proposed ordinance as advertised originally, no final
action may be taken until the amended ordinance has been adopted in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government, § 5-8.
§ 3.03 RADNOR CODE § 3.05
C:14
which they are enacted shall not be required. The Board may enact, by
a majority vote of its membership, emergency resolutions or emergency
ordinances at any Board meeting at which they are introduced. Emergency
ordinances shall become effective immediately, shall automatically stand
repealed as of the 36th day following the date of their enactment, but may
be reenacted once, consecutively, as provided herein, if the Board finds
that the emergency still exists. Emergency ordinances may also be repealed
by the Board at any time following enactment at a Board meeting by a
repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for the
adoption of emergency ordinances. Copies of emergency resolutions and
emergency ordinances shall be posted immediately and remain posted while
in effect. Public notice shall be given as provided in this Charter as soon
as possible after the date on which they are adopted, enacted, reenacted or
repealed.
§ 3.06. Adoption of standard codes of technical regulations.
The Board may adopt by reference any standard code of technical
regulations or amendments thereto, such as published national or state
building, electrical or plumbing codes. 11 The details of standard codes
or amendments thereto need not be advertised, but copies of such codes
shall be available at the Township Building and may be purchased from the
township at a reasonable price.
§ 3.07. Recording and codification.
The Township Secretary shall cause the full text of every ordinance, with
proof of publication, to be recorded in a permanent record book upon
its effective date. Ordinances of general application shall be included in
the Code of the Township of Radnor. The Township Secretary shall be the
custodian of this record book; it shall be open and available for public
inspection upon request during normal office hours.
§ 3.08. Compilation.
The Board shall provide for the publication of a general compilation
consisting of this Charter, the Administrative Code and the Code of the
Township of Radnor, indexed properly. Copies shall be furnished to township
officers, placed in the Township Building office, the Memorial Library of
Radnor Township and such other places as the Board may direct for free
public reference and be made available for purchase by the public at a
reasonable price. Public notice of this compilation shall be given by the
Township Secretary as provided by this Charter. All amendments and new
ordinances of general application shall be integrated in this compilation and
distributed, as provided above, by the Township Secretary.
11.Editor's Note: See, for example, Ch. 125, Building Construction; Ch. 156, Electrical
Standards; Ch. 166, Fire Prevention; Ch. 195, Mechanical Standards; Ch. 218, Plumbing;
and Ch. 222, Property Maintenance.
§ 3.05 CHARTER § 3.08
C:15

ARTICLE IV
Treasurer
§ 4.01. Qualifications.
No person shall be eligible for nomination or appointment to the office
of Treasurer of the township unless such person shall be a resident and
registered elector of the township for a period of not less than one (1) year
immediately prior to such nomination or appointment and not otherwise
be disqualified by the terms of this Charter or by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Treasurer of the township shall be
hereinafter referred to as the "Treasurer."
§ 4.02. Election and term of office.
The Treasurer shall be elected at large in the municipal election of 1977 and
at four-year intervals thereafter in accordance with the election laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Treasurer shall serve for a four-year
term beginning on the first Monday in January following the year in which
elected. If the first Monday is a legal holiday, said term shall begin on the
first following day which is not a legal holiday.
§ 4.03. Vacancy in office. [Amended 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-2112]
The office of Treasurer shall become vacant upon death, resignation,
removal of residence from the Township, or determination of mental
disability by a court of competent jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. A vacancy in the office of Treasurer might also occur upon the
filing of a petition or complaint by any Commissioner or any 5 registered
electors of the Township and then upon final determination of forfeiture
of office by any court of competent jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, upon any of the grounds which follow.
§ 4.04. Filling of vacancy.
Whenever a vacancy exists in the office of Treasurer, the vacancy shall be
filled in accordance with the procedures which follow:
A. Lack, at any time during the term of office, of any qualification for the
office prescribed by this Charter or by law.
B. Willful violation of any specific prohibition of this Charter.
C. Conviction of any crime punishable by imprisonment for a term
exceeding one year under the laws of this Commonwealth or conviction
of any comparable crime under the laws of any other State or of the
United States during the term of office.
12.Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
§ 4.01 CHARTER § 4.04
C:17
§ 4.05. Powers and duties. [Amended 1-7-2013 by Ord. No.
2012-2113]
The Treasurer shall have the powers and general oversight of the functions
which follow.
A. If the vacancy occurs within the first two (2) years of the Treasurer's
term of office and at least sixty (60) days before the date of the
municipal election scheduled in that period, the Board, by majority vote
of its total membership, within thirty (30) days from the time the office
becomes vacant, shall make an interim appointment of a qualified
person to fill the vacancy.
B. If the vacancy occurs after that date which is sixty (60) days before the
scheduled municipal election, referred to in § 4.04A, then the Board of
Commissioners, by majority vote of its total membership, within thirty
(30) days from the time the office becomes vacant, shall make an
appointment of a qualified person to fill the remainder of the unexpired
term.
C. If the Board, for any reason, fails to fill a vacancy within thirty (30) days
after the vacancy occurs, any court of competent jurisdiction of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, upon petition of any Commissioner or
any five (5) registered electors of the township, shall make an interim
appointment if the vacancy occurred within the first two (2) years of the
Treasurer's term of office and more than sixty (60) days prior to the
municipal election scheduled in that period; otherwise, the court shall
make an appointment to fill the unexpired term.
D. A person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve until a successor has
been elected and has assumed the office.
E. If the vacancy occurs in the period specified in § 4.04A, a qualified
person shall be elected at the next scheduled municipal election to fill
the vacancy. The person so elected to fill a vacancy shall assume office
on the date the election results are certified by the County Board of
Elections and shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
A. Receipts. The Treasurer shall receive all Township taxes, revenues,
fines, fees, and all other money paid to, owed, or due the Township. This
money shall be deposited promptly in the name of the Township in such
depositories as the Board shall specify by ordinance. In addition, the
Treasurer shall maintain records of receipts in accordance with the
uniform classification of accounts established by the Administrative
Code.14 The Treasurer shall keep a complete record of these deposits
and accounts which shall be open to inspection and verification at any
time by the Township Finance Director and the Board. The Treasurer
13.Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government.
§ 4.04 RADNOR CODE § 4.05
C:18
shall submit such reports as are requested by the Board. The
independent auditor, retained by the Board, shall audit the Treasurer's
accounts, books, and records annually, or more frequently, if the Board
directs.
B. Disbursements. The Treasurer shall disburse Township money only
upon order in the manner prescribed by ordinance. Payment shall be
made and records maintained in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles; no payment shall be made unless there is an
unencumbered balance in the applicable appropriation.
C. Tax collection. The Treasurer shall collect such Township taxes as the
Board shall direct by ordinance. Such ordinance shall set forth the
procedures for the collection of the specified tax. The Treasurer may
collect County and school taxes levied within the Township, subject to
applicable law, and nothing in this Charter shall prohibit the Treasurer
from receiving compensation for such collection.
D. Surcharge. The Treasurer's power to surcharge shall be as follows:
(1) The Treasurer shall surcharge any elected or appointed official for
the amount of any financial loss to the Township caused in whole or
in part by the official's act or omission in violation of law or beyond
the scope of the official's authority. If the Treasurer finds an
absence of intent to violate the law or exceed the scope of authority,
and further finds that the result of the official's act could have been
achieved by legal means and authorized procedures, the surcharge
imposed shall be limited to the difference between the losses and
costs actually incurred by the Township and the costs that would
have been incurred had legal means and authorized procedures
been employed. Provisions of this section which limit the amount of
surcharge do not apply to cases involving fraud or collusion, or
other criminal acts on the part of the official.
(2) Within 10 days after notification of a surcharge amount against any
elected or appointed official, the Treasurer shall file with the
Delaware County Office of Judicial Support the surcharge amount
as a judgment against the official in favor of the Township. The
Township or any elector of the township may enforce the collection
of a judgment entered for a surcharge for the benefit of the
Township by any appropriate action or execution.
E. Additional Authority.
(1) The Treasurer shall have access to all financial accounts and
reports of the Township upon request to the Township Manager or
Township Finance Director. If the Treasurer determines that there
are significant errors or irregularities in the course of reviewing
such records, the Treasurer shall immediately report such matters
in writing to the Township Board of Commissioners and the
Township Manager.
§ 4.05 CHARTER § 4.05
C:19
§ 4.06. Compensation; offices.
The Treasurer shall be compensated for work performed at an annual rate
to be fixed by ordinance. Any subsequent change in said compensation shall
be fixed by ordinance adopted at least ninety (90) days before the primary
election for the nomination of candidates to the office of Treasurer. Such
change shall not take effect until the expiration of the term of office of the
incumbent Treasurer at the time the change is enacted. The Treasurer and
employees of that office shall have offices in the Township Building and
shall not be eligible for any township pension or fringe benefit at township
expense.
(2) The Treasurer has the right to make an oral presentation to the
Township Board of Commissioners at a regular public meeting
concerning any indications of significant irregularities,
deficiencies, abuse, or illegal acts relating to the overall finances of
the Township. If the Treasurer issues a written report, the
Township will promptly and prominently post that report on its
website or successor form of general communication with the
public.
(3) The Treasurer may prepare a written annual report to the people of
Radnor Township and may publically present it in person at a
Township Board of Commissioners meeting during the first quarter
of each calendar year. The Township will promptly and prominently
post the Treasurer's annual report on its website or successor form
of general communication with the public.
§ 4.05 RADNOR CODE § 4.06
C:20
ARTICLE V
Manager
§ 5.01. Appointment and compensation.
The Township Manager, hereinafter referred to as the "Manager," shall be
appointed by a majority vote of the total membership of the Board to serve
at the pleasure of the Board. The Board shall fix the compensation of the
Manager.
§ 5.02. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be selected on the basis of managerial and
administrative qualifications, including education, training and experience
related to the duties of the position. The Manager need not be a resident
of the township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of
appointment but must become a resident of the township within one (1) year
after appointment, unless exempted from this requirement by resolution of
the Board. The Manager shall devote his full time to the affairs of the office.
§ 5.03. Powers and duties.
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the township. The
Manager shall be responsible to the Board for the execution of all policies
established by it and for the administration of all affairs of the township
placed in the Manager's charge. The powers and duties shall include but not
be limited to those which follow:
A. Direct, supervise and be responsible for the administration of all
departments and offices of the township except as otherwise provided
in this Charter or by law.
B. Implement and enforce all township ordinances, including the
Administrative Code and all laws applicable to the operation of the
township, consistent with the provisions of this Charter.
C. Appoint, and suspend or remove department heads and other Township
employees under the Manager's direct and general supervision,
subject, however, to formal approval by a majority vote of the total
membership of the Board when required by this Charter. The Manager
shall have ultimate responsibility for the appointment, suspension, or
removal of all other Township employees under the personnel rules and
regulations established by the Administrative Code or other ordinances
in accordance with this Charter. [Amended 1-7-2013 by Ord. No.
2012-2015]
D. Attend meetings of the Board, participate in discussions and assist the
President of the Board in the preparation of agenda.
15.Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
§ 5.01 CHARTER § 5.03
C:21
§ 5.04. Removal procedures.
The Board may, at any time, by resolution, request the resignation of
the Manager and thereafter may, at any time, remove the Manager in
accordance with the procedures which follow.
E. Negotiate and sign contracts for the township subject to the provisions
of this Charter and of the Administrative Code.16
F. Make recommendations to the Board to aid and assist it in the
formulation of policy and keep the Board and public informed
concerning the conduct of township affairs.
G. Provide such reports and information as required by this Charter and as
may be requested by a majority of the members of any appointed
township board, commission, authority or any elected township official.
H. Take such actions as are necessary to protect the life, health, property
or peace of residents of the township in the event of a public
emergency.
I. Report to the Board any proposed major changes in land use, with an
analysis of the effect on the annual budget and the capital program of
the township.
J. Request prompt inspection, investigations and preparation of tax
duplicates by Delaware County for all new construction and major
building improvements as soon as such construction or improvements
are subject to taxation.
A. The Board shall adopt, by majority vote of its total membership in a
regular or special meeting, a preliminary resolution which states the
specific facts upon which the removal is based. The Board may
thereafter suspend the Manager from duty for a period not to exceed
forty-five (45) days. A copy of this resolution shall be delivered promptly
to the Manager.
B. Within ten (10) days after a copy of the preliminary resolution is
delivered, the Manager may file with the Board a written request for an
opportunity to respond and comment on the resolution at a special
meeting of the Board, which shall be held not earlier than twenty-one
(21) days nor later than thirty (30) days after the filing of such a request
by the Manager. Public notice of the date and time of such meeting shall
be given in accordance with the provisions of § 9.02. The Manager may
file a written statement of position with respect to the preliminary
resolution not later than seven (7) days before the special meeting.
C. At the special meeting, if one is requested, the Manager may make an
oral statement in addition to the written statement of position. After full
consideration, the Board may, by majority vote of its total membership,
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government, § 5-51.
§ 5.03 RADNOR CODE § 5.04
C:22
§ 5.05. Acting Manager.
adopt a final resolution of removal, specifying the effective date of
such removal. If such meeting is not requested and the Manager has
not submitted a resignation, the Board may adopt a final resolution of
removal by a majority vote of its total membership at any regular or
special meeting which takes place fourteen (14) days or more following
the date of delivery of the preliminary resolution to the Manager. This
final resolution shall specify the effective date of removal.
D. The Manager shall continue to receive a salary until the effective date
of removal. The Board shall provide such severance pay as it deems
appropriate. The decision of the Board shall be final.
A. The Manager shall designate, in writing, a qualified employee of the
township to be Acting Manager during the Manager's temporary
absence or disability. The Board may revoke such designation at any
time and appoint another qualified person as Acting Manager.
B. In the event of death, incapacity, removal, suspension or resignation of
the Manager, the Board, by a majority vote of its total membership,
shall appoint a qualified person as Acting Manager to serve until a new
Manager is appointed. The Board may replace an Acting Manager at
any time by appointing, by majority vote of the total membership of the
Board, another qualified person to serve as Acting Manager.
C. The Acting Manager, designated or appointed as provided in this
section, shall exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the
Manager during the period the office of Manager is vacant or the
Manager is incapacitated, absent, disabled or suspended.
§ 5.04 CHARTER § 5.05
C:23

ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 6.01. General provisions.
The Board shall, by ordinance, create, alter or abolish nonelective township
departments, boards, commissions, authorities and offices and prescribe
their organization and functions subject to the provisions of this Charter
and general law. The compensation of department heads and administrative
officers shall be fixed by the Manager, subject to the approval of the
Board. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the township
and responsible for administration of township affairs as provided in this
Charter.
§ 6.02. Administrative Code.
The Board shall, by ordinance, adopt an Administrative Code17 which shall
provide for the administrative organization of the township government,
the assignment of duties and responsibilities to department heads,
administrative officers and employees and the procedural requirements set
forth in the general laws or in this Charter. All changes in organization
and procedures set forth in the Administrative Code shall be effected by
amendment to the Administrative Code in the same manner as other
ordinances are enacted and amended.
§ 6.03. Department heads and administrative officers. [Amended
1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-2018]
The heads of all departments and all administrative officers shall be
appointed and suspended or removed by the Manager subject to approval
by a majority vote of the total membership of the Board, unless otherwise
provided for in this Charter. Department heads and administrative officers
shall appoint, and for stated cause suspend or remove, the subordinate
employees with the approval of the Manager under the personnel rules and
regulations established by the Administrative Code19 or other ordinances in
accordance with this Charter.
§ 6.04. Appointments, hirings and promotions; vacancies.
Appointments, hirings and promotions of all township employees shall be
made on the basis of merit and fitness, demonstrated by examination or
by other evidence of competence, in accordance with the Administrative
Code,20 ordinances and applicable federal and state laws. Vacancies
occurring in the positions of Manager, department head and administrative
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government.
18.Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
19.Editor’s Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government, Art. VIII.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government, Art. VIII.
§ 6.01 CHARTER § 6.04
C:25
officer under this Charter shall be advertised in accordance with the
provisions for legal advertising specified in this Charter.
§ 6.05. Personnel procedures and policies.
As part of the Administrative Code, the Board shall adopt personnel
procedures and policies which shall apply to township employees.21 These
procedures and policies shall make provision, as a minimum, for job
classifications with specified compensation, hours of work, overtime
compensation, holidays, vacations, sick leaves, leaves of absence, jury duty,
reductions in force, discharge, pension and retirement. They shall also
include provision for disciplinary action and grievances.
§ 6.06. Solicitor.
The Board, by a majority vote of its total membership, shall appoint a
Township Solicitor to serve at the pleasure of the Board. The Board shall
fix the compensation of the Township Solicitor. The Township Solicitor shall
be a member of the Bar of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania and shall
not hold other elected or appointed public office in the township. The
Township Solicitor shall serve as the legal advisor to the Board, department
heads, administrative officers, boards, authorities and commissions, except
as otherwise provided by law. The Township Solicitor shall represent the
township in legal proceedings or hearings and perform any other duties
prescribed by this Charter, by ordinance or as directed by the Board. It is
the intent of this Charter that only one (1) person shall be the legal advisor
to the township, but the Board may authorize other legal counsel for special
purposes from time to time.
§ 6.07. Engineer.
The Township Engineer shall be a professional civil engineer registered
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Township Engineer shall be
appointed by the Township Manager with the approval of a majority of the
total membership of the Board. Under the direct or general supervision of
the Township Manager, the Township Engineer shall supervise and control
all engineering and other related matters of the township except as
otherwise provided by the Board, by ordinance or by law.
§ 6.08. Secretary.
The Board, by majority vote of its total membership, shall appoint a
registered township elector as Township Secretary to serve at the pleasure
of the Board. The Board shall fix the compensation of the Township
Secretary. The Township Secretary shall serve as secretary to the Board and
as keeper of the Township Seal and shall attest to official actions taken by
the Board. The Township Secretary shall maintain and publish a calendar
for regular meetings of boards, commissions and authorities and shall be
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government, Art. VIII.
§ 6.04 RADNOR CODE § 6.08
C:26
custodian of the records and minutes of the same. The Township Secretary
shall perform such other functions as may be directed by the Board and as
may be required by this Charter, by ordinance or by law.
§ 6.09. Finance Director.
The Township Finance Director shall be qualified by education or
experience in financial management and public finance. The Finance
Director shall be appointed by the Manager with the approval of a majority
vote of the total membership of the Board. Under the direction of the
Manager, the Finance Director shall be the chief financial officer and shall
supervise the financial affairs of the township as provided for in this
Charter, by ordinance or by law.
§ 6.08 CHARTER § 6.09
C:27

ARTICLE VII
Finances
§ 7.01. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the township shall be the calendar year. However, after
1978, if not prohibited by law, the Board may, by ordinance, adopt a
different fiscal year, specifying an orderly procedure for fiscal and
budgetary controls in making such a transition.
§ 7.02. General provisions.
The Board shall have responsibility for establishing financial policies for the
township, for developing and approving the budget and for levying taxes.
The Board shall adopt, in the Administrative Code, a uniform classification
of accounts to be used and followed in all financial plans, programs,
budgets, financial records and reports.22 The budget for each fiscal year
shall be balanced as provided in this Article. The Manager shall have
overall responsibility for the administration of township finances. Under
the supervision of the Manager, the Finance Director shall administer the
township finances in accordance with the provisions of this Charter, the
Administrative Code, ordinance and law.
§ 7.03. Submission of comprehensive budget. [Amended 1-7-2013
by Ord. No. 2012-2223]
At one or more regular or special meetings of the Board, held as provided
for below, the Manager and department heads shall submit and present to
the Board a proposed comprehensive budget for the ensuing fiscal year,
which shall be comprised of a proposed operating budget and a proposed
3 year capital program. The comprehensive budget and supporting
documentation will be posted on the Township's website at least 5 days in
advance of the budget meeting as described in § 7.06.C. of this Article.
§ 7.04. Presentation of proposed budget; budget message.
The presentation of the proposed budget shall be accompanied by a budget
message from the Manager. The Manager's message shall explain the
proposed budget both in terms of revenues and expenditures as well as
programs, projects and services. It shall outline the proposed financial
policies of the township for the ensuing fiscal year; describe the important
features of the budget; indicate any major changes from the current year
in financial policies, expenditures and revenues together with the reasons
for such changes; and summarize the township's debt position. In the
budget message, the Manager shall also submit, for long-range planning
and advisory purposes only, as a supplement to the proposed capital
program and proposed budget, tentative projections of revenues and
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government, Art. VII.
23.Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
§ 7.01 CHARTER § 7.04
C:29
expenditures for a period of at least three (3) years. The projections shall
include programs, projects and services, as well as a schedule for the
amortization of debt, stated in general categories in accordance with the
provisions of the Administrative Code.24 The projections shall also include
estimates for unfunded obligations and contingent liabilities not set forth in
the capital program.
§ 7.05. Budget form and content. [Amended 1-7-2013 by Ord. No.
2012-2225]
The proposed, recommended, and adopted comprehensive budgets, which
as provided in § 7.03 are each comprised of an operating budget and a
three-year capital program, shall provide a complete financial plan of all
Township funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year. The proposed,
recommended, and adopted comprehensive budgets shall follow Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) and shall be in the form prescribed
by this Charter, the Administrative Code,26 and by law. They shall begin with
a clear general summary of their contents; shall show in detail all estimated
income, indicating any proposed tax levy, and all proposed expenditures,
including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year; and shall be so arranged
as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and
expenditures of the preceding fiscal year.
§ 7.06. Adoption procedure for comprehensive budget. [Amended
1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-2227]
A. Time line. The time line for comprehensive budget approval is as
follows:
(1) No later than 105 days before the end of the fiscal year: Submission
of the Manager's proposed comprehensive budget.
(2) No later than 60 days before the end of the fiscal year: Board
Approval of the recommended comprehensive budget.
(3) No later than 20 days before the end of the fiscal year: Board
Adoption of the final comprehensive budget.
B. Approval of the recommended comprehensive budget. At least 60 days
before the end of the fiscal year, the Board shall complete its review of
the Manager's proposed comprehensive budget, make such
adjustments as the Board deems necessary, and in a publicly noticed
Board meeting, approve by resolution a recommended comprehensive
budget, copies of which shall be made available promptly thereafter to
the public.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5 Administration of Government, Art. VII.
25.Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5 Administration of Government, Art. VII.
27.Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
§ 7.04 RADNOR CODE § 7.06
C:30
§ 7.07. Quarterly budget review. [Amended 1-7-2013 by Ord. No.
2012-2228]
Within 15 days after the end of each fiscal quarter the Township Manager
shall present to Board at a public meeting a report on the unfunded
liabilities, incurred operating and capital expenditures, revenues and cash
position, along with a comparison to the comprehensive budget adopted
for the same period. The Township Manager shall also present a budgetary
forecast for the remaining fiscal year.
§ 7.08. Budget revision and amendment.
C. Public Notice and Public Hearing. No later than 5 days following the
approval of the recommended comprehensive budget by the Board, the
Board shall provide public notice of the date, time, and place at which
the Board shall hold a public hearing on the recommended
comprehensive budget. This notice shall include a summary of the
recommended comprehensive budget. The public hearing shall take
place at any regular or special meeting of the Board at least 7 days after
advertisement and at least 20 days prior to the end of the fiscal year.
D. Levy of Taxes. At the time of enacting the final budget, the Board shall,
by ordinance, levy sufficient taxes allowed by law which, with other
revenues and available receipts and balances, shall provide for a
balanced budget.
A. Budget revision by new Board. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this Charter, in any year following a municipal election, if the fiscal year
is on a calendar-year basis, the newly elected Board may, within fortyfive
(45) days after the start of the fiscal year, enact a revised budget
and levy a different tax in place of the budget and tax levy enacted by
the previous Board. The Board shall make such revisions as it deems
necessary in the budget of the previous Board and shall adopt, by
resolution, a preliminary revised budget at a Board meeting. The
procedures for adopting a final revised budget shall be in accordance
with § 7.07A through D. Ordinances enacting a revised budget or
levying taxes shall be effective as of the start of the fiscal year and shall
rescind and replace the budget and tax ordinances of the previous
Board.
B. Supplemental appropriations. If during the fiscal year the Manager
certifies to the Board that there are available for appropriation
revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the Board may
make, by resolution, supplemental appropriations for operating
expenses or for the purpose of reducing indebtedness up to the amount
of such excess.
28.Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
§ 7.06 CHARTER § 7.08
C:31
§ 7.09. Lapse of appropriations.
Every appropriation shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent
that it has not been expended or encumbered.
§ 7.10. Administration of budget.
C. Emergency appropriations. In the event of an emergency, the Board
may make supplemental appropriations to meet the emergency. To the
extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet the
emergency, the Board may authorize the issuance of temporary notes
which shall constitute unfunded debt to be funded and repaid in
accordance with the Local Government Unit Debt Act29 or other law. It
is the intent of this Charter that the proceeds of such temporary notes
shall neither be appropriated nor paid out except to meet emergencies.
D. Reduction of appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it
appears probable to the Manager that the revenues available will be
insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, the Manager shall report
to the Board without delay, indicating the estimate amount of the
deficit, any remedial action taken and recommendations as to any other
steps to be taken. The Board shall then take such further action as it
deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit, and for that
purpose, it may, by resolution, reduce one (1) or more appropriations.
E. Transfer of appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year, the
Manager, with the approval of the Board, may transfer part or all of any
unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a
department or office, and, upon written request by the Manager, the
Board may, by ordinance, transfer part or all of any unencumbered
appropriation balance from one department or office to another.
F. Limitations: effective date. No appropriation for existing debt service
may be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced
below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than
the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental
and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of
appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective
immediately.
A. Receipts. The Board shall provide in the Administrative Code,
consistent with the provisions of this Charter, procedures for the
receipt, deposit and accounting by the Township Treasurer for all
moneys due and received by the township.30
B. Expenditures. The Finance Director shall cause the appropriations
voted by the Board to be entered in the accounting records of the
township and shall approve no contract or expenditure which would
29.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6780-1 et seq.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government, Art. VII.
§ 7.08 RADNOR CODE § 7.10
C:32
§ 7.11. Contracts. [Amended 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-2333]
No contract shall be made or obligation incurred unless there is a sufficient
unencumbered balance in an appropriation and sufficient money is available
to cover the contract or meet the obligation when it becomes due and
payable. Any official who authorizes knowingly a contract to be made in
violation of this provision shall be subject to removal from office and liable
to the township, or its surety, for any loss incurred as a result of such
action. The Board shall provide in the Administrative Code the procedures
for letting contracts which shall not be inconsistent with this Charter or
law.34
exceed the unencumbered balance of appropriations in any account.
The Board shall provide in the Administrative Code for a uniform
procedure for the execution and control of all township purchases,
including those involving sums less than three thousand dollars
($3,000.).31 The Finance Director shall authorize disbursement of
township money only after determining that all goods and services
contracted for have actually been received or performed. The Board
shall provide in the Administrative Code for procedures for the signing
and countersigning of all checks, drafts or other orders of payment32 by
two (2) persons, one (1) of whom shall be the Treasurer or such other
employee of the Treasurer as the Treasurer may designate, subject to
the approval of the Board.
A. Written contracts. All contracts of the township shall be in writing,
either in the form of a purchase order or more formal document. For
sums in excess of $3,000, the document shall bear signatures of the
Township and the vendor or contractor.
B. Contracts requiring approval by ordinance. Authorization for contracts
for the purchase, sale, lease or use of real estate or for the construction
of public capital improvements shall be given by ordinance, and such
contracts shall be signed by the President of the Board as well as the
Manager. Any official authorized to execute a written contract shall
submit a form of contract to the Township Solicitor for approval before
execution. All contracts requiring approval by Ordinance shall be
submitted to the Township Solicitor for legal review prior to final
execution.
C. Expenditures not exceeding $7,500. The Manager may, within the
amounts and items appropriated by the Board, but otherwise without
specific Board approval for such purchase or contract, make purchases
and enter into contracts on behalf of the Township involving
expenditures not in excess of $7,500.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government, § 5-49.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government, § 5-48.
33.Editor’s Note: This ordinance was subject to referendum and was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters 5-21-2013.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government, § 5-51.
§ 7.10 CHARTER § 7.11
C:33
§ 7.12. Accounting records and reports.
A record of all township financial transactions shall be maintained by the
Finance Director in accordance with the forms and procedures prescribed
in the Administrative Code.35The Finance Director shall prepare financial
D. Expenditures exceeding $7,500. All expenditures above $7,500 shall
require Board of Commissioners' specific approval, subject to the
following:
(1) Emergency expenditures. Emergency expenditures may be made
without Board of Commissioners' prior approval when obtaining
the Board's approval would be impracticable and provided that
such emergency expenditures are promptly thereafter presented to
the Board of Commissioners for its approval.
(2) Expenditures of $25,000 and above. Expenditures of $25,000 and
above shall only be authorized by the Board of Commissioners
pursuant to a contract made with the lowest responsible and
responsive bidder after public advertising and receipt of bids in the
manner provided.
E. No-bid contracts. Regardless of the amount of same, the following
expenditures may be authorized by the Board of Commissioners
without being subject to the advertisement and public bidding
procedures in the Charter:
(1) For the acquisition of real estate;
(2) For professional services;
(3) For the joint use of facilities or exercise of powers with other
political subdivisions; or
(4) For products or services of public utilities including those operated
by political subdivisions or other municipal entities.
F. Piecemeal evasion prohibited. No person shall evade the provisions of
this section of the Charter by purchasing or contracting for materials,
supplies or services piecemeal, when the transactions would, in the
exercise of reasonable discretion and prudence, be considered as one
transaction amounting to more than $7,500.
G. Limit on terms. The terms of contracts for the purchase of materials,
supplies and services shall not exceed 3 years. The term for contracts,
leases or service agreements for capital equipment may be extended by
the Board to a period longer than 3 years, but in no event longer than
the expected usable life of such capital equipment.
H. Future adjustment of dollar limitations. The Board may increase by
ordinance the dollar limitations contained in this Section to reflect
inflation. Such increases must be approved by an affirmative vote of 2/3
of the Commissioners.
§ 7.11 RADNOR CODE § 7.12
C:34
reports, at least monthly and at such other times as the Board shall direct,
which shall be submitted to the Manager and the Board. Such reports shall
be in such form as to present fairly the financial condition of the township,
including receipts, disbursements and account balances for the month and
year-to-date, compared with the budget allocation by month. In addition,
the Finance Director shall prepare an annual inventory of capital assets.
Special reports shall be prepared as required by the Manager or the Board.
All financial records shall be maintained in the Township Building and shall
be available for public inspection at reasonable times within regular office
hours.
§ 7.13. Independent annual audit.
The Board shall provide for an independent annual audit of township
receipts, expenditures, accounts and reports by a Pennsylvania certified
public accountant or a certified public accounting firm, experienced in
municipal finance and having no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the
fiscal affairs of the township or any of its elected or appointed officials. The
Board may provide for more frequent audits at its discretion. The Board
shall review the work of such auditor annually and, at intervals not to
exceed three (3) years, shall obtain proposals for future audits from at least
two (2) other qualified firms for comparison with the incumbent auditor's
proposal. The results of the annual audit and financial statements of the
township shall be submitted to the Board and Manager, and the audited
financial statements shall be included in the township's annual report. Any
report of the independent auditor containing recommendations concerning
financial management or fiscal controls shall be presented to the Board and
made available to the public upon request. The financial statements shall
include a balance sheet showing all current assets and liabilities.
§ 7.14. Bonding of officers and employees.
The Board shall provide in the Administrative Code for the bonding of
the Treasurer, the Treasurer's employees and township employees who
are responsible for receipts, disbursements, materials or supplies.36 All
such bonding shall be approved by the Township Solicitor for form and
sufficiency in accordance with amounts fixed by the Board. The premium for
such bonding shall be paid by the township.
§ 7.15. Limitation on taxes and debt.
The township shall be limited in sources and rates of taxation by laws
applicable to municipalities governed by a home rule charter. Until such
time as the General Assembly shall provide tax rate limits which apply to a
municipality governed by a home rule charter, the township shall continue
to be limited to the rates which apply to Pennsylvania townships of the
first class generally. Proposed tax increases in excess of this limit shall
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government, Art. VII.
36.Editor's Note: Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government, § 5-53.
§ 7.12 CHARTER § 7.15
C:35
require approval of the registered electors of the township by referendum.
The borrowing of money by the township shall continue to be limited in
amounts and governed by procedures in the Local Government Unit Debt
Act (Act 185 of 1972), as amended,37 or acts of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
37.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6780-1 et seq.
§ 7.15 RADNOR CODE § 7.15
C:36
ARTICLE VIII
Citizen Participation and Protection
§ 8.01. General provisions.
The Board shall protect and promote the right of citizens to participate in a
positive and constructive manner in the government of the township.
§ 8.02. Boards, commissions and authorities.
§ 8.03. Recall of elected officials.
Any person holding an elective office in the government of the township
shall be subject to removal from office at a recall election in the manner
provided in this Charter. Officials elected from the township at large may
be recalled by registered electors of the township at large. Officials elected
by ward shall be subject to recall by registered electors of such wards
represented.
A. Unless otherwise provided by ordinance or law, the Board shall appoint
registered electors of the township to township boards, commissions or
authorities, to serve on a staggered basis for terms set by the Board but
which shall not exceed six (6) years. No member shall serve
consecutively more than two (2) full terms and the balance of one (1)
unexpired term on the same board, commission or authority.
B. A Chairman shall be elected for a one-year term by each board,
commission or authority from among its members. The Chairman shall
preside at all meetings and shall report to the Board in the manner
which it directs. Other appropriate offices may be created and filled
from the membership of the body.
C. Vacancies on boards, commissions and authorities shall be announced
at a public meeting of the Board at least thirty (30) days in advance of
the date on which the appointment is made.
A. Recall petition. A recall of an incumbent of an elective office shall be
initiated upon petition signed by thirty percent (30%) of the electors
registered to vote for that office at the time of the most recent primary,
municipal or general election. With the exception of the number of
signatures and the time permitted for obtaining such signatures
required for recall, the same requirements as to form of signature and
affidavit shall apply to a recall petition as apply to an initiative and
referendum petition under this Charter.
B. Filing of petition. A recall petition shall be tendered for filing to the
Board of Elections of Delaware County. At the same time, a copy shall
be served upon the incumbent official. No signature shall be counted as
valid which is dated more than sixty (60) days prior to the date the
petition is tendered for filing. Upon tender to the Board of Elections, the
petition shall be available for examination by any interested person.
§ 8.01 CHARTER § 8.03
C:37
Within fifteen (15) days after tender of the petition, the Board of
Elections shall pass upon the validity of the petition and the validity and
number of signatures required thereon. The decision of the Board of
Elections shall be subject to review on appeal to any court of competent
jurisdiction in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania within thirty (30)
days of the date of the decision of the Board of Elections.
C. Notice to incumbent. As soon as the Board of Elections has received a
recall petition for filing and determined its validity and sufficiency, the
Board of Elections shall notify the incumbent named in the petition that
the petition has been filed and validated. Upon receipt of such notice,
the incumbent may resign from office, and thereupon the recall
proceedings shall terminate.
D. Recall election. If the incumbent against whom a recall petition is
directed does not resign from office within ten (10) days after receipt of
such notice, the Board of Elections shall arrange a recall election. The
recall election shall take place at a special election conducted at the
first regularly scheduled election, primary, municipal or general, which
shall occur not less than seventy (70) days after the incumbent has been
notified as provided above. The incumbent against whom a recall
petition is directed may resign at any time prior to the recall election,
and thereupon the recall proceeding shall terminate.
E. Recall question.
(1) At the recall election, the following question shall be presented to
each elector entitled to vote on the recall question: "Shall (name of
official) be recalled and removed from the office of (name of
office)?"
(2) The above question shall appear in the case of each official whose
recall is to be voted upon, and provision shall be made for the
elector to vote "Yes" or "No" to the question.
F. Results of election. If a majority of the registered electors who vote on
the question at a recall election shall vote "Yes," the incumbent shall be
deemed recalled and removed from office; otherwise, the incumbent
shall remain in office. When the result of such election is affirmative,
the date of the removal and vacancy in the office shall be effective seven
(7) days after the date when the results of the election are certified by
the Board of Elections.
G. Filling of vacancy. A vacancy in the office created by the recall of an
elected official shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of this
Charter.
H. Ineligibility for office. Any person who has been removed from an
elective office by recall petition or who has resigned from such an
elective office after a recall petition directed to such person has been
filed shall be ineligible for appointment to any office of the township
government for two (2) years after removal or resignation.
§ 8.03 RADNOR CODE § 8.03
C:38
§ 8.04. Initiative and referendum powers.
§ 8.05. Initiative and referendum procedures.
The procedures which follow shall be employed to exercise the powers of
initiative and referendum:
I. Limitations. No recall petition shall be filed against any incumbent of an
elective office within the first year or the last nine (9) months of the
term of office or within one (1) year after the date of certification of an
unsuccessful recall election.
A. Initiative. The registered electors of the township shall have the power
to propose ordinances to the Board. If the Board fails to adopt, without
any changes in substance, an ordinance so proposed, the registered
electors of the township shall have the opportunity to approve or reject
it at the next election.
B. Referendum. The registered electors of the township shall have the
power to require reconsideration by the Board of any enacted
ordinance. If the Board fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, the
registered electors of the township shall have the opportunity to
approve or reject it at the next primary, municipal or general election.
C. Limitations. The exercise of initiative and referendum shall not extend
to ordinances affecting the annual budget in its entirety, to any
emergency ordinance or to an ordinance relating to the levy of taxes.
Such limitation, however, shall not apply to specific capital projects in
the budget or capital program.
A. Initiative and referendum petition.
(1) All papers of a petition circulated for the purposes of initiating or
repealing an ordinance shall meet the requirements which follow:
(a) They shall contain the names and addresses of five (5)
registered electors of the township, designated as the
Committee of the Petitioners, including the person designated
as Chairman.
(b) They shall contain the full test of the ordinance proposed or
sought to be reconsidered.
(c) They shall contain on each page an affidavit executed by the
circulator of the page that the circular observed personally the
signing of each signature on the page.
(d) They shall bear in ink the signatures, addresses, wards and
dates of signing of at least ten percent (10%) of the registered
electors of each ward of the township qualified to vote at the
time of the most recent primary, municipal or general election.
No signature shall be counted as valid which is dated more
§ 8.03 CHARTER § 8.05
C:39
than thirty (30) days prior to the date of filing with the
Township Secretary.
(2) For a referendum petition to cause the suspension of an ordinance
which has not become effective, such petition shall be filed no later
than thirty (30) days after the enactment of the ordinance proposed
to be reconsidered; furthermore, no signature shall be valid which
is dated prior to the enactment of the ordinance.
(3) The assembled petition shall be filed with the Township Secretary
as one (1) instrument.
B. Certification and Board action. The Township Secretary shall, within
fifteen (15) days after a petition is filed, examine the petition for
compliance with the provisions of this Charter, submit the petition to
the Township Solicitor for a written opinion as to legality and certify the
results of such examination by registered mail to or personal service
upon the Committee of the Petitioners and the President of the Board.
(1) Valid certified petitions. If the Township Secretary certifies that the
petition is valid, the following procedures shall apply:
(a) An initiative ordinance shall be presented at the next Board
meeting and be acted upon subject to other provisions of this
Charter.
(b) If the petition calls for repeal of an ordinance which was not in
effect at the time the petition was filed with the Secretary, the
effectiveness of the ordinance shall be suspended until a final
decision has been made under this Article. Otherwise, the
ordinance will remain in effect until repealed by the Board or
referendum.
(2) Invalid petitions and amendment. If the Secretary certifies that the
petition is invalid, the particulars in which it is defective shall be
set forth in the certificate. Any petition may be corrected by the
Committee of the Petitioners within ten (10) days after notification
of invalidity has been received.
C. Special election. If, within sixty (60) days of the service of a certified
petition by the Secretary or the President of the Board, the Board shall
fail to pass an ordinance required by initiative petition without any
change in substance or to repeal an ordinance as required by
referendum petition, the Secretary shall, within fifteen (15) days
thereafter, or the Committee of the Petitioners if the Secretary fails to
act, file the petition with the Board of Elections. The proposed or
referred ordinance shall be voted upon by the township electors at the
next regular primary, municipal or general election which shall occur
not less than sixty (60) days from the date of filing the petition with the
Board of Elections. An initiative or referendum election shall be held in
accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Election Code
relating to the conduct of special elections.
§ 8.05 RADNOR CODE § 8.05
C:40
D. Final action. If a majority of the registered electors voting on the
proposed ordinance vote in favor thereof, such ordinance shall
thereupon become a valid and binding ordinance of the township upon
certification of the election results by the County Board of Elections. If
the provisions of two (2) or more ordinances approved or adopted at the
same election conflict, then the ordinance receiving the greatest
affirmative vote shall control. If a majority of the registered electors
voting on a referred ordinance vote to repeal it, the ordinance shall be
considered repealed upon certification of the election results;
otherwise, the referred ordinance shall become effective if it were
suspended. The Board may not consider reversing the results of an
initiative or referendum vote for at least two (2) years following
certification of such vote. Ordinances adopted or repealed by initiative
or referendum vote, or summaries thereof, shall be published and
recorded as provided elsewhere in this Charter.
§ 8.05 CHARTER § 8.05
C:41

ARTICLE IX
General Provisions
§ 9.01. Severability.
If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the remaining provisions
of this Charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of this
Charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstances is held
invalid, the application of this Charter and its provisions to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ 9.02. Public notice.
Unless provided specifically otherwise, the requirement of public notice of
this Charter shall include the procedures which follow:
§ 9.03. Armed Forces service.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Charter, any elected or appointed
official and any employee of the township may hold an appointment
(inactive duty) in any component of the Armed Forces or uniformed services
of the United States or the National Guard of a state or commonwealth.
§ 9.04. Prohibited activities; violations and penalties.38
A. Legal advertising: publication in one (1) or more newspapers of general
circulation in the township, one (1) of which shall be printed in the
township, if such a newspaper exists.
B. Posting: posting in the Township Building, the Memorial Library of
Radnor Township and such other places as the Board may direct in
locations readily accessible to the general public within the township.
C. Public availability. Copies of the subject matter so advertised and
posted shall be made available for inspection by members of the public
at the Township Building during regular working hours or at any
meeting of the Board at which the subject is being considered by the
Board. Such copies shall be made available to members of the public
free of charge or at a reasonable price as authorized by the Board.
A. The activities which follow shall be prohibited in the operation of the
township government:
(1) Discrimination. No person shall, in employment by the township in
any capacity or appointment to any board, commission or authority
or removal therefrom, be favored or discriminated against because
of age, race, national origin, sex, handicap or political or religious
opinions or affiliations in violation of applicable federal or state
laws. No person shall be accorded favored treatment in
employment or appointment because of a family relationship.
38.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 39, Ethics, Code of.
§ 9.01 CHARTER § 9.04
C:43
(2) Improper gifts. No person who seeks appointment on any township
board, commission or authority or employment by the township in
any capacity shall, directly or indirectly, give or pay any money,
service or other consideration to any person in connection with
such appointment or employment. In addition, no elected or
appointed township official or employee shall receive any money,
service or other consideration in connection with such appointment
or employment.
(3) Political party office. No township official elected under this
Charter, no appointed official and no full-time township employee
shall hold any elected or appointed political party office.
(4) Improper political influence. No elected or appointed township
official and no employee of the township shall request any township
employee to make a political contribution or engage in political
activity.
(5) Other government service. No township official elected or
appointed to an elective office under this Charter and no full-time
township employee shall hold any other township employment or
any other elective or appointive township position. No township
official elected or appointed to an elective office under this Charter
and no full-time township employee shall hold any full-time
employment or any other elective position with Delaware County or
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. This provision shall not apply
to employees of school districts or of other educational institutions.
(6) Ex parte communications. All proceedings of a quasi-judicial
character required to be determined on the record by the Board or
any other township board, commission or authority shall be
determined solely upon the evidentiary record and the arguments
of the parties to the proceeding or their counsel, properly made in
the regular course of the proceedings. No member of the Board or
of any other township board, commission or authority or any
township employee or representative assisting in the determination
in any such proceeding shall communicate, directly or indirectly,
with any party or his or her representative in connection with any
issue involved, except upon notice and opportunity for all members
of the Board or other township board, commission or authority
involved and parties to the proceeding to participate. If any
member of the Board or any other township board, commission or
authority receives a communication or authority receives a
communication orally or in writing from any person with respect to
any such proceeding, the member shall disclose the communication
to all other members and furnish them and all parties to the
proceeding with a memorandum of the oral communication or a
copy of the written communication.
B. Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute grounds for
forfeiture of office, termination of appointment or dismissal.
§ 9.04 RADNOR CODE § 9.05
C:44
§ 9.05. Conflicts of interest.39
A. No elected or appointed official of the township and no township
employee shall engage in any activity as follows:
(1) Take any action as a result of information acquired as a township
official, from which action the township official or employee or any
other person or entity in whose welfare the official is interested
shall realize a gain or advantage. Such action shall not, however, be
construed to be prohibited if the gain or advantage were realized
generally by a group or class of citizens as the purposeful result of
such action.
(2) Solicit or accept directly or indirectly, any gift, favor, service,
commission or other consideration that might reasonably tend to
influence that official or employee in the discharge of the duties of
office.
(3) Seek to influence, directly or indirectly, the awarding of any
contract where such township official or employee or other person
or entity in whose welfare the official or employee is interested
would benefit, directly or indirectly, financially or otherwise, from
said contract.
B. Disqualification from action. Any elected or appointed official and any
employee of the township, having a direct or indirect financial interest
with any person or business entity proposing to contract with the
township for the purchase or sale of land, materials, supplies or
services of any kind or seeking formal action of the Board or any
petition application, request or appeal, whether that interest is as an
employee, a party, a partner or a stockholder, shall disclose fully said
interest and, except where stock holdings in a public corporation shall
be minimal, shall not participate in the discussion or formal action
relating thereto. Violation of the provisions of this section shall render
the contract or such actions voidable by the township.
C. Disclosure of ownership of real property. All elected officials, the
Township Manager and all appointed officials shall, upon taking office,
file with the Township Secretary a statement of direct, indirect or
beneficial ownership of real property in the township or direct, indirect
or beneficial interest in any corporation, partnership or joint venture
owning real property in the township. Such statement shall be revised
promptly as required by any change in ownership.
D. Violation. Willful violation of any provision of this section shall
constitute malfeasance in office which, and except as may otherwise be
provided by law, shall be a summary offense punishable by the
maximum fine, including double the pecuniary gain derived from the
offense, or by imprisonment as provided by law. Conviction of such a
violation by an official or appointed official or employee shall result in
39.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 39, Ethics, Code of.
§ 9.05 CHARTER § 9.05
C:45
§ 9.06. Retention of records.40
All records shall be retained or disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of the Municipal Records Act, as amended.41
§ 9.07. Other elective offices.
The Board shall not have the authority to create, alter or abolish any
township elective office except as provided otherwise herein.
§ 9.08. Definitions.
As used in this Charter, the term "elected officials" of the township shall
mean the seven (7) members of the Board and the Treasurer of the
township. The term "appointed officials" of the township shall mean
members of those boards, commissions and authorities appointed by the
Board, the Township Secretary, the Township Solicitor, the Township
Manager, department heads and administrative officers who are appointed
by the Manager subject to approval of the Board. The term "employees of
the township" or its equivalent shall include the Township Manager, the
Township Secretary, all department heads, all administrative officers and all
other persons employed by the township.
§ 9.09. Charter amendment.
This Charter may be amended or repealed in the manner provided by law.
§ 9.10. When effective.
This Charter shall become effective on the first day of January 1977, except
for the transition provisions which shall become effective upon adoption of
this Charter.
forfeiture of office, termination of appointment or dismissal, and any
elected or appointed official or employee so convicted shall thereafter
be ineligible to hold office or employment with the township.
40.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 72, Records Retention.
41.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 9001 et seq.
§ 9.05 RADNOR CODE § 9.10
C:46
ARTICLE X
Transitional Provisions
§ 10.01. Board of Commissioners.
Commissioners in office on the day before this Charter becomes effective
shall continue in office for the remainder of the term to which they were
elected or appointed. On the effective date of this Charter, they shall assume
the functions and duties of Commissioners as set forth in this Charter.
§ 10.02. Treasurer.
The elected Treasurer in office on the day before this Charter becomes
effective shall continue in office for the remainder of the term to which
elected or appointed. On the effective date of this Charter, the elected
Treasurer shall assume the powers and duties of Treasurer as provided in
this Charter.
§ 10.03. Rights and privileges preserved.
§ 10.04. Boards, commissions, authorities, departments and
administrative offices.
The organization of the township government under this Charter after the
first day of January 1977 shall be as set forth in this Charter. However,
nothing in this section shall be construed to abolish the office or terminate
the terms of office of any appointed official or employee protected by a
tenure-of-office law or collective bargaining agreement. It is the intent of
A. Citizen and property rights. Provisions of the First Class Township
Code42 affording protections to citizens, property owners, public and
private schools and religious, historic, educational and charitable
properties, which are in force at the time this Charter becomes effective
and are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter or general
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall be incorporated in the
Administrative Code43 or other ordinance until modified, amended or
repealed by ordinance.
B. Rights of township officials and employees. Nothing in this Charter,
except as provided specifically otherwise, shall affect or impair the
rights and privileges of elected or appointed officials or employees of
the township at the time of the adoption of this Charter. An employee
holding a position in the township government at the time of adoption of
this Charter shall not be subject to competitive tests as a condition of
continuation in the same or similar position, but in all other respects
shall be subject to the personnel system set forth in this Charter and in
the Administrative Code.44
42.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government, Art. VIII.
§ 10.01 CHARTER § 10.04
C:47
this Charter that appointed officials and employees be continued in the
same or similar positions in the organization subject to the provisions of the
Administrative Code.45 All appointed members of boards, commissions and
authorities, heads of departments or administrative officers shall continue
in office with the same or similar bodies for the balance of the term, if any,
of their original appointment. However, nothing in this section shall limit
the right of the Board to create, modify or abolish boards, commissions,
authorities, departments, administrative offices or individual positions.
§ 10.05. Pending matters; continuation of ordinances, resolutions,
rules and regulations.
§ 10.06. Temporary ordinances.
At the time of the first organizational meeting of the Board, following the
effective date of this Charter and not more than sixty (60) days from the
date of such meeting, the Board may enact such temporary ordinances as
may be necessary to ensure orderly transition to and conformity with the
provisions of this Charter. Such temporary ordinances shall be labelled as
such and may be enacted and take effect immediately upon enactment at
any regular or special meeting of the Board. Such temporary ordinances
need not be advertised in advance, but the full text shall be given public
notice upon adoption in accordance with § 9.02 of this Charter. Temporary
ordinances to implement transition shall stand repealed automatically as
of August 1, 1977, if not repealed earlier, replaced by the Administrative
Code46 or such other ordinances required by this Charter or enacted
pursuant to the provisions of this Charter.
§ 10.07. Transition Committee.
To establish an orderly procedure for transition from the old to the new
form of township government provided by this Charter and to ensure that
all necessary action is taken to make this Charter fully operational, the
Board shall, within fifteen (15) days after adoption of this Charter, appoint
a Transition Committee. This Committee shall be comprised of two (2)
members of the Board of Commissioners, two (2) members of the
A. All actions and proceedings of a legislative, executive or quasi-judicial
character, which are pending upon the effective date of this Charter,
shall be maintained, carried on or dealt with by the elected or
appointed township official, department head, administrative officer,
board, commission or authority appropriate under this Charter.
B. All township ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations which are in
force at the time of the effective date of this Charter and which are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall continue in force
unless amended or repealed.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government.
§ 10.04 RADNOR CODE § 10.07
C:48
Government Study Commission, one (1) of the administrative staff of the
township and at least four (4) registered electors as the Board of
Commissioners shall select. Such Committee shall draft the proposed
Administrative Code47 and such ordinances as are necessary to implement
fully this Charter.
§ 10.08. Enactment of Administrative Code and other ordinances.
No later than May 16, 1977, the Board shall meet with the Transition
Committee to review and prepare for public distribution a final draft of
the proposed Administrative Code and other ordinances necessary to
implement this Charter. Prior to July 1, 1977, the Board shall enact the
Administrative Code48 and such other ordinances. In the adoption of the
proposed Administrative Code and such other ordinances, the procedures
specified in Article III of this Charter for legal advertising of ordinances
shall not apply. However, the Board shall cause copies of the proposed
Administrative Code and such other ordinances to be made available free
of charge to any interested township resident upon request at least seven
(7) days in advance of the regular or special meeting or meetings at which
the proposed Administrative Code and such other ordinances will be given
further consideration. Public notice of the availability of the proposed
Administrative Code and such other ordinances, as well as the date, time
and place of the Board meeting at which they will be considered for
enactment, shall be given at least seven (7) days before such meeting.
At any such regular or special meeting, the Board shall enact the
Administrative Code and such ordinances as proposed by the Transition
Committee and accepted by the Board.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration of Government.
§ 10.07 CHARTER § 10.08
C:49
The Code
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10.08 RADNOR CODE § 10.08
C:50
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
The codification of a complete body of legislation for the Township of
Radnor, County of Delaware, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised,
codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp., and consisting of the Charter and Chapters 1 through 280,
is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of
the Township of Radnor, which shall be known and is hereby designated as
the "Code of the Township of Radnor," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
the prior Code adopted February 25, 1974, as Ord. No. 1564, as amended,
and those of other ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior
to the enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of
such ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Commissioners of the Township of Radnor, and it is the intention of
said Board of Commissioners that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only
such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Radnor and in force on the date of the adoption
of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the
effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to February 24, 1992.
§ 1-1 CHARTER § 1-4
C:51
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of fees,
special taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 RADNOR CODE § 1-4
C:52
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature adopted
subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of
this ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon
being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances
and resolutions shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed
supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any legislation pertaining to vehicles and traffic.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Commissioners that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a
substantive nature are hereby made to the prior Code and various
ordinances and resolutions included in the Code. These changes are
made to bring provisions into conformity with the desired policies of the
Board of Commissioners, and it is the intent of the Board of
Commissioners that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the legislation so changed have been previously formally amended to
read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in
effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in § 1-15.49
49.Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-6B, the following sections or chapters were added or
amended: §§ 5-36B, 5-36D(5)(b), 25-1, 98-6A, 104-8, Ch. 109, §§ 115-17, 120-25, 134-4,
140-19A, 140-26, 145-14, 150-9, 156-16, 170-8B, 170-11B, 170-13, 170-23, 170-24,
170-25A, 170-26A, 170-30B(2), 170-34B, 170-41, 175-17C, 180-1, 180-5, 180-8, 186-2,
186-6B, 190-2A(3), 190-4, 200-7, 205-5, 209-2C, 209-3F, 209-5A, 209-6, 214-4C, 214-5,
230-12, 235-7, 235-17, 240-7, 240-18, 240-26, 250-3B, 250-4B, 250-6, 250-14, 250-34A,
255-6, 255-25C, 260-17, 260-21, 260-38, 260-59, 260-68, 260-86, 260-98, 267-12, 275-5,
280-4B, 280-7, 280-42H, 280-47H, 280-69B, 280-77, 280-105B, C and F, 280-108, 280-109,
280-110A, 280-111A, 280-112I and 280-114E. A complete description of each change is
included in Ord. No. 92-13, which is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 1-4 CHARTER § 1-7
C:53
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Commissioners to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-7 RADNOR CODE § 1-11
C:54
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Commissioners subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Commissioners shall
adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are
printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements
shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Board of Commissioners that this ordinance and the Code
would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been
included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after August 19, 1992.
§ 1-11 CHARTER § 1-15
C:55
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
CHARTER REFERENCES
Generally — See Charter.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessments — See Ch. 9.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 25.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 39.
Financial policies — See Ch. 44.
Intergovernmental cooperation — See Ch. 50.
Municipal Authority — See Ch. 56.
Pensions and annuities — See Ch. 62.
Police Department — See Ch. 67.
Records retention — See Ch. 72.
Wards — See Ch. 90.
§ 1-15 RADNOR CODE § 1-15
C:56
ARTICLE I
Findings and Definitions
§ 5-1. Legislative findings.
There is established by this chapter and any amendments thereto a Code
for the government of the Township of Radnor, a political subdivision of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, pursuant to its Charter,50 drawn and
approved as provided by Act 62 of 1972, which Code shall be known and
referred to as the "Administrative Code" and which shall be the rules and
regulations prescribing duties of officials and employees, the system of
office and the management of the offices, department and institutions of the
Township of Radnor.
§ 5-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Terms defined in the Charter shall have the same meanings when used
in this chapter unless the chapter specifically provides otherwise. The
following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
and significance herein indicated:
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Radnor.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — The acquisition of or improvement to real
property or the acquisition of equipment having an expected life of at
least five years.
CHARTER — The Home Rule Charter of the Township of Radnor,
Delaware County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.51
CODE — The Administrative Code of the Township of Radnor as enacted
by this chapter and any and all amendments thereto, unless some other
code is indicated.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
MANAGER — The Township Manager of the Township of Radnor.
SECRETARY — The Township Secretary of the Township of Radnor.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor.
B. General terminology. The singular shall include the plural and the
plural the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is
permissive; words used in the masculine gender shall include the
feminine; and any word not specifically defined shall be construed
according to its common usage.
50.Editor's Note: The Charter is included immediately preceding Ch. 1 of this volume.
51.Editor's Note: The Charter is included immediately preceding Ch. 1 of this volume.
§ 5-1 CHARTER § 5-2
C:57

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 5-3. Oath of office.
Every elected and appointed official of the Township and every police officer
of the Township shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and
subscribe to an oath or affirm to perform the duties of his office with fidelity
and to uphold the laws of the commonwealth and the Township. A signed
copy of such oath or affirmation shall be filed with the Township Secretary
within 10 days of taking office.
§ 5-4. Liability insurance.
The Township shall carry liability insurance to cover personal liabilities and
the cost of litigation against elected and appointed officials and employees
of the Township, individually and collectively, which arise directly from the
lawful discharge of their official duties and responsibilities on behalf of the
Township.52
§ 5-5. Association membership; meeting attendance; expenses.
The Board may authorize Township membership in one or more municipal
associations or organizations. The Board may authorize attendance by an
elected or appointed Township official or Township employee at meetings,
seminars or workshops of such associations or organizations and at other
special meetings, courses and workshops which will be of direct benefit to
the Township. Reasonable expenses incurred by the individual elected and
appointed officials and employees for these purposes shall be reimbursed
by the Township as authorized by the Board.
§ 5-6. Conduct of meetings.
Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the conduct of all meetings of the
Board of Commissioners, Township boards, commissions and authorities
unless otherwise specified by ordinance or law.
§ 5-7. Police Pension Fund.
The Radnor Township Police Pension Fund shall be governed by the
provisions of Public Law 1804, Act. No. 600, May 29, 1956, of the
commonwealth, as amended.53
§ 5-8. Notification of zoning changes. [Amended 6-11-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-29]
52.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Defense and Indemnification.
53.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 767 et seq. and Ch. 62, Pensions and Annuities, Art. II.
§ 5-3 CHARTER § 5-8
C:59
§ 5-9. Planning Commission referral. [Amended 6-11-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-29]
A. The Board of Commissioners shall, during a public meeting, fix the time
and place of a public hearing on a proposed zoning amendment and
cause notice thereof to be given as follows:
(1) By publishing a legal notice thereof once a week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the Township as
provided for in § 9.02 of the Home Rule Charter. Such notice shall
state the date, place, time and particular nature to be considered at
the public hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30
days and the second publication shall not be less than seven days
from the date of the hearing.
(2) By mailing a notice thereof to contiguous municipalities, the
Township School District and residents or associations of residents
within the Township who shall have registered their names and
addresses for this purpose with the Department of Community
Development.
(3) By mailing a notice to all properties within any zoning district
where the proposed amendment is for the purpose of revising land
use controls and development regulations within such district.
Where the proposed amendment involves a zoning map change,
notice shall be mailed to every property to be affected and to every
property in the Township which is located on the same street and is
within 1,000 feet of the land in question and to every property not
on the same street within 500 feet of said land. Notices shall also be
posted along the perimeter of tract where a Zoning Map change is
proposed at least one week prior to the hearing.
B. Failure to mail the notices as required by Subsections A(2) and (3) shall
not invalidate the public hearing by the Board of Commissioners nor
any enacted zoning amendment.
A. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission, the Board of Commissioners shall refer each proposed
amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on the proposed amendment to provide the Planning
Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations on the
proposed amendment. The Commission shall consider whether or not
the proposed change or amendment would be, in their view, consistent
with the purposes and objectives set forth in § 280-1 of Chapter 280,
Zoning, and desirable in furtherance of the plan therein referred to for
future land development.
B. Notification and a copy of the proposed change or amendment shall also
be submitted by the Board of Commissioners to the Delaware County
Planning Commission for review and recommendations at least 30 days
prior to the hearing.
§ 5-8 RADNOR CODE § 5-10
C:60
§ 5-10. Standards of ethics.54
A. Declaration of policy. The proper operation of Township government
requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial
and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy
be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that
public office and employment not be used for personal gain; and that
the public have confidence in the integrity of its government and its
employees. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a
minimum standard of ethics for all officials and employees, elected or
appointed. The purpose of this section is to establish ethical standards
of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those
acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the
Township and by directing full disclosure by such officials and
employees of all private financial, political, personal or other interests
in matters affecting the Township.
B. Responsibilities of public office. Public officials and employees are
agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public.
They are bound to uphold the Constitutions of the United States and
this commonwealth, the Charter and other applicable laws and to carry
out impartially all laws applicable to local government of the nation,
commonwealth and Township and thus to foster respect for all
government. They are bound to observe in their official acts the highest
standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their
offices, regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the
public interest must be their primary concern.
C. Dedicated service.
(1) Officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and
performance established as the standard for their positions by the
appropriate authority.
(2) Officials and employees shall under no circumstances exceed their
authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and they shall
work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees
where so directed by the appropriate Township authority, unless
prohibited from so doing by law or by officially recognized
confidentiality of their work.
D. Fair and equal treatment.
(1) Interest in employment. No official or employee of the Township
shall directly or indirectly attempt to obtain employment by the
Township for any person on any grounds other than merit.
(2) Use of public property. No official or employee shall request or
permit the use of Township-owned vehicles, equipment, materials
54.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 39, Ethics, Code of.
§ 5-10 CHARTER § 5-10
C:61
§ 5-11. Surcharges.
or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such
services are available to the public generally.
(3) Obligations to citizens. No official or employee shall grant any
special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen
beyond that which is available to every other citizen.
E. Conflict of interest and prohibitions. No elected or appointed official or
employee shall engage in any activity which is in violation §§ 9.04 and
9.05 of the Charter. No official or employee of the Township shall render
advice to or consult with any person in connection with any pending
proceeding before any board, commission or judicial body where the
Township is involved directly, except that a Commissioner or other
official may appear before Township boards, commissions and
authorities on behalf of constituents in the course of his duties as a
representative of the electorate, provided that the official or employee
shall not accept compensation for such appearance or representation.
F. Applicability of standards of ethics. When a Commissioner or other
official or employee has doubts as to the applicability of the Charter or
this chapter to a particular situation, he may apply to the Ethics Board
for an advisory opinion. The Commissioner or other official or employee
shall have the opportunity to present his interpretation of the facts at
issue and of the applicable provision(s) of the chapter before such
advisory decision is made.
A. Authority. The Treasurer shall enter surcharges against elected or
appointed Township officials or Township employees in accordance with
the provisions of § 4.05D of the Charter.
B. Notice. The Treasurer shall provide the surcharged official or employee
with written notice which specifies the amount of the surcharge and the
facts upon which the surcharge was entered. Copies of this notice shall
be provided to the Manager and to each member of the Board.
C. Judgment. The Treasurer shall cause the surcharge to be recorded in
the office of the Prothonotary of the County of Delaware as a judgment
against the person surcharged in favor of the Township.
D. Appeal. After entry of judgment and before execution, the surcharged
official or employee may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas by filing
with the Prothonotary a petition to open judgment. From that point
forward, the prosecution of the appeal will be governed by the
Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure and local court rules.
E. Execution. The judgment, once entered with the Prothonotary, may be
enforced through any appropriate action brought in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
§ 5-10 RADNOR CODE § 5-11
C:62
F. Standing. Any registered elector or taxpayer of the Township may
enforce the judgment, for the benefit of the Township, upon the filing of
a bond to indemnify the Township from all costs which may accrue in
the prosecution of the action.
§ 5-11 CHARTER § 5-11
C:63

ARTICLE III
Board of Commissioners
§ 5-12. General provisions.
The number of Board members, their qualifications, terms, election,
removal, compensation and the filling of Board vacancies shall be as
provided in §§ 2.01 through 2.06 of the Charter. The powers and duties of
the Board shall be as provided by the Charter or by ordinances adopted
pursuant thereto. The annual compensation of each Board member shall be
paid in equal quarterly installments.
§ 5-13. Organizational meeting.
A. The officers of the Board and the day, time and place of the
organizational meeting of the Board shall be as provided in §§ 2.07 and
2.08 of the Charter. The order of business at the organizational meeting
shall be:
(1) Oath of office of newly elected Board members.
(2) Selection of the Chairman pro tem.
(3) Election of the President and Vice President of the Board.
(4) Appointment of the Township Solicitor.
(5) Appointment of the Township Secretary and designation of an
Assistant Secretary.
(6) Oath of office of the Township Solicitor and Township Secretary.
(7) Establishment of standing and ad hoc advisory committees of the
Board.
(8) Appointments of Chairmen and members of standing committees of
the Board.
(9) Appointments of Chairmen and members of ad hoc advisory
committees to the Board.
(10) Appointments of members of Township boards, commissions and
authorities.
(11) Appointments to other boards and authorities.
(12) Establishment of the location, time and twelve-month calendar for
regular meetings of the Board.
(13) Adjournment.
B. Either the immediate past President or past Vice President of the
Board, if continuing in office and present, shall act as Chairman pro tem
of this meeting for the purpose of electing the President and Vice
§ 5-12 CHARTER § 5-13
C:65
§ 5-14. Powers and duties of President of Board.
In addition to those duties provided for in § 2.08 of the Charter and
elsewhere in the Charter, the President of the Board and, in his absence,
the Vice President shall have the authority to administer the oath of office
to newly appointed Township officials and police officers. In the case of
investigations or hearings conducted by the Board, the President may
administer oaths to witnesses and rule on the admissibility of evidence and
the qualifications of expert witnesses.
§ 5-15. Committees.
Only Township Commissioners shall be eligible to serve as members of the
standing committees of the Board. All standing committees of the Board,
except any committee dealing with finances and taxation, shall be composed
of a Chairman and two members, all of whom shall be appointed by the
President. All members of the Board shall be members of any committee
on finances and taxation, and the President shall serve as Chairman of
any such committee. The President shall be a member ex officio of all
standing committees. Standing committees of the Board may make policy
recommendations to the Board regarding departments or other matters
within their purview. They may provide Board liaison with appropriate
boards, commissions and authorities of the Township. When authorized
by resolution of the Board, committees may act as the hearing body for
proposals, requests, complaints and appeals of individual citizens or groups
of citizens. Such hearings shall be open to the public with notices posted on
the bulletin board. In so doing, the committee shall develop facts and make
recommendations to the Board for formal action. The Board may establish,
by resolution, such advisory committees as it may require.
§ 5-16. Meetings.
President of the Board. If neither continues in office or neither is
present, the Commissioners present shall elect a Chairman pro tem
according to Robert's Rules of Order.
A. The Manager, in cooperation with the Secretary, shall prepare agendas
for meetings of the Board subject to the approval and direction of the
President of the Board. The Secretary shall provide public notice of
special meetings and shall make available to the public copies of the
agendas and appropriate supporting documents for all meetings. The
order of business for each regular meeting shall be as follows:
(1) Pledge of allegiance.
(2) Announcement of executive sessions, if any.
(3) Approval of minutes of the previous meeting.
(4) Reports of the Manager and department heads.
(5) Reports of advisory groups, if any.
§ 5-13 RADNOR CODE § 5-16
C:66
§ 5-17. Public participation.
At regular or special meetings of the Board, individual citizens shall have
the right to speak on agenda items under discussion prior to formal action
by the Board and as provided in § 2.09 of the Charter. To ensure inclusion
in the agenda and the opportunity to speak on subjects not scheduled for
discussion by the Board, individual citizens may so inform the Secretary
prior to 12:00 noon of the working day which precedes by two working days
the day of the regular Board meeting. The President may limit the time each
person shall speak, giving equal time to all. When a group of citizens wishes
to address the Board on the same subject matter, the President may request
that a spokesman be chosen by the group to address the Board and to limit
the number of persons addressing the Board on the same subject matter
in order to avoid unnecessary repetition. The President may exclude from
participation any person for disorderly conduct or disruption of the meeting.
(6) Reports of standing committees of the Board.
(7) Old business.
(8) New business.
(9) Public participation.
(10) Adjournment.
B. At the discretion of the President, the order of business may be
modified.
§ 5-16 CHARTER § 5-17
C:67

ARTICLE IV
Officers
§ 5-18. Treasurer.
A. General. The term of office, manner of election, qualifications and
removal of the Treasurer and the procedures for filling vacancies in the
office of Treasurer shall be as provided in §§ 4.01 through 4.04 of the
Charter.
B. Powers and duties. The Treasurer shall have those powers and duties
prescribed by law, the Charter and ordinance, including the power and
duty to:
(1) Receive, deposit and record all moneys due the Township or
collectible by the Township, as provided in § 4.05 of the Charter
and Article V of this chapter.
(2) Disburse and record disbursements of Township money as provided
in § 4.05 of the Charter and in Article V of this chapter.
(3) Collect the Township property tax as provided by ordinance.
(4) Enter and collect surcharges against elected or appointed
Township officials or employees as provided in § 4.05 of the Charter
and in § 5-11 of this chapter.
C. Compensation and expenses. For the performance of his/her duties for
the Township, the Treasurer shall be paid $26,000 per annum, which
shall be paid to him/her in the form of annual compensation in 12 equal
monthly payments. In addition, the Township shall pay such actual
printing and postage expenses as shall be incurred by the Treasurer in
the performance of his/her duties as Treasurer. The Township shall also
provide adequate office space and equipment for the performance of
these duties by the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall receive no
compensation or commission on money borrowed by the Township
either as a temporary loan or loans in anticipation of taxes levied and to
be collected during the then current fiscal year or on bonds issued. The
Treasurer shall receive no other compensation of any kind from the
Township for the collection or receipt of Township moneys or for the
performance of duties of his/her office as Treasurer, provided that
nothing herein shall in any way affect his/her right to commissions or
compensation for the collection of state, county and school district
taxes. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to prohibit the
Treasurer from collecting fees charged for tax certifications of the
payment of Township real estate taxes as permitted by Ordinance No.
93-22, as enacted by the Board of Commissioners on December 7,
1993.55 [Amended 2-10-1981 by Ord. No. 81-04; 2-14-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-04; 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 96-32]
55.Editor's Note: See now Ch. 162, Fees.
§ 5-18 CHARTER § 5-19
C:69
§ 5-19. Manager.
A. General. The qualifications, compensation and the procedure for
appointment and removal of the Manager shall be as provided in
§§ 5.01, 5.02 and 5.04 of the Charter.
B. Powers and duties. The Manager shall be the chief administrative
officer of the Township and shall have those powers and duties
prescribed by law, the Charter and ordinance, including the power and
duty to:
(1) Administer and enforce those personnel policies and regulations
required by the Charter, by law, by ordinance and by resolution of
the Board, except in those specific instances where other
provisions for administration and enforcement have been specified
by ordinance or contract.
(2) Develop and maintain employment records reflecting all aspects of
the service of Township employees.
(3) Authorize a department head or other employees responsible to the
Manager to appoint, suspend and remove subordinates serving
under that department head or official.
(4) Designate an employee to temporarily perform the duties of any
office or position which is vacant until the office or position is filled
in accordance with the Charter and this chapter.
(5) Prescribe such administrative rules, practices and procedures as
shall be deemed necessary or expedient for the conduct and
operation of administrative departments and revoke, suspend or
amend any rules, practices or procedures by whomever prescribed,
unless contained in an ordinance, a contract or resolution adopted
by the Board, and make such rules, practices and procedures
available to affected employees and for public inspection.
(6) Investigate or inquire into the operations of any department.
(7) Overrule or set aside any action taken by a department head.
(8) Assign any employee to any department requiring the services of
that employee; provided, however, that such assignment is
appropriate to and consistent with the personnel classification of
the employee and applicable personnel rules and regulations.
(9) Refer, when required, Board actions to other advisory or governing
bodies for consideration or action and keep the Board informed.
(10) Report to the Board at such time as it may require on the coverage,
expiration date and premium of each surety bond and contract of
insurance, the nature and terms of outstanding leases and their
expiration dates.
§ 5-19 RADNOR CODE § 5-19
C:70
§ 5-20. Secretary.
(11) Appoint, suspend or remove an Assistant Manager subject to
approval by the Board, as provided in § 5.03 of the Home Rule
Charter. [Added 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 90-09]
A. General. The qualifications, compensation and the appointment of the
Secretary shall be as provided in §§ 2.07 and 6.08 of the Charter. The
Manager shall be responsible for overseeing such duties of the
Secretary as the Board may from time to time specify.
B. Duties. The Secretary shall have those duties prescribed by law, the
Charter and ordinance, including the power and duty to:
(1) Serve s Secretary of the Board and of standing Committees of the
Board, to attend all regular and special meetings of the Board and
of such Board committees as the Board may require and to take,
retain and have custody of all Board and committee minutes.
(2) Provide, subject to prior review by the Township Solicitor, for the
distribution, posting and advertising of all proposed and adopted
ordinances, as provided in §§ 3.03 through 3.05 of the Charter.
(3) Attest to all ordinances enacted by the Board and have custody and
maintain official copies of all Township ordinances, as provided in
§§ 3.07 and 3.08 of the Charter.
(4) Draft, subject to review by the Township Solicitor, traffic
ordinances and general resolutions as requested by the Manager
for Board consideration.
(5) Serve as the Secretary to such Township boards and commissions
as the Board shall designate and have custody of and maintain
official copies of the minutes of all Township boards, commissions
and authorities.
(6) Index, codify and maintain the official file of all Board resolutions
having to do with the operation of Township government and make
copies of the codified resolutions available for the use of Township
officials and interested citizens. Also maintain the codification of
ordinances known as the "Code of the Township of Radnor."
(7) Serve as the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds
furnished by or on account of any official or employee of the
Township, except for those required by law to be deposited with
some other person; of all insurance policies upon or with respect to
any risk insured for the benefit of the Township or to protect it
against any claim, demand or liability whatsoever; and of all formal
contract for work, labor, services, supplies, equipment and
materials to which the Township may be a party.
§ 5-19 CHARTER § 5-20
C:71
§ 5-21. Solicitor.
(8) Serve as the depository and custodian of all performance bonds
other than cash running to the Township as obligee or of any other
form of security given by any contractor, subdivision developer or
other person on account of work done or to be done in and for the
Township.
(9) Have custody of all leases and deeds of property owned by the
Township.
(10) Cause the Corporate Seal of the Township to be affixed to
instruments and writings when authorized by ordinance or
resolution of the Board or when necessary to exemplify any
document on record or to certify any act or paper, which from the
records shall appear to have been a public act of the Township or a
public document.
(11) File workers compensation claims and maintain workmen's
compensation records under the supervision of the Finance
Director.
(12) Maintain the records of all claims against the Township and on
behalf of the Township under the supervision of the Finance
Director.
(13) Provide, in January of each year, public notice of the projected
calendar of regular meetings of the Board and of other Township
boards, commissions and authorities, as provided in § 6.08 of the
Charter.
(14) Provide, subject to prior review by the Township Solicitor, public
notice of special meetings of the Board and special meetings of
Township boards, commissions and authorities or changes in the
dates, times and places of regular meetings on the calendar.
(15) Provide, subject to approval by the Township Solicitor, other public
notices required by law, the Charter, ordinance or as may be
ordered from time to time by the Board.
(16) Assemble and, with Board approval, provide for the dissemination
and distribution of the Annual Report, as provided in § 2.11 of the
Charter.
(17) Receive, refer and respond to inquiries from residents and the
public pertaining to public records and provide access thereto and
copies of such records.
A. General. The qualifications, compensation and the appointment of the
Township Solicitor shall be as provided in § 6.06 of the Charter.
B. Duties. The Township Solicitor shall have those duties prescribed by
law, the Charter and ordinance, including the duty to:
§ 5-20 RADNOR CODE § 5-21
C:72
(1) Attend meetings of the Board as required and serve as
parliamentarian of such meetings and attend meetings of such
other Township boards, commissions and authorities as the Board
may request from time to time.
(2) Advise and assist the Board, members of the Board and the
Manager and Secretary in drafting proposed ordinances.
(3) Advise and assist the Secretary in preparing public notices of
regular and special meetings of the Board and of other Township
boards, commissions and authorities and of other Township
business requiring public notice and approve such notices prior to
legal advertising and posting.
(4) Approve for legality all contracts, agreements or other legal
documents prior to execution by authorized Township officials.
(5) Furnish the Board, committees of the Board and the Manager,
when requested, his opinion upon any question of law which may
be submitted to him by any of them in their official capacities.
(6) File all liens as required.
(7) Perform such other functions as required in § 6.06 of the Charter.
§ 5-21 CHARTER § 5-21
C:73

ARTICLE V
Departmental Organization
§ 5-22. General provisions.
A. Administrative departments of the Township. The administrative
departments of the Township shall be under the direction of the
Manager and shall be comprised of the following departments:
(1) Community Development Department.
(2) Engineering and Sewer Department.
(3) Finance Department.
(4) Police Department.
(5) Public Works Department.
(6) Recreation Department.
(7) Information Technology Department. [Added 11-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-37]
B. Department heads; general provisions.
(1) Department heads shall be appointed, suspended or removed by
the Manager subject to approval by the Board, as provided in § 5.03
of the Charter. The Manager shall supervise the work of all
department heads. Department heads shall be chosen solely on the
basis of executive, administrative and technical qualifications
which are pertinent to the function, duties and operations of their
respective departments and as are prescribed by the Charter and
by law.
(2) All department heads, except those for the Police Department and
the Engineering Department, shall carry the title of Director. The
Police Chief or the Superintendent of Police shall be the head of the
Police Department, and the Township Engineer shall be the head of
the Engineering and Sewer Department. The Superintendent of
Police shall be a non-civil-service position appointed pursuant to
§ 5.03 of the Home Rule Charter. [Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-38]
(3) All department heads shall have the duty and responsibility to
direct and carry out the assigned functions and operations of their
respective departments in accordance with provisions of law, the
Charter, all applicable ordinances, this chapter and administrative
regulations and within budget allocations. Subject to prior approval
by the Manager and unless otherwise provided by ordinances,
department heads shall appoint, suspend or remove subordinate
employees in their respective departments. Department heads
shall assign duties and responsibilities to subordinate employees in
§ 5-22 CHARTER § 5-22
C:75
§ 5-23. Community Development Department.
their respective departments and modify these duties and
responsibilities as necessary. Department heads shall keep the
Manager informed with regard to the operations of their respective
departments and shall provide the Manager, the Board and
committees of the Board with such information, reports and
recommendations as may be required and requested.
(4) All department heads shall attend meetings of such boards,
commissions and committees as required or as requested.
A. Function. The Community Development Department shall be
responsible for the protection of persons and property in the Township
through administration and enforcement of regulatory ordinances of
the Township.
B. Duties and responsibilities. Department duties and responsibilities shall
be as follows:
(1) To perform the work of the Health Officer, Plumbing Inspector,
Building Inspector and Fire Marshal in order to ensure proper
administration and enforcement of Chapter 98, Air Pollution;
Chapter 125, Building Construction; Chapter 156, Electrical
Standards; Chapter 166, Fire Prevention; and Chapter 218,
Plumbing, of the Township and to ensure compliance with
applicable provisions of the Charter and of law.
(2) To carry out the functions of the Township Building Official, Fire
Marshal, Housing Officer and Zoning Officer in order to ensure
proper administration and enforcement of Chapter 125, Building
Construction; Chapter 156, Electrical Standards; Chapter 166, Fire
Prevention; Chapter 222, Property Maintenance; and Chapter 280,
Zoning, and to ensure compliance with orders of the Zoning
Hearing Board and applicable provisions of the Charter and of law.
(3) To review all construction plans and subdivision plans and, in
collaboration with the Township Engineer, conduct inspections of
construction and subdivisions to ensure compliance with Township
codes. The Director shall serve with the Township Engineer, the
Director of Public Works, and the Superintendent of Police as a
member of the Subdivision Advisory Committee. [Amended
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-15]
(4) To issue permits and licenses as required by ordinance, regulation
or law and maintain records of the same.
(5) To maintain all real property registration and inspection records.
(6) To evaluate the soundness of Chapter 98, Air Pollution; Chapter
125, Building Construction; Chapter 156, Electrical Standards;
Chapter 166, Fire Prevention; Chapter 218, Plumbing; Chapter
§ 5-22 RADNOR CODE § 5-23
C:76
§ 5-24. Engineering Department. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-15]
222, Property Maintenance; and Chapter 280, Zoning, and make
recommendations for changes in these chapters.
(7) To prepare and file such reports and maintain such records as may
be required by law.
(8) To provide the Board, the Board of Health and the Zoning Hearing
Board and Planning Commission with such reports as may be
required or requested and, when appropriate, refer questions,
complaints and appeals to these bodies.
A. Function. The Engineering Department shall be responsible for
furnishing professional engineering advice and consultation, reviewing
all engineering design work and construction plans and for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the Township sanitary
sewer collection system.
B. Duties and responsibilities. Department duties and responsibilities shall
be as follows:
(1) To operate the sanitary sewer collection system of the Township.
(2) To prepare and recommend assessments for the extension of the
Township sanitary sewer system.
(3) To provide engineering design work and construction plans for
storm sewer and sanitary sewer system maintenance and
construction.
(4) To administer the processing and review of subdivision
applications. The Township Engineer shall serve with the Director
of the Community Development Department, the Director of the
Public Works Department, and the Superintendent of Police on the
Subdivision Advisory Committee, the Township Engineer to act as
Chair.
(5) To provide engineering consultation and advice to the Public Works
Department and to other departments as required in the areas of
street construction, drainage, storm sewers and floodplain
maintenance.
(6) To review and approve all plans and specifications for Township
construction projects and to make recommendations for the
acceptance of such bids.
(7) To negotiate rights-of-way, easements and other related land
acquisitions required for construction projects.
(8) To maintain and recommend changes in the Comprehensive Sewer
Plan.
§ 5-23 CHARTER § 5-24
C:77
§ 5-25. Finance Department.
(9) To represent the Township in its relations with other governmental
jurisdictions, public utilities, contractors, consulting engineers and
the general public with regard to projects in which the Township
has an interest, at the request of the Board or the Manager.
(10) To maintain, in conjunction with the Community Development
Department, records of plot plans in the Township.
A. Function. The Finance Department shall be responsible for the
collection, expenditure, accounting, investment and management of
Township funds and assets, except to the extent that such activities are
expressly charged by law, the Charter, ordinance or this chapter to any
other department or official of the Township government.
B. Duties and responsibilities. Department duties and responsibilities shall
be as follows:
(1) To collect the Township local services tax, business privilege tax,
mercantile tax, amusement tax, business device tax, sewer rents,
special assessments and other user fees and charges according to
the procedures specified by ordinance and to maintain records of
these collections. [Amended 10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-35]
(2) To maintain a uniform accounting system in accordance with
generally accepted principles of accounting and in accordance with
the requirements of law, the Charter and ordinance.
(3) To invest and manage Township funds.
(4) To administer the uniform Township purchasing procedures as
provided in Article V of this chapter.
(5) To conduct internal reviews, in accordance with generally accepted
principles of auditing, of the fiscal transactions of Township
departments and the Treasurer's office, pursuant to § 4.05A of the
Charter.
(6) To prepare and submit to the Board and Manager financial reports
as required by the Charter and by ordinance and as otherwise
requested.
(7) To prepare and maintain an inventory of capital assets of the
Township.56
(8) To assist the Manager and department heads in the preparation of
the proposed Township budget and in the presentation of the
proposed budget to the Board.
56.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(7), regarding the Township data processing system,
was repealed and Subsection B(8) through B(12) was renumbered as Subsection B(7)
through B(11), respectively, 11-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-87.
§ 5-24 RADNOR CODE § 5-25
C:78
§ 5-25.1. Information Technology Department. [Added 11-26-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-37]
§ 5-26. Police Department.
(9) To supervise the encumbrance and expenditure of Township funds.
(10) To supervise the Township payroll and the maintenance of
Township payroll records.
(11) To maintain records of Township bonded indebtedness.
A. Function. The Information Technology Department shall be responsible
for overseeing the Township's computer, website, cable government
access channel, telecommunications, and other information systems
and technology-related operations.
B. Duties and responsibilities. Department duties and responsibilities shall
be as follows:
(1) To develop and maintain the Township's computerized hardware,
software, and telecommunications systems.
(2) To serve as administrator of Township computer networks.
(3) To develop and maintain the Township website and cable
government access channels.
(4) To maintain the integrity of data flowing through Township
information systems.
(5) To train Township employees and members of boards and
commissions in the operations and applications of computer
systems.
(6) To develop, in consultation with various stakeholders, a long-range
information technology plan for the Township organization and the
community as a whole.
(7) To provide an annual report to the Board of Commissioners on the
Department's accomplishments and on the evolving technological
needs and capabilities of the Township and its residents.
A. Function. The Police Department shall be responsible for maintaining
public order, enforcing laws and ordinances, taking lawful and
appropriate measures to prevent crime and for the protection of
persons and property against crime in the Township.
B. Duties and responsibilities. Department duties and responsibilities shall
be as follows:
(1) To prevent crimes against persons and property.
(2) To enforce all criminal laws and ordinances.
§ 5-25 CHARTER § 5-26
C:79
(3) To detect and apprehend offenders and suspected persons.
(4) To maintain records and files of crimes and criminals.
(5) To operate facilities for the safekeeping of prisoners.
(6) To promote public safety.
(7) To enforce laws pertaining to dogs and other animals.
(8) To develop and conduct community relations and education
programs pertaining to public safety.
(9) To operate and maintain the police radio communication systems
and to maintain records and logs related to radio and emergency
communications as are required by law.
(10) To recommend the replacement, addition or upgrading of
Department equipment.
(11) To regulate traffic flow and to enforce public parking regulations in
the Township.
(12) The Superintendent shall serve with the Township Engineer, the
Community Development Director, and the Director of Public
Works as a member of the Subdivision Advisory Committee.
[Added 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-15]
C. General powers of police officers. Police officers employed by the
Township shall be ex officio constables of the commonwealth and shall
have the power and prerogatives conferred on police officers by law.
Police shall have the authority to serve and execute all criminal
processes which may be issued for the violation of municipal
ordinances. No member of the Police Department shall charge or
accept any fee nor accept any form of compensation for the
performance of police duties except that paid by the Township.
D. Department organization.
(1) The Board shall fix the number of police officers and organization of
the police force.
(2) Employees of the Police Department who are not police officers
shall be under the direct or general supervision of the Police Chief,
but shall come under the personnel regulations for nonpolice
employees and shall not be eligible to join the Police Pension Fund
for Township police.
(3) The Board shall fix the number of special police who shall be under
the supervision of the Police Chief but shall not come within the
civil service regulations for regular police officer nor be eligible to
join the Police Pension Fund for Township police.
§ 5-26 RADNOR CODE § 5-26
C:80
§ 5-27. Public Works Department.
§ 5-28. Recreation Department.
(4) The Superintendent of Police may appoint a Deputy Superintendent
pursuant to § 5-22B(3) of this chapter. This will be a non-civilservice
position. [Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-38]
A. Function. The Public Works Department shall be responsible for the
construction, operation and maintenance of those physical structures,
facilities and equipment that are owned and maintained by the
Township to house governmental functions and to provide solid waste
disposal, drainage, transportation and similar operations and services.
B. Duties and responsibilities. Department duties and responsibilities shall
be as follows:
(1) To construct and maintain the streets, bridges, curbs and gutters of
the Township, including street cleaning, snow removal and ice
control, in accordance with applicable plans.
(2) To construct and maintain stormwater and flood-control structures,
facilities and appurtenances in accordance with applicable plans.
(3) To install and maintain traffic control devices and directional signs
and signals, street name signs and parking meters.
(4) To provide for the collection and disposal of solid wastes.
(5) To construct, maintain and provide for custodial services for all
Township buildings except those under the jurisdiction of the
Recreation Department.
(6) To repair and maintain all Township vehicles.
(7) The Director shall serve with the Township Engineer, the
Community Development Director, and the Superintendent of
Police as a member of the Subdivision Advisory Committee.
[Added 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-15]
(8) To review plans and specifications for Township equipment,
construction and repair projects and to recommend acceptance of
bids.
(9) To issue permits for street openings, utility construction and street
construction by developers and to enforce Township regulations
pertaining thereto as provided by ordinance.
(10) To plan, develop and administer, in cooperation with other
appropriate departments and governmental jurisdictions,
expansion and modification of facilities for which the Department is
responsible.
§ 5-26 CHARTER § 5-28
C:81
A. Function. The Recreation Department shall be responsible for the
development, operation and maintenance of the recreation facilities of
the Township and for the development, administration and supervision
of recreation programs for all age and interest groups in the Township.
B. Duties and responsibilities. Department duties and responsibilities shall
be as follows:
(1) To plan, design, develop and maintain Township parks and other
recreation facilities.
(2) To coordinate and plan with the Radnor Township School District
and other agencies and institutions for utilization of their facilities
for recreational purposes.
(3) To organize, plan and supervise or, in cooperation with volunteer
groups to organize, plan and supervise, recreational, cultural and
leisure-time programs for all residents of the Township.
(4) To recruit, train, advise and supervise the work of recreation
supervisors, instructors and volunteer helpers.
(5) To perform the duties of the Tree Warden and the planting and
removal of trees and plants on Township property and rights-ofway.
(6) To issue permits and enforce regulations pertaining to the use of
Township recreation facilities.
(7) To recommend joint recreation programs with other governmental
jurisdictions and agencies and to recommend sources of support
for special recreation programs.
§ 5-28 RADNOR CODE § 5-28
C:82
ARTICLE VI
Boards, Commissions and Authorities
§ 5-29. General provisions.
§ 5-30. Membership.
A. Township boards, commissions and authorities shall be as follows:
(1) Board of Health.
(2) Civil Service Commission.
(3) Ethics Board.
(4) Rental Housing Board of Appeals. [Amended 2-10-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-5]
(5) Park and Recreation Board.
(6) Planning Commission.
(7) Zoning Hearing Board.
(8) Design Review Board. [Added 2-25-1991 by Ord. No. 91-09]
B. Except where otherwise provided by law, the Charter or ordinance, all
boards and commissions shall be advisory in nature and perform no
administrative function.
A. Appointing authority. The appointment of members to all boards,
commissions and authorities shall be made by the Board at its annual
organization meeting, except to fill unexpired terms as hereinafter
provided.
B. Qualifications. All members of boards, commissions and authorities
shall be registered electors of the Township of Radnor.
C. Terms. Terms of members of boards, commissions and authorities shall
be staggered and shall not exceed six years. No member shall serve
consecutively more than two full terms and the balance of one
unexpired term. A term shall expire on December 31 of its last year.
D. Officers. A Chairman shall be elected for a one-year term by each board,
commission or authority from among its members at its first meeting of
the calendar year. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings and shall
report to the Board in the manner which it directs. Other appropriate
offices may be created and filled from the membership of the body.
E. Vacancies. Any vacancy on a board, commission or authority shall be
filled by the Board for the remainder of the unexpired term. Such
members shall be appointed within 90 days of the date the vacancy
occurs. Public notice of the vacancy shall be given.
§ 5-29 CHARTER § 5-30
C:83
§ 5-31. Compensation; expenses.
§ 5-32. Meetings.
§ 5-33. Rules and regulations.
Each board, commission and authority may establish rules and regulations
deemed necessary for the conduct of its business. Such rules and
regulations and changes thereto shall be approved by the Board.
§ 5-34. Reports.
All boards, commissions and authorities shall make an annual report and
such other reports as from time to time may be requested by the Board.
§ 5-35. Board of Health.
F. Removals. Removals shall be for cause in accordance with the Charter.
A. Except as provided by law or ordinance, members of boards,
commissions and authorities shall serve without compensation. The
compensation of any staff member paid from Township funds shall be
established by the Board.
B. Members may be reimbursed for any reasonable expenses incurred in
the performance of their duties.
A. Except as otherwise provided by law or this chapter, boards,
commissions and authorities shall conduct meetings at such time and
place as they may designate. The Chairman of each board, commission
and authority shall provide the Township Secretary with a regular
meeting schedule prior to December 15 for the ensuing year for
publication and shall notify the Secretary of all special meetings for
publication.
B. Each board, commission and authority shall keep minutes of its meeting
and shall submit them to the Township Secretary unless otherwise
provided.
C. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members.
A. Membership. The membership on the Board of Health shall consist of
nine electors, five of whom shall be licensed doctors, registered nurses
or persons trained and experienced in public health matters.
[Amended 11-26-1984 by Ord. No. 84-36; 1-11-1988 by Ord. No.
88-06]
B. Term of office. The term of office shall be four years. [Amended
1-11-1988 by Ord. No. 88-06]
C. Duties. The Board of Health shall:
§ 5-30 RADNOR CODE § 5-35
C:84
§ 5-36. Civil Service Commission.
(1) Advise the Board and the Community Development Department on
matters of public health policy and administration necessary to
protect the health of the citizens of the Township.
(2) Advise the Board regarding federal and state laws and regulations
on public health.
(3) Recommend to the Board such new ordinances, rules and
regulations or changes to existing ordinances and regulations
necessary to protect the health of the citizens of the Township.
(4) Conduct hearings and advise the Board on appeals from the Health
Officer and Plumbing Inspector in accordance with rules and
regulations established by the Board.
A. Membership. The membership of the Civil Service Commission shall
consist of three registered electors. No member shall at the same time
hold an elected or appointed office under the United States
Government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any political
subdivision of the commonwealth.
B. Term of office. The term of office of Civil Service Commission members
shall be six years. [Amended 5-28-1985 by Ord. No. 85-14;
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
C. Meetings.
(1) The Civil Service Commission shall meet and organize on the
second Monday of each year. Each member shall be notified, in
writing, of each and every meeting. Meetings shall be called by the
Chairman.
(2) No action of the Civil Service Commission shall be valid unless it
shall have the concurrence of at least two members.
D. Powers and duties. The Civil Service Commission shall:
(1) Administer the civil service provisions of this chapter for police
officers.
(2) Enforce rules and regulations approved by the Board for
administering civil service provisions of this chapter. The Civil
Service Commission shall be governed by such rules and
regulations.
(3) Certify qualified applicants for positions and promotions within the
Police Department.
(4) Conduct investigations concerning all matters touching the
administration and enforcement of the civil service provisions of
this chapter and rules and regulations adopted thereunder. The
§ 5-35 CHARTER § 5-36
C:85
§ 5-37. Ethics Board.
Chairman of the Civil Service Commission shall have the power to
administer oaths.
(5) Issue subpoenas over the signature of the Chairman to require the
attendance of witnesses and the production of records and papers
pertaining to any investigation or inquiry.
(a) All officers in public service and employees shall attend when
required to do so by the Commission.
(b) If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena
issued by the Commission, he shall, after hearing and upon
conviction by the District Justice of his summary offense, be
sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $600 and, in default of
the payment of such fine and costs, shall be imprisoned not to
exceed 90 days. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
(c) If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena
issued by the Commission, the Commission may apply by
petition to the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County for
its subpoenas requiring the attendance of such persons before
the Commission or the Court, there to testify and to produce
any records and papers necessary, and in default thereof shall
be held in contempt of court.
(6) Hold hearings and hear appeals.
(7) Perform such other duties as are consistent with the Charter, this
chapter and general law.
E. Minutes and records. The Civil Service Commission shall keep minutes
of its meetings and records of examinations and other official actions.
All certifications of applicants for appointment received by the Civil
Service Commission shall be kept and preserved for five years. All
minutes shall be open to public inspection.
A. Membership. The membership of the Ethics Board shall consist of five
registered electors. [Amended 3-26-1984 by Ord. No. 84-06]
B. Term of office. Term of office shall be four years. [Amended 3-26-1984
by Ord. No. 84-06]
C. Duties. The Ethics Board shall:
(1) Hear and investigate written complaints and transmit the findings
and all supporting documentation, evidence and testimony to the
Board.
(2) Render interpretations with respect to application of the standards
of ethics.
§ 5-36 RADNOR CODE § 5-37
C:86
§ 5-38. Citizens Communications Council (the "Council").57 [Added
1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
(3) Cause such findings to be formally filed with the Board and made a
part of the public record.
(4) Recommend with respect to amendments to the standards of
ethics.
(5) Render confidential advisory opinions.
A. Membership. The membership of the Council shall consist of nine
registered electors, one of whom shall be the supervisor of the Radnor
Township educational access channel, or his/her designee, or another
individual who may be appointed by the Radnor Township School
District (the "District"), and one of whom shall be appointed by Radnor
Studio 21 ("RS21") or its successor organization.
B. Term of office. The term of office for all members of the Council who are
appointed by the Board of Commissioners (the "Board") shall be five
years; provided, however, that, notwithstanding other provisions of the
Code, the terms of office for members who are representatives of the
District and RS21 may be for indefinite terms.
C. Duties. The Council shall:
(1) Advise the Board and Township staff on policy and administrative
matters relating to cable television, telecommunications, wireless
facilities, and new and emerging communication technologies.
(2) Review and, as may be directed by the Board, negotiate cable
franchise, right-of-way, and other communication agreements and
make appropriate recommendations.
(3) Recommend appropriate policies and procedures governing the
use and operation of the Township's public, educational, and
governmental television access channels.
(4) Evaluate applications and plans submitted for the placement of cell
towers, distributed antenna systems, micro-cell, and other
communications facilities, including all related equipment, in the
public rights-of-way and on Township-owned property and make
appropriate recommendations.
(5) Evaluate applications and plans submitted for the placement of cell
towers, distributed antenna systems, micro-cell, and other
communications facilities, including all related equipment, on
private property and, if appropriate and necessary, make
recommendations to the Zoning Hearing Board. Applications
57.Editor's Note: Former § 5-38, Municipal Authority, was repealed 2-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-5.
§ 5-37 CHARTER § 5-38
C:87
§ 5-39. Park and Recreation Board.
§ 5-40. Planning Commission.
seeking approval under this subsection shall conform to the rules
of the Zoning Hearing Board.
(6) Consider complaints dealing with cable television and other
communication issues in the Township and make appropriate
referrals and recommendations.
A. Membership. The membership of the Park and Recreation Board shall
consist of nine registered electors, two of whom shall be members of
the Radnor Township School Board. [Amended 2-28-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-05]
B. Term of office. The term of office shall be five years except for the initial
terms of the additional members, which terms shall be at the discretion
of the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 2-28-1983 by Ord. No.
83-05]
C. Duties. The Park and Recreation Board shall:
(1) Advise the Board and the Recreation Department on matters of
recreational policy and administration necessary to provide
appropriate facilities and programs.
(2) Make recommendations to the Board and the Recreation
Department on rules and regulations and practices concerning the
utilization of programs and facilities, the schedule of fees for
programs and facilities and the operation and maintenance of park
and recreational facilities and programs.
(3) Receive complaints dealing with park and recreation programs or
facilities and make recommendations pursuant to them.
A. Membership. The membership of the Planning Commission shall consist
of nine members.
B. Term of office. The term of office shall be four years.
C. Duties. The Planning Commission shall:
(1) Advise the Board upon all plans related to development in the
Township.
(2) Promote public interest in and understanding of the
Comprehensive Plan and community development and planning
and hold public meetings to this end.
(3) Review and make recommendations to the Board concerning the
Comprehensive Plan, the Official Map, Chapter 280, Zoning,
subdivision and other land development plans, building standards,
§ 5-38 RADNOR CODE § 5-40
C:88
§ 5-41. Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended 4-23-1984 by Ord. No.
84-14; 2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 89-06]
§ 5-42. Design Review Board. [Added 2-25-1991 by Ord. No. 91-09]
regulations for the Township, environmental matters and all other
plans for the community development prepared by the Community
Development Department.
(4) Perform such other functions as set forth in Article II, Section
209.1, of Act No. 247, 1968 (Municipalities Planning Code).58
A. Membership. There shall be a Zoning Hearing Board appointed which
shall consist of five registered electors; however the Board of
Commissioners may also appoint one but no more than three registered
electors who shall serve as alternate members to the Board.
B. Appointment. Appointment as a member or alternate member to the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be by resolution by the Board of
Commissioners.
C. Terms of office.
(1) Terms of office of a five-member Board shall be five years and shall
be so fixed that the terms of office of any one member shall expire
each year.
(2) Terms of office of an alternate member shall not exceed three
years.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board shall:
(1) Conduct hearings and render decisions on appeals from the Zoning
Officer.
(2) Hear requests for variances and render decisions thereon,
attaching such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may
deem necessary to implement the purposes of law, the Charter or
ordinances.
(3) Hear and decide upon requests for special exceptions pursuant to
criteria and standards adopted by the Board.
(4) Perform such other duties provided in Chapter 280, Zoning, Article
XXIV, of the Code of Radnor Township and Article IX of Act 247,
168 (Municipalities Planning Code), as amended.59
A. Membership. The membership of the Design Review Board shall consist
of five registered electors, three of whom shall have a professional
58.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10209.1.
59.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 5-40 CHARTER § 5-42
C:89
§ 5-42.1. Rental Housing Board of Appeals. [Added 7-16-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-26]
background and experience in the fields of architecture, engineering or
landscaping.
B. Term of office. The term of office shall be for a period of five years. As
first established, the Board of Commissioners shall appoint one member
to serve for a period of three years, two members to serve for terms of
four years and two members to serve for periods five years.
C. Rules. The Design Review Board shall elect from the membership a
Chairman and adopt rules and regulations to conduct business. Three
members shall constitute a quorum. Approval, conditional approval or
denial of an application shall be by majority vote. A tie vote shall
constitute a denial of an application.
D. Meetings. The Design Review Board shall schedule meetings to be held
at regular intervals or at the call of the Chairman.
E. Records. Records shall be kept of all official business transacted and
shall be filed in the Department of Community Development.
F. Reports. The Design Review Board shall submit an annual report
following December 31 and other such reports as may be requested by
the Board of Commissioners.
G. Duties and responsibilities. The Design Review Board shall have the
following duties and responsibilities:
(1) To review applications for sign permits to ensure compliance with
Chapter 280, Zoning, Article XXI, of the Township Code.
(2) The review of architectural and landscaping plans for new
development within nonresidential zoning districts, including those
plans which propose exterior structural additions and material
changes, excluding painting, to existing buildings.60
A. Establishment and composition. The Rental Housing Board of Appeals
shall consist of three registered electors; however, the Board of
Commissioners may appoint one registered elector to serve as an
alternate member to the Board.
B. Terms of office. Terms of office shall be for five years, or until a
successor is appointed by the Board of Commissioners, and shall be so
fixed that the term of office of only one member shall expire in any
given year.
C. General powers. The Board of Appeals shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair
and create, alter and rescind rules and regulations to conduct business.
Two members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any and
60.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 150, Design Review.
§ 5-42 RADNOR CODE § 5-42.1
C:90
§ 5-42.2. Historic and Architectural Review Board (HARB). [Added
2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-07; amended 7-16-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-30]
all business. Approval or denial of an appeal before the Board shall be
by majority vote of those in attendance. A tie vote shall constitute a
denial of an appeal.
D. Meetings. Meeting shall be held at the call of the Chair or when
necessary for the proper and efficient discharge of business.
E. Records. Records shall be kept of all official business transacted and
shall be filed in the Department of Community Development.
F. Reports. The Board of Appeals shall submit an annual report to the
Board of Commissioners following December 31 of each year, as well as
any other information which may be requested.
G. Responsibilities. The Board of Appeals shall be responsible for
considering appeals from the owner of a rental unit who is aggrieved by
the Code Official's determination to revoke the owner's privilege to rent
to student tenants or to not renew or suspend the owner's license. The
Board shall conduct a public meeting, and consider factual information
and arguments presented by the owner, Code Official, police and other
relevant parties. In accordance with Ordinance 2001-25,61 the Board
shall render a decision based upon the facts presented and shall be
empowered to affirm, amend or reverse the decision of the Code
Official, with such decision being final.
A. Establishment, composition. The HARB shall consist of five registered
electors who shall serve at the discretion of the Board of
Commissioners, preferably including the following: one registered
architect or engineer; one licensed real estate broker; and one person
with technical knowledge in the building codes and construction
industry. The remaining two members shall have knowledge and
interest in the preservation of historic districts.
B. Terms of office. The term of office shall be five years. As first
established, the Board of Commissioners shall appoint one member to
serve for a period of three years, two members to serve for a period of
four years, and two members to serve for a period of five years.
Vacancies on the HARB shall be filled by the Board of Commissioners.
C. Rules. The HARB shall elect from its membership a Chair and adopt its
own rules and regulations to conduct business. Three members shall
constitute a quorum. Approval, conditional approval, or denial of an
application shall be by majority vote of members present. A tie vote
shall constitute a denial of an application.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 226, Rental Property, Art. I, Rental Unit Regulations.
§ 5-42.1 CHARTER § 5-42.2
C:91
§ 5-43. Other boards, commissions and authorities.
D. Meetings. The HARB shall schedule public meetings on a regular basis,
or meetings shall be held at the call of the Chair.
E. Records. Records of all business transacted shall be filed in the
department so designated by the Township Manager. An annual report
shall be filed following December 31, or at the request of the Board of
Commissioners.
F. Responsibilities. The HARB shall serve as an advisory body to the Board
of Commissioners in the review of applications for the erection,
addition, or demolition of buildings within the North Wayne Historic
District, the Louella Court Historic District, and the South Wayne
Historic District, in accordance with Chapter 178 of the Administrative
Code.62
A. Radnor-Haverford-Marple Sewer Authority. The Board shall appoint
two members to the Authority who shall be registered electors for
terms of five years, in accordance with Chapter 78, Sewer Authority.
B. Memorial Library of Radnor Township. The Board shall appoint two
members to the Board of the Memorial Library of Radnor Township,
who shall be registered electors, for terms of three years. The terms
shall be staggered by the appointments made in January 1978 being for
two years and three years, respectively.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 178, Historic Districts.
§ 5-42.2 RADNOR CODE § 5-43
C:92
ARTICLE VII
Fiscal Affairs
§ 5-44. Budget.
§ 5-45. Classification of accounts.
A. The annual budget and the capital program for the ensuing fiscal year
shall be prepared, adopted, revised or amended as required by §§ 7.02
through 7.09 of the Charter.
B. The annual budget shall include estimated income, including any
proposed tax levy, and proposed expenditures by the Township. No
annual budget shall project an excess of expenditures over receipts.
Proposed expenditures shall be divided into those major classifications
that most fully describe the financial operations of the Township.
Revenues shall be shown in enough detail to indicate their sources.
Capital improvement expenditures shall be identified and the method of
their financing shall be described. A three-year capital program shall be
submitted in accordance with § 7.06 of the Charter.
C. Payments to or income from the Radnor-Haverford-Marple Sewer
Authority and the Municipal Authority63 or any other authority
established after the enactment of this chapter shall be included in the
annual budget.
D. The annual budget shall include a summary of debt service which shows
the date, purpose, amount and maturity date of original issue; the
interest rate; the balance outstanding at the beginning of the fiscal
year; the principal and interest payable for the fiscal year; and
retirement by year, principal and interest. It shall also conform to other
requirements of § 7.05 of the Charter.
A. Major classifications of revenue accounts in the general fund shall
include as a minimum:
(1) Beginning balance.
(2) Real estate taxes.
(3) Local enabling taxes.
(4) Licenses and permits.
(5) Fines and forfeits.
(6) Interest and rents.
(7) Grants and gifts.
(8) Departmental earnings.
63.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 78, Sewer Authority, and Ch. 56, Municipal Authority.
§ 5-44 CHARTER § 5-45
C:93
§ 5-46. Accounting records and reports.
(9) Transfers from other funds.
(10) Miscellaneous income.
B. Subdivisions within the major classifications shall be those in the
adopted budget for the current year and may change from year to year.
The classification of revenue accounts for other funds shall include the
beginning balance and interest earnings; assessments, rents, fees,
grants, bond revenue and donations, if applicable; and such other
classifications as are used in the annual budget.
C. Major classifications (departments or offices) for expenditure accounts
for all funds shall be those which most fully describe the financial
operations of the Township. These major classifications shall be
subdivided, where appropriate, into control accounts, as follows, and
into such other classifications as may be needed. The classifications
may be further subdivided for effective control.
(1) Personnel and personal services.
(2) Contractual services.
(3) Materials, supplies and minor equipment.
(4) Debt service.
(5) Equipment.
(6) Educational expenses.
(7) Maintenance of equipment.
(8) Contributions.
(9) Insurance.
(10) Pension expenses.
(11) Transfers to other funds.
D. Each of the above classifications in the adopted budget shall be treated
as a control account for the current year. The Finance Director shall
maintain a current list of account numbers. These account numbers
shall be used for all financial records in the Township. Each control
account for the current year shall be funded by an appropriation and
may be revised, amended or transferred as provided in § 7.08 of the
Charter.
A. Records and reports maintained and prepared by the Finance Director.
(1) The Finance Director shall supervise the preparation and
maintenance of records of all financial transactions consistent with
accounting procedures and practices of the American Institute of
§ 5-45 RADNOR CODE § 5-46
C:94
Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). Accounting records shall be
maintained on the modified accrual basis. The financial statements
at year-end shall be prepared on a modified accrual basis
consistent with the procedures and practices of the AICPA. The
Township shall record all transactions using a double-entry
bookkeeping system.
(a) All transactions shall be recorded by the appropriate fund,
including the following funds, and such other funds established
by law or required by the Board:
[1] General fund.
[2] Special Assessment Fund.
[3] Capital Improvement Fund.
[4] Sinking Fund.
[5] Sewer Fund.
[6] Revenue Sharing Fund.
[7] Liquid Fuels Fund.
(b) There shall be continuous identification of assets, liabilities,
revenues, expenditures and fund equity for each fund so
established.
(2) The following books of account shall be maintained for each fund,
where applicable, to record each financial transaction:
(a) General journal (general fund journal).
(b) Cash receipts journal (revenue fund journal).
(c) Cash disbursements journal (appropriation transaction
journal).
(d) Payroll journal.
(e) Others as needed.
(3) The Finance Director shall be responsible for the safeguard,
storage and retention of all Township financial records. Record
retention and disposal practices shall conform to the Municipal
Records Act.64
(4) The Finance Director shall prepare as promptly as possible
financial practices and procedures, in writing, for the Township.
Practices and procedures shall describe procedures and forms
necessary to record, preserve and report the financial transactions
of the Township in accordance with the provisions of the Charter
64.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 9001 et seq. and Ch. 72, Records Retention.
§ 5-46 CHARTER § 5-46
C:95
and this chapter. These written procedures and practices shall
cover as a minimum the following areas:
(a) Budgeting.
(b) Capital assets.
(c) Chart of accounts.
(d) Disposal of property.
(e) Financial reporting.
(f) Insurance.
(g) Internal auditing.
(h) Pensions.
(i) Purchasing.
(j) Timekeeping.
B. Procedures covering the Township Treasurer.
(1) Receipts.
(a) As provided in § 4.05 of the Charter, all payments to the
Township shall be received by the Treasurer. No other
Township employee (elected or appointed) shall be authorized
to receive money for the benefit of the Township unless
specifically designated by the Treasurer. Money belonging to
the Township shall be deposited each business day in the name
of the Township in a depository previously designated.
(b) The Treasurer shall issue receipts for funds collected. At the
end of each business day, copies of all receipts, plus duplicate
deposit slips, shall be forwarded to the Finance Director. The
Treasurer shall prepare a daily summary of the collections for
the day by major classification, as set forth in § 5-45A. The
original shall be retained by the Treasurer and a copy shall be
forwarded to the Finance Director. The daily summary shall be
signed by the Treasurer or his duly authorized designee. The
Treasurer shall use the same chart of accounts as the
Township.
(2) Disbursements. The treasurer shall disburse Township funds in the
manner prescribed in § 5-48. The Treasurer shall maintain a file of
disbursement authorizations in his office.
(3) Real estate tax. The Treasurer shall check for accuracy the real
estate tax duplicate provided by Delaware County and shall advise
the county of any errors or discrepancies. He shall keep accurate
§ 5-46 RADNOR CODE § 5-46
C:96
§ 5-47. Receipt procedures.
records of the real estate tax billings, receipts and accounts
receivable.
A. Depositories.
(1) The Board of Commissioners shall designate, from time to time, by
resolution, a depository or depositories for Township funds. Such
depository or depositories shall be banks, banking institutions or
trust companies located in the commonwealth.
(2) Depositories so designated shall, upon receipt of notice of their
selection as a depository of Township funds, furnish a bond to
secure payment of deposits of Township funds and any interest to
the Township, with a proper warrant to confess judgment in favor
of the Township, secured by a surety company or individual
sureties to be approved by the Board, or deposit obligations of the
United States or the commonwealth or any political subdivision
thereof, with a bond rating of at least A by Moody's Investor
Service, to secure the payment of Township deposits and any
interest thereon. Such surety bonds shall be in a sum, to be fixed by
the Board, at least equal to the probable greatest amount of such
deposit at any one time. The market value of deposit bonds at all
times shall be at least equal to 120% of the amount of Township
funds to be secured. Such deposit bonds shall be accompanied by
proper assignments or powers of attorney to transfer the same. In
the event of the failure of the depository to pay to the Township the
full amount of such deposits and interest thereon, such bonds and
the proceeds of sale thereof shall belong to the Township until it
shall receive therefrom the full amount of such deposits and
interest thereon, and the Township shall have a prior standing as
respects such bonds and be in all respects preferred to any and all
claims except such as have heretofore been preferred by law.
(3) Nothing herein contained shall be construed to require a
depository to furnish bond or collateral security to cover the
amount of any deposit to the extent that the same is insured with
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Federal Savings
and Loan Insurance Corporation.
(4) The Treasurer shall, upon the designation and qualification of such
depository or depositories, thereafter keep Township funds only in
such depository or depositories in the name of the Township.
B. Separation of funds. Whenever any moneys which have been pledged or
assigned to a special Township fund are received by the Treasurer, the
Treasurer shall deposit said moneys into the appropriate fund account
and shall not disburse them or any part of them for any purpose other
than that for which they were collected. Misuse of such moneys shall be
an offense for which the authorizers and signers of the illegal checks,
§ 5-46 CHARTER § 5-47
C:97
§ 5-48. Disbursement procedures.
§ 5-49. Purchasing procedures.
money orders or drafts shall be liable for surcharge for the sum
misused or the loss of the Township.
C. Transfers and loans between funds. The Finance Director may borrow
from one Township fund to another with the approval of the Board. All
loans shall be repaid within one year. Any loans to or from the sewer
fund shall be repaid with interest at 6% per annum. Loans and/or
transfers between funds shall be accompanied by appropriate
documentation.
D. (Reserved)65
E. Escrow accounts. Any escrow funds or refundable deposits received by
the Township shall be deposited in escrow accounts by the Treasurer.
The Treasurer shall release said funds only after authorization by the
Township official responsible for certifying that the conditions requiring
the release of the escrow funds or refundable deposits have been met.
A. Check signing.
(1) Checks shall be prepared upon the authorization of the Finance
Director after he is satisfied that the expenditure is proper.
(2) The Treasurer shall disburse funds of the Township by check, draft
or other order of payment on a form of disbursement authorization
adopted by the Manager and issued to the Treasurer by the
Manager or, in his absence, by the Secretary. The Treasurer shall
assure himself that each disbursement shall not exceed the
applicable appropriation.
(3) All checks, drafts or other orders of payment drawn upon the
Township shall be signed by two persons:
(a) The Manager or, in his absence, the Secretary.
(b) The Treasurer or his designee who has been approved by the
Board.
(4) Individual payroll checks shall bear the actual signature or
facsimile thereof of the Manager and the signature of the Treasurer
or his approved designee. The Treasurer shall receive with the
checks to be signed payroll authorization supporting the
disbursements which have been approved by the Manager or, in his
absence, the Secretary.
65.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding temporary investment of funds, was
repealed 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-11.
§ 5-47 RADNOR CODE § 5-49
C:98
§ 5-50. Competitive bidding.
A. All purchases shall be made with a purchase order except those made
from petty cash and regular bills that are paid upon presentation. A
petty cash imprest system shall be used only for the purchase of small
items, as defined in purchasing procedures, and shall be fully
documented. Blanket purchase orders may be used on a monthly or
annual basis for those vendors from whom regular purchases are made.
Confirming purchase orders may be used for emergencies only. The
Finance Director shall provide appropriate forms for purchase orders
and control the issuing of the forms. All purchase orders shall be signed
by the Finance Director or the Manager.
B. Vendors for nonbid items shall be selected based on quotations
obtained by telephone, in writing or from current catalogs. Written
quotations shall be obtained when specifications are used. All
quotations and related documentation shall be submitted with the
purchase order. Written justification shall be made when a quotation
other than the lowest one is accepted.
C. If the purchase price is $300 or less and the price is considered
reasonable, only one quotation need be obtained. If the purchase price
is between $300 and $3,000, three quotations shall be solicited.
Purchases of $3,000 or more shall be made in accordance with the
procedures given in § 5-50 on competitive bidding.
D. The department receiving supplies, material, equipment or contractual
services shall verify that they meet the specifications set forth in the
order or contract. The Township shall have the authority to require
chemical, physical and performance tests of materials submitted with
bids and delivery samples to determine their quality. For such tests, the
Township may make use of outside testing facilities.
E. The Township, with the approval of the Board, may enter into
agreements to purchase cooperatively with other governmental
entities.
A. General procedures.
(1) All purchases of labor, material, supplies or services, aggregating
$3,000 or more in any fiscal year, shall be bought after the
awarding of bids as provided in this chapter. In determining
whether or not a purchase exceed $3,000, the definition of items to
be bid shall be the class rather than specific items within a class,
e.g., tires of different sizes or grades are all of one class.
Exemptions from and restrictions on competitive bidding are
governed by § 7.11 of the Charter.
(2) All bids in all cases, whether of straight sale price, conditional sale,
bailment lease or otherwise, shall be for the entire amount which
the Township shall pay to the successful bidder or his assigns in
§ 5-49 CHARTER § 5-50
C:99
order to obtain the services or property, or both, and shall not be
construed to mean only the amount which shall be paid to acquire
title or to receive any other particular benefit or benefits of the
whole bargain. All bids shall be sealed by the bidder. A bid bond
may be required of all bidders on a contract at the discretion of the
Board or the Manager.
B. Advertising.
(1) A legal advertisement shall be required for bids for each
nonexempted purchase aggregating $3,000 or more. This
advertisement shall state in general terms the material, labor,
supplies or service needed; where and when the specifications and
plans can be obtained and their price, if any; the time limit on
receipt of bids; and the date, time and place for publicly opening
the bids. This advertisement shall be published at least twice in the
same newspaper. The first time shall be not less than 10 days
before the opening date for the bids. Additional advertisements in
appropriate trade or legal journals and notification of prospective
bidders may be made at the discretion of the Board or the Manager.
(2) Specifications and plans must be available on the date of the first
advertisement for bids.
C. Opening of bids. Bids shall be publicly opened and read aloud at the
time and place specified in the legal advertisement. All bids shall be
available for public inspection.
D. Performance bonds. The successful bidder may be required, at the
discretion of the Board or the Manager, to furnish bond with
requirements guaranteeing the performance of the contract or, as
required by law, with surety in an amount sufficient to guarantee the
completion of the contract. Performance bonds, if required, shall be
given to the Township within 20 days after the contract has been
awarded unless the Board shall prescribe a shorter period of not less
than 10 days. Upon failure to furnish bond within such time, the
previous award shall be void. The contract may then be awarded to
another bidder or it may be readvertised for bids. Deliveries,
accomplishment and guaranties may be required in all cases of
expenditures, including negotiated contracts.
E. Bonds for protection of labor and material. The Township shall require
any person, partnership, association or corporation entering into a
contract with the Township for the construction, erection, installation,
completion, alteration, repair of or addition to any public work or
improvement of any kind whatsoever where the amount of the contract
is $3,000 or more, before commencing work under such contract, to
execute and deliver to the Township, in addition to any other bond
which may now or hereafter be required by law to be given in
connection with such contract, an additional bond for the use of any and
every person, partnership, association or corporation interested, in a
§ 5-50 RADNOR CODE § 5-50
C:100
§ 5-51. Procedures for awarding contracts.
sum not less than 50% and not more than 100% of the contract price,
as the Township may prescribe, having as surety thereon one or more
surety companies legally authorized to do business in the
commonwealth, conditioned for the prompt payment of all material
furnished and labor supplied or performed in the prosecution of the
work, whether or not said material or labor enter in and become
component parts of the work or improvements comtemplated. Such
additional bond shall be deposited with and held by the Secretary for
the use of any part interested therein. Every such additional bond
shall provide that every person, partnership, association or corporation
that, whether as subcontractor or otherwise, has furnished material or
supplied or performed labor in the prosecution of the work as above
provided and that has not been paid therefor may sue in assumpsit on
said additional bond, in the name of the Township, for his, their or its
use and prosecute the same to final judgment for such sum or sums as
may be justly due him, them or it and have execution thereon; provided,
however, that the Township shall not be liable for the payment of any
costs or expense of any suit.
F. Awarding of bids. All bids shall be awarded by the Board at a public
meeting to the lowest responsible and qualified bidder after the bids
have been publicly opened and have been evaluated by the Township
staff. When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a statement of
the reasons for awarding the contract to another bidder shall be
recorded in the minutes of the meeting at which the bid was awarded.
The Board may award part or all of any bid or may reject all bids for any
reason.
A. General.
(1) The terms of contracts for purchase of materials, supplies and
services shall not exceed two years. All contracts of the Township
involving sums in excess of $3,000 shall be in writing and approved
formally by the Board. Single contracts for a project or program
may be used at the discretion of the Board.
(2) No contract shall be made or obligation incurred unless there is a
sufficient unencumbered balance in an appropriation and sufficient
money is available to cover the contract or meet the obligation
when it becomes due and payable. Any official who knowingly
authorizes a contract to be made in violation of this provision shall
be subject to removal from office and liable to the Township or its
surety for any loss incurred as a result of such action. The Township
Solicitor shall approve all written contracts before they are signed
by any Township official.
(3) A special type of contract may be used whereby the Township does
not obligate itself to purchase or to accept a commodity but
§ 5-50 CHARTER § 5-51
C:101
furnishes the vendor with an estimate of its probable needs as a
guide to the amount that may be purchased.
(4) No contract shall be awarded any contractor who has any other
interests in the same project.
B. Procedures for specific categories of contracts.
(1) Purchase, sale, use or lease for three or more years of real
property. The contract shall be authorized by ordinance. The
written contract shall be signed by the President of the Board and
the Manager.
(2) Construction of public capital improvements. The contract shall be
awarded by competitive bidding if the amount is over $3,000. The
contract shall be authorized by ordinance. The written contract
shall be signed by the President of the Board and the Manager.
(3) Labor contract with a union. The contract shall be negotiated by
the Board or its designee, and such contract shall be subject to
approval by the Board. The written contract shall be signed by the
President of the Board.
(4) Professional or unique services and supplies. Professional or
unique services and supplies costing over $3,000 shall require
public notice, including a request for proposals. Initial screening of
the applicants shall be done by the Manager. The contract shall be
approved by the Board at a public meeting. The written contract
shall be signed by the President of the Board or the Manager if
authorized by the Board.
(5) Insurance and surety company bonds. A contract shall be
negotiated by the Manager or Finance Director. The Township shall
seek additional proposals before renewing existing contracts. The
contract shall be subject to approval by the Board at a public
meeting. The written contract shall be signed by the President of
the Board or the Manager if authorized by the Board.
(6) Contracts with other governmental entities, authorities, agencies
or political subdivisions. Contracts shall be negotiated by the
Manager subject to the approval of the Board. The written contract
shall be signed by the President of the Board or the Manager if
authorized by the Board.
(7) Emergency repairs or service and equipment required by
emergency conditions. Approval shall be given by the Manager or
Finance Director and the department head involved in the
emergency. If the contract is for over $3,000, it shall be approved
by a special meeting of the Board. The written contract shall be
signed by the President of the Board or the Manager if authorized
by the Board.
§ 5-51 RADNOR CODE § 5-51
C:102
§ 5-52. Disposal of Township property. [Amended 5-14-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-04]
(8) Contracts for purchase of labor, material, supplies or services
aggregating $3,000 or more in any fiscal year. A contract shall be
awarded by the Board after competitive bidding as defined in
§ 5-50. The written contract shall be signed by the Manager.
(9) Negotiated contracts. A contract may be negotiated by the
Manager if no bids are received after publicly advertising for bids
twice as required in § 5-50. Approval shall be given by the Board at
a public meeting. The written contract shall be signed by the
Manager.
A. Real property.
(1) No real property of the Township shall be sold or disposed of
without the approval of the Board of Commissioners. No real estate
owned by the Township having a fair market value, as determined
by a professional appraisal, in excess of $1,500 may be sold except
to the highest bidder after due notice by advertisement for bids or
advertisement of a public auction in one newspaper of general
circulation in the Township. The advertisement shall be published
once not less than 10 days before the date set for the opening of
bids or public auction, and the date for opening bids or public
auction shall be announced in the advertisement. The award of
contracts shall be made only by public announcement at a regular
or special meeting of the Board of Commissioners or at the public
auction. All bids shall be accepted on the condition that payment of
the purchase price in full shall be made within 60 days of the
acceptance of bids or upon such other conditions of purchase price
payment as determined by the Board of Commissioners at the time
of bid advertisement.
(2) The Board of Commissioners may reject all bids if the bids are
deemed to be less than the fair market value of the property. In the
case of a public auction, the Board of Commissioners may establish
a minimum bid based on the fair market value of the real property.
(3) All sale of real property by the Township shall comply with the
requirements of the Donated or Dedicated Property Act, 53 P.S.
3381 et seq., if applicable, including any conveyances or leases of
real property as identified in Subsection A(4) of this section.
(4) Conveyances or leases.
(a) The requirements of this section do not apply to conveyances
or leases of real property by the Township to any of the
following:
[1] A municipal corporation.
§ 5-51 CHARTER § 5-52
C:103
[2] The federal government.
[3] The commonwealth.
[4] An institution district.
[5] A school district.
[6] A municipality authority.
[7] A county.
[8] A public utility.
[9] A volunteer fire company.
[10] A nonprofit corporation engaged in community industrial,
commercial or affordable housing development.
[11] A volunteer ambulance service or volunteer rescue squad
located within the Township.
[12] A nonprofit corporation organized as a public library.
[13] A nonprofit medical service corporation.
[14] A nonprofit housing corporation.
[15] A nonprofit organization providing community service or
development activities.
[16] A nonprofit corporation established for the preservation of
historical, architectural or aesthetic sites or artifacts.
[17] A nonprofit association or nonprofit corporation organized
to acquire and maintain real property for the preservation,
conservation and stewardship of open space.
(b) Such conveyances or leases shall be at the sole discretion of
the Township.
(5) When real property is sold to a nonprofit corporation organized as a
public library or to a nonprofit medical service corporation,
nonprofit housing corporation, volunteer fire company, volunteer
ambulance service or volunteer rescue squad, the Board of
Commissioners may elect to accept any nominal consideration for
the property as it believes appropriate. Real property sold under
this subsection is subject to the condition that when the property is
not used for the purposes of the corporation or volunteer fire
company, the property reverts to the Township.
(6) Any official or employee who sells or authorizes the sale of any
Township real property without complying with the provisions of
this section shall be subject to a surcharge in the amount of any
§ 5-52 RADNOR CODE § 5-52
C:104
loss sustained by the Township by reason of such sale, as well as
any additional disciplinary action the Township deems appropriate.
B. Personal property.
(1) No personal property of the Township shall be sold or disposed of
without the approval of the Board of Commissioners. No personal
property owned by the Township, the estimated fair market value of
which is $1,000 or more, shall be sold except to the highest bidder
after due notice by advertisement for bids or for public auction in
one newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The
advertisement shall be published once not less than 10 days before
the date set for the opening of bids or public auction, and the date
for opening bids or public auction shall be announced in the
advertisement. The advertisement for electronic auction sales
authorized in Subsection B(4) shall include the Internet address or
means of accessing the electronic auction and the date, time and
duration of the electronic auction. If after attempting twice to
receive bids or if at a public auction no bid was received, the Board
of Commissioners may by resolution adopt a procedure by which
the personal property may be sold without further action of the
Board of Commissioners. A procedure adopted pursuant to this
authorization shall be subject to and shall conform with the
requirements of any law governing the sale of property by
municipal corporations generally when no bids have been received.
The award of contracts shall be made only by public announcement
at a regular or special meeting of the Board of Commissioners or at
the public auction. Except as provided in Subsection B(4), all bids
shall be accepted on the condition that payment of the purchase
price in full is made immediately upon acceptance of the successful
bid. The Board of Commissioners may reject any bids received if
the bids are believed to be less than the fair market value of the
property. In the case of a public auction, the Board of
Commissioners may establish a minimum bid based on the fair
market value of the personal property.
(2) With respect to personal property, either individual items or lots of
items, that have a fair market value estimated to be less than
$1,000, the Board of Commissioners shall by resolution adopt a
procedure by which the property may be sold without further
action by the Board of Commissioners. The Board of
Commissioners may arrange for the sale of the item or items at
public auction.
(3) The bidding and advertising requirements of this section do not
apply to the following transactions:
(a) If personal property of the Township is being traded in or
exchanged for other personal property.
§ 5-52 CHARTER § 5-52
C:105
(b) The sale or lease of personal property to any one of the
following:
[1] A municipal corporation.
[2] The federal government.
[3] The commonwealth.
[4] An institution district.
[5] A school district.
[6] A municipality authority.
[7] A county.
[8] A public utility.
[9] A volunteer fire company.
[10] A nonprofit corporation engaged in community industrial
development.
[11] A volunteer ambulance service or volunteer rescue squad
located within the Township.
[12] A nonprofit corporation organized as a public library.
[13] A nonprofit medical service corporation.
[14] A nonprofit housing corporation.
[15] Nonprofit organizations providing community service or
development activities.
[16] A nonprofit corporation established for the preservation of
historical, architectural or aesthetical sites or artifacts.
(4) A public auction may include an online or electronic auction sale.
During an electronic auction sale, bids shall be accepted
electronically at the time and in the manner designated in the
advertisement. During the electronic auction, each bidder shall
have the capability to view the bidder's bid rank or the high bid
price. Bidders may increase their bid prices during the electronic
auction. The record of the electronic auction shall be accessible for
public inspection. The purchase price shall be paid by the high
bidder immediately or at a reasonable time after the conclusion of
the electronic auction as determined by the Township. In the event
that shipping costs are incurred, they shall be paid by the high
bidder.
(5) Any official or employee who sells or authorizes the sale of any
Township personal property without complying with the provisions
of this section shall be subject to a surcharge in the amount of any
§ 5-52 RADNOR CODE § 5-52
C:106
§ 5-53. Fidelity bonds.
§ 5-54. Sinking funds.
It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to cause accounts of any sinking
funds and other accounts relating to the indebtedness of the Township to be
kept and to see to the proper application and superintend the investment
of moneys therein in accordance with law. Moneys in a sinking fund may
be invested only in obligations of the commonwealth or the United States
of America, in deposits in banking institutions or in shares of building and
loan associations or Federal Savings and Loan Associations, the deposits or
shares of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
or the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and which deposits
or shares shall at no time exceed the maximum amount so insured. The
income derived from such investments or on any bank balances credited to
the sinking fund shall be credited and applied only to the sinking fund.
§ 5-55. Annual audit.
loss sustained by the Township by reason of such sale, as well as
any additional disciplinary action the Township deems appropriate.
(6) When no bids are received for unserviceable or junk property, the
Board may authorize the Finance Director or other authorized
Township representative to dispose of such property in the manner
most advantageous to the Township.
A. Fidelity bonds in the amount set by the Board shall be approved by the
Township Solicitor for form and sufficiency and shall be with a surety
company or other company authorized by law to act as a surety and
approved by the Board. The bonds shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance and discharge of their respective duties and for proper
application and payment of all money or property for which they are
responsible by virtue of their offices or employment.
B. Officials and employees to be bonded before September 1, 1977, are the
Treasurer, the Treasurer's employees and employees who are
responsible for receipts or disbursements of funds. The Board may
require bonds for other individuals. The cost of the bonds shall be borne
by the Township. However, the Township shall not provide a bond for
the collection of county or school taxes.
A. Annual audit. An audit of the financial records of the Township shall be
made annually by an independent auditor, as provided in §§ 4.05 and
7.13 of the Charter.
B. Appointment of independent auditor. Such independent auditor shall be
appointed annually by the Board at least 30 days prior to the close of
the fiscal year.
§ 5-52 CHARTER § 5-55
C:107
C. Audit due date. The annual audit shall be filed with the Board within 90
days of the close of the fiscal year.
§ 5-55 RADNOR CODE § 5-55
C:108
ARTICLE VIII
Personnel Policies
§ 5-56. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — An application to a higher authority for review of a grievance
submitted or instituted by an employee.
COMPENSATORY LEAVE — Leave from work in lieu of monetary payment
for overtime.
DEPARTMENT — The primary organizational unit which is under the
immediate charge of a department head reporting directly to the Manager.
DISMISSAL — Separation from Township employment for cause.
LAYOFF — The involuntary, nondisciplinary separation of an employee from
his position.
LEAVE — An approved absence from work.
OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT — Employment of any kind engaged in by a
Township employee for which compensation or value is received from a
source other than the Township.
OVERTIME — Authorized time worked by a full-time employee in excess of
his total normal working hours per week.
PERMANENT FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE — An employee who has completed
his designated probationary period and occupies a permanent full-time
position.
PERMANENT FULL-TIME POSITION — A set of duties and responsibilities
requiring the full-time employment of one person for 35 or more hours per
week on a regular schedule throughout the year.
PERMANENT PART-TIME EMPLOYEE — An employee who has completed
his designated probationary period and occupies a permanent part-time
position.
PERMANENT PART-TIME POSITION — A set of duties and responsibilities
requiring the part-time employment of one person for at least 18 hours but
less than 35 hours per week on a regular schedule throughout the year.
PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEE — A newly appointed employee who has not
completed his designated probationary period for the position he occupies.
PROBATIONARY PERIOD — A trial period in which a new employee is
required to demonstrate his fitness for the position prior to receiving
permanent status.
REINSTATEMENT — Reappointment without a probationary period of a
former employee, who resigned in good standing from the Township service,
to a position of equal or lower classification.
§ 5-56 CHARTER § 5-56
C:109
SUSPENSION — The temporary removal without pay of an employee from
his designated position for disciplinary purposes or pending investigation of
charges against an employee.
TEMPORARY OR SEASONAL EMPLOYEE — An employee who occupies a
temporary or seasonal position.
TEMPORARY OR SEASONAL POSITION — A set of duties and
responsibilities requiring the temporary or seasonal employment of one
person on either a full- or part-time basis.
§ 5-57. General provisions.
A. Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply uniformly to all
Township employees, both police and nonpolice. With regard to the
police, the provisions of §§ 5-69 and 5-70 (civil service provisions and
the Police Manual) shall control, except that when the other provisions
of this article are more restrictive, those provisions shall apply.
B. Personnel policy. In order to establish an equitable and uniform
Township procedure for dealing with personnel matters and to ensure
that the best qualified persons are employed, the following is declared
to be the Township personnel policy:
(1) Employment in the Township government shall be based on merit.
(2) This policy shall be uniformly, equitably and fairly administered to
the end that high employee morale is maintained, the deserving
employee's career in the Township's service is enhanced, the unfit
employee is not maintained in the Township's service and the
interests and rights of the public and the Township are properly
preserved and protected.
(3) Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be
classified and compensated on a uniform basis.
(4) Appointments and other actions requiring the application of the
merit principle shall be based on systematic evaluations,
experience and education applicable to the position involved.
(5) Permanent status of employees shall be subject to satisfactory
behavior, satisfactory performance of work, necessity for the
performance of work and the availability of funds.
(6) Appropriate incentives and conditions of employment shall be
established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in
the operation of the Township government.
(7) Individuals shall be recruited from a geographic area as wide as is
necessary to ensure well-qualified candidates for the variances
Township positions. Employment, therefore, shall not necessarily
be limited to residents of the Township. However, Township
residents shall receive first consideration in cases where residents
§ 5-56 RADNOR CODE § 5-57
C:110
§ 5-58. Appointments and promotions.
and nonresidents are equally qualified for a vacant position. A
residency requirement may be imposed by the Board if it is
considered essential for particular positions.
A. Employment policy. The employment policy of the Township shall be in
keeping with accepted personnel practices not inconsistent with
Charter provisions to provide assurance that the best qualified
applicants are employed. The procedures outlined herein shall apply to
all persons who wish to obtain employment with the Township, except
former Township employees who may be reemployed to equal or lower
classifications through reinstatement with the Manager's approval.
B. Examination process. The examination process for permanent full-time
employees may consist of written, oral and performance tests as
necessary to determine an applicant's potential for the Township
employment, an evaluation of past experience and training and a
background and character investigation. A physical examination, given
by a physician selected by the Township, shall be required as a
prerequisite to employment.
C. Appointment. Department heads are appointed by the Manager subject
to approval by the Board. Other employees shall be appointed by their
respective department heads, subject to the approval of the Manager.
D. Probationary period and permanent status. A newly appointed
employee shall serve a probationary period during which time he will be
required to demonstrate his fitness for his position prior to receiving
permanent status.
(1) Probationary period. The length of the probationary period shall be
six months for nonuniformed employees and one year for sworn
police officers.
(2) Removal of probationary employee. A probationary employee may
be removed from his position at any time during the probationary
period at the discretion of the appropriate department head and
upon approval of the Manager. Probationary employees shall not
have recourse to appeal.
(3) Conditions of permanent employment. A probationary employee
will become a permanent employee upon the successful completion
of the probationary period, the favorable written recommendation
of the department head and the approval of the Manager.
E. Promotions. It shall be the policy of the Township to fill vacancies within
the Township service by promotion of present employees whenever
possible. All promotional procedures shall be governed by the Charter
and this chapter.
§ 5-57 CHARTER § 5-58
C:111
§ 5-59. Attendance and leaves.
(1) Notice of vacancies. Notice of vacancies shall be posted on
department bulletin boards.
(2) Criteria for promotion. An employee must possess the
qualifications as set forth in the job description for the position to
which he seeks promotion. The department head and the Manager
shall be responsible for determining whether or not an employee,
other than sworn police officers, possesses the necessary
qualifications for promotion to a particular position. Appropriate
examinations may be given to aid in this determination.
(3) Promotional probationary period. The duration of the promotional
probationary period shall be six months.
(4) Status during promotional probationary period. During a
promotional probationary period, a promoted probationary
employee shall retain his status as a permanent employee and shall
be reinstated to his former or to a similar position if his
performance is unsatisfactory in his new position or if he requests
to be reinstated in his former or a similar position either during or
at the completion of his promotional probationary period. After
permanent status is received in his new position, the promoted
employee loses all rights to his former position.
(5) Conditions of permanent appointment after promotion. A promoted
employee will receive a permanent appointment to his new position
upon the successful completion of a promotional probationary
period, the favorable written recommendation of his department
head and the approval of the Manager.
A. Workweek. The workweek shall be established by the Board.
B. Attendance. Employees shall be in attendance at their work in
accordance with these rules and general or departmental regulations.
Accurate attendance records for each employee shall be maintained
under the direction of the Manager.
C. Holidays. Holidays shall be observed in accordance with contract
provisions for those employees covered by formal contract and in
accordance with a schedule approved by the Board.
D. Vacations and personal leave. [Amended 2-23-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-03]
(1) Vacations and personal leave shall be earned and used in
accordance with the provisions of the formal contracts for
employees covered thereunder. The Board shall establish and
reflect in the Employee Handbook vacation and personal leave
credits for employees not covered by contract.
§ 5-58 RADNOR CODE § 5-59
C:112
(2) Use and carryover.
(a) Unless provided otherwise in accordance with the provisions of
formal contracts, employees shall take their vacations and use
all of their vacation time and personal leave earned on or after
January 1, 2009, during the calendar year in which it was
earned. Vacation time and personal leave shall not be carried
over the year's end, except as provided in Subsection D(2)(b)
below;
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon good cause shown, on
recommendation by the Manager and formal, public approval
by the Board, an employee may be permitted to carry over a
maximum of two weeks vacation time earned on or after
January 1, 2009, to the following year, which two weeks
vacation must be used, in its entirety, in that year, or the time
carried over shall expire;
(c) Vacation time and personal leave that employees have accrued
prior to January 1, 2009, may remain as accrued vacation time
and shall be used and resolved in accordance with the policy
fixed therefor by the Board and reflected in the Employee
Handbook. This accrued vacation time shall be fixed and paid
at the employee's 2008 wage rate even if the employee's wage
rate at the time of separation of employment is higher.
(3) Regular, full-time employees who are separated from the service
shall be compensated for accumulated vacation and personal leave
up to the date of separation at the employee's wage rate in effect on
December 31, 2008.
E. Sick leave. Sick leave with pay shall be granted to all fulltime
employees in the following manner:
(1) Sick leave for employees covered by formal contract shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the contract.
(2) Sick leave for employees not covered by contract shall be in
accordance with the policy fixed therefor by the Board.
(3) When an absence is due to sickness or injury, the employee may be
required to furnish a physician's certificate of illness.
(4) Physical exams may be required for employees when deemed
necessary by the Manager.
F. Leave of absence. Leave of absence for just cause without pay may be
granted by the Manager for a period of up to 30 days. Any further leave
must be granted by the Board.
G. Jury duty. The employee shall be granted a leave of absence for
required jury duty. Such employee shall receive that portion of his
§ 5-59 CHARTER § 5-59
C:113
§ 5-60. Compensation; salary administration. [Amended 3-27-1989
by Ord. No. 89-12]
regular salary which will, together with his jury duty pay or fees, equal
his total salary for the same period.
H. Emergency leave. Funeral leave will be allowed from the date of death
through the date of the funeral in the event of the death of the mother,
father, spouse, child, brother or sister of an employee, and a funeral
leave will be allowed for the day of the funeral in the event of the death
of a father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law,
grandparent or grandchild of an employee. [Amended 4-28-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-07]
A. Pay-setting practices of the Township shall be based upon applicable
federal, state and local laws and upon these principles:
(1) Positions with comparable levels of responsibility and working
conditions requiring similar skills and training shall be within the
same classification and grade.
(2) Pay within the salary range of a grade shall be adjusted according
to performance distinctions.
(3) Pay rates of employees shall be sensitive to the pay of comparable
positions with both public and private employers in the region and
in other markets with whom the Township must compete to attract
and retain the employees needed to sustain a successful operation.
B. The Board shall include in the annual operating budget for the
forthcoming year a pool of funds equal to a percentage, for which it
designates, of the aggregate basic payroll of all civilian employees for
the then current budget year.
C. Subject to provisions of applicable collective bargaining agreements or
other formal employee contracts, an employee's compensation shall be
adjusted annually or at other intervals determined by the Manager,
based upon the results of performance appraisals described in § 5-67.
D. An adjustment in each employees' rate of pay shall be made in the
following manner:
(1) Each employee's compensation ratio ("compa-ratio") shall be first
calculated by dividing an employee's current base salary by the
midpoint salary of the grade in which an employee is then
classified.
(2) The net merit increase shall next be calculated by multiplying the
percentage of the aggregate basic payroll, designated by the Board
and available for performance-related pay adjustments as
described in Subsections D(3) and (4) (with one percent expressed
as 0.01, ten percent expressed as 0.10 and so forth), by one of the
§ 5-59 RADNOR CODE § 5-60
C:114
following "performance factors," equal to the employee's most
recent performance appraisal. Such performance factors may be
adjusted from time to time by the Manager, at his discretion,
when changes in job market conditions or the general economy so
warrant:
Performance Factor
Outstanding 1.4
Above average 1.2
Average 1.0
Below average 0.5
Unsatisfactory 0.0
(3) The amount available for merit pay adjustments for employees
falling into a bargaining unit and covered under a collective
bargaining agreement shall be the remainder of the total
percentage of aggregate payroll described in Subsection B,
subtracted by any non-merit-related across-the-board pay
adjustment contained in a collective bargaining agreement
covering the same budget year.
(4) The amount available for merit pay adjustments for employees not
in a bargaining unit and not covered under a collective bargaining
agreement shall be the percentage of aggregate payroll described
in Subsection B.
(5) The net merit increase shall then be multiplied by the employee's
current base salary. The product derived therefrom shall be divided
by the employee's compa-ratio and the resultant figure shall be
added to the employee's current base salary. That resultant sum
shall be the employee's new base salary.
E. The Township's 1989 Basic Pay Schedule (the "BPS") is hereby enacted
as follows:
1989 BASIC PAY SCHEDULE (BPS)
Grade
Minimum Annual
Salary
Midpoint
Salary
Maximum Annual
Salary
1 $12,794.79 $15,033.88 $17,272.97
2 13,754.40 16,161.42 18,568.44
3 14,785.98 17,373.53 19,961.07
4 15,894.93 18,676.54 21,458.15
5 17,087.05 20,077.28 23,067.52
6 18,368.58 21,583.08 24,797.58
7 19,746.22 23,201.81 26,657.40
8 21,227.19 24,941.95 28,656.70
§ 5-60 CHARTER § 5-60
C:115
Grade
Minimum Annual
Salary
Midpoint
Salary
Maximum Annual
Salary
9 22,819.23 26,812.58 30,805.96
10 23,058.83 28,823.54 34,588.24
11 24,788.24 30,985.30 37,182.36
12 26,647.36 33,309.20 39,971.04
13 28,645.91 35,807.39 42,968.87
14 30,794.35 38,492.94 46,191.53
15 33,103.93 41,379.91 49,655.90
16 35,586.73 44,483.41 53,380.09
17 38,255.73 47,819.66 57,383.60
18 41,124.91 51,406.14 61,687.36
19 44,209.28 55,261.60 66,313.92
20 47,525.97 59,406.22 71,287.46
F. The BPS shall consist of 20 grades of difficulty and responsibility of
work, with Grade 1 composed of employees occupying positions having
the lowest levels of difficulty and responsibility and Grade 20 composed
of employees occupying positions having the highest levels of difficulty
and responsibility.
G. Each grade shall include all classifications of positions which, although
different in work or subject matter, are sufficiently equal in terms of the
level of difficulty and responsibility and the level of skill and training
required for the work as to warrant inclusion within the range of pay set
for a given grade.
H. The basic characteristics of the BPS shall be:
(1) Grades 1 through 20 shall each consist of:
(a) A minimum rate of pay;
(b) A maximum rate of pay; and
(c) A midpoint rate of pay that reflects the approximate relative
market value of positions occupying such grade.
(2) The midpoint rate of pay in each succeeding grade shall be seven
and one-half percent (7 1/2%) greater than the midpoint in each
respective preceding grade. The midpoint also shall be equal to
approximately one-half of the sum of the minimum and maximum
rates of pay in that grade.
(3) The difference between the minimum and the maximum rates of
pay in Grades 1 through 9 shall be 35%. The difference between the
minimum and the maximum rates of pay in Grades 10 through 20
shall be 50%.
§ 5-60 RADNOR CODE § 5-60
C:116
(4) The midpoint rates of pay in each grade shall be adjusted
periodically by the Manager, with the advice and consent of the
Board, to reflect changes in the relative market value of Township
positions. The Manager may, at his discretion, participate in
compensation surveys to determine the necessity of such changes.
(5) No employee's base salary shall at any time exceed the maximum
rate of pay established for the grade to which the employee's
position has been assigned.
(6) An employee who has demonstrated consistently outstanding
performance or who has made a unique or unusually meritorious
contribution to the Township's operations may receive, at the
Board's discretion, appropriate commendation and/or a one-time
bonus not to exceed 5% of such employee's current base salary.
Such bonus shall not be added to that employee's base salary.
I. New appointments to positions shall generally be made at the minimum
rate in the appropriate grade. The Manager may, at his discretion,
however, approve a higher starting rate within the appropriate grade
when special circumstances warrant, such as preexisting pay or high or
unique qualifications of the employee.
J. For purposes of implementing this plan, each current position shall be
placed within the grade to which it has been assigned by the Manager,
provided that no employee's basic pay shall be reduced as a result
thereof. An employee's rate of pay may be increased immediately upon
this plan's adoption, within the ranges established for the appropriate
grade, if the Manager believes special circumstances warrant such.
Alternatively, an employee's rate of pay may, at the Manager's
discretion, initially be kept constant at the level in effect prior to this
plan's adoption.
K. Any employee who is promoted to a higher grade shall be placed in a
rate of pay that is equal to or greater than such employee's rate of pay
in effect before the promotion.
L. Subject to provisions of collective bargaining agreements, nothing
contained herein shall prohibit a department head from recommending
or the Manager from enacting a demotion, a reduction in pay or other
appropriate action for an employee whose performance is appraised as
below average or worse.
M. The Manager's job performance and rate of pay shall be reviewed at
least once each year, or as otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board
and the Manager, either informally or formally through a contract.
N. Overtime and compensatory time may be authorized by department
heads and the Manager. Payment for overtime and credit for
compensatory time shall be in accordance with collective bargaining
agreements, other formal contracts, the Fair Labor Standards Act and
§ 5-60 CHARTER § 5-60
C:117
§ 5-61. Disciplinary actions and separations.
other applicable federal, state and local laws and policies and
procedures established by the Manager.
O. The effective date of any pay increases enacted under Subsection J
herein shall generally be the first full payroll period falling on or after
the plan's date of enactment, or as otherwise established by the
Manager.
A. Demotion.
(1) A department head may demote an employee within the
department for cause subject to the approval of the Manager. A
written statement of the reasons for any such action shall be
furnished by the department head to the employee, and a copy shall
be filed with the Manager at least five days prior to the effective
date of the action.
(2) No demotion shall be made as a disciplinary action unless the
employee to be demoted is eligible for employment in a lower class.
Any regular employee who is demoted may appeal the demotion
through the appropriate grievance procedures.
B. Suspension. The department head may, for disciplinary purposes,
suspend without pay any employee for such length of time as he
considers appropriate, not exceeding 30 days in any twelve-month
period, subject to approval by the Manager. The Manager and the
employee shall be furnished a written statement by the department
head specifically setting forth reasons for such suspension prior to the
suspension.
C. Layoffs.
(1) An employee may be laid off when the Manager deems it necessary
or is directed by the Board by reason of shortage of work or funds,
the abolition of the position or other material change in the duties
or organization.
(2) The Manager shall give notice to the employee of any proposed
layoff and reasons therefor within a reasonable time before the
effective date thereof.
D. Dismissals.
(1) A department head may dismiss any employee for inefficiency,
misconduct, violation of the Charter or this Code or other just
cause with the approval of the Manager.
(2) No dismissal of a permanent employee shall take effect unless at
least two days prior to the effective date thereof the Manager gives
to such employee a written statement setting forth in substance the
reasons therefor.
§ 5-60 RADNOR CODE § 5-61
C:118
§ 5-62. Complaints and grievances.
(3) Any employee who is dismissed shall have the right to appeal the
dismissal in accordance with the appropriate grievance
procedures.
(4) Dismissal of department heads shall be subject to approval by the
Board.
E. Resignations.
(1) To resign in good standing, an employee must give the Manager at
least 14 calendar days notice unless the Manager, because of
extenuating circumstances, agrees to permit a shorter period of
notice.
(2) A written resignation shall be supplied by the employee to the
Manager giving reasons for leaving. Failure to comply with this rule
shall be entered on the service record of the employee and may be
cause for denying future employment with the Township.
(3) The Manager shall notify the employee, in writing, of the
acceptance of his resignation.
F. Retirement. Retirement shall be in accordance with existing Township
pension or retirement plans.66
G. Issuance and return of Township property.
(1) It is the responsibility of the department head to keep a record of
all Township property which is in the hands of employees within his
department.
(2) An employee leaving the service, whether through retirement,
resignation, layoff or dismissal, is responsible for returning any
Township property which he may have in his possession. Upon
termination, such property must be returned to the department
which the employee is leaving. When an employee terminates his
employment, the department head shall certify to the Manager that
all property has been returned.
(3) All moneys due the employee shall be withheld until the Manager is
satisfied that all Township property has been returned.
A. Complaints. Any employee who has a complaint shall first notify his
immediate supervisor.
B. Grievances. In the case of employees covered by formal contract,
grievance procedures shall be those stipulated in the contract. In the
case of employees who are not covered by formal contract, grievance
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Pensions and Annuities.
§ 5-61 CHARTER § 5-62
C:119
§ 5-63. Position classification. [Amended 3-27-1989 by Ord. No.
89-12]
procedures shall be established by the Board and circulated to the
affected employees.
A. Under the direction of the Township Manager (the "Manager"), the
Township shall provide a plan for classifying all positions in the
Township's employ whereby each position shall, in accordance with its
level of responsibilities, skills, training, working conditions or other job
requirements, be so grouped and identified by various series,
classifications and grades.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Manager, with input from
department heads or a compensation committee he selects, to:
(1) Determine the level of responsibilities and other applicable criteria
to consistently group a position into a series, classification and
grade.
(2) Place in the appropriate series, classification and grade all existing
positions falling initially under this plan and all newly created
positions that may be created after the plan's adoption.
(3) Decide from time to time whether a position is in its appropriate
series, classification and grade and change a position, when facts
warrant, from one series, classification and grade to another.
C. Certain details of the classification system shall be periodically
distributed as follows:
(1) The series, classification, grade and pay range for each position
shall be presented to the Board and provided to each employee
annually on or about the later of January 1, the date on which the
annual Township budget is adopted, or the date on which a new
collective bargaining agreement with civilian employees is ratified.
(2) Changes made throughout the year to a position's series,
classification, grade, pay ranges or the standards used to
determine each shall be presented to the Board and provided to
each affected employee no later than 30 days following the
implementation of such changes.
D. The classification process shall work as follows:
(1) The process for designating the series, classification, grade and
pay range of any current position falling under this plan or of any
position created after adoption of this plan may be initiated by a
department head or by the Manager.
(2) The Manager shall then approve a series, classification, grade and
pay range for each position under this plan, based upon input from
department heads or a compensation committee, if he so chooses.
§ 5-62 RADNOR CODE § 5-63
C:120
§ 5-64. Personnel records.
§ 5-65. Standards of conduct.67
The Manager's decision as to which series, classification, grade
and pay range a position is assigned shall be final, subject only
to a grievance procedure contained in any collective bargaining
agreement ratified after this plan's adoption that specifically
applies to this plan.
A. The Manager shall maintain records necessary for the proper
administration of personnel practices and procedures.
B. Individual personnel records shall be maintained in confidential files
which are not subject to public inspection.
C. Requests for the disclosure of individual personnel information will be
honored only as prescribed by law or upon request by the employee.
Employees shall be informed of requests for information.
D. The Manager shall prescribe the necessary forms for reports of all
personnel changes. Such forms shall provide space for entering such
supporting or other pertinent information as the Manager shall deem
necessary.
A. General. The standards of conduct shall be as specified in the Charter
and the standard of ethics section of this chapter.68
B. Outside employment. Employees who wish to obtain outside
employment shall obtain prior written approval from the Manager.
Employees shall not engage in outside employment which would in any
way hinder the objective and impartial performance of their public
duties, embarrass the Township or impair their efficiency on the job.
Employees who are or have been granted permission to engage in
outside employment must sign the following waiver:
"The undersigned, an employee of the Township of Radnor,
Pennsylvania, does hereby waive and release said Township from any
liability because of any injury or sickness incurred by reason of any
employment accepted by the undersigned other than as an employee
of the Township. This waiver shall be binding upon my heirs,
representatives or assigns."
C. Gifts and fees. Except for the annual Police and Fireman Fund, which is
collected by the Suburban and Wayne Times, and contributions to the
employees' pension or retirement funds, no employee shall accept any
money, gift, service or other thing of value from any person, firm or
corporation which to his knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly,
in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the Township; nor
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 39, Ethics, Code of.
68.Editor's Note: See § 5-10 of this chapter.
§ 5-63 CHARTER § 5-65
C:121
§ 5-66. Merit and service awards.
The Board may make merit and service awards which recognize meritorious
service of employees at retirement.
§ 5-67. Performance appraisal. [Amended 3-27-1989 by Ord. No.
89-12]
shall any employee receive any funds solicited directly or by others.
No employee shall accept any money, gift, service, favor or other thing
of value that may tend to influence him in the discharge of his duties
or grant, in the discharge of his duties, any improper favor, service or
thing of value. [Amended 12-12-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34]
D. Falsification of records. Any employee who, for any reason, improperly
alters, falsifies or destroys or causes to be altered, falsified or destroyed
official documents, records or files, regardless of motive, is subject to
immediate separation or other disciplinary action.
E. Conviction for criminal offenses. Conviction of any crime arising to a
misdemeanor or felony shall constitute a basis for suspension or
removal.
F. Citizens' complaints. Any written complaint of a citizen involving the
conduct of an employee shall be filed with the Manager. The Manager
shall keep a file not subject to public inspection of such complaint and
the disposition thereof.
A. The Manager shall develop and maintain one or more performance
appraisal systems that:
(1) Provide for an annual appraisal of the job performance of every
employee. Such appraisals shall be administered at least once
annually by the employee's direct supervisor and shall be reviewed
and approved by the respective department head and by the
Manager.
(2) Encourage ongoing satisfactory levels of performance by
employees.
(3) Promote employee participation and feedback in the performance
appraisal process.
(4) Apply the results of such performance appraisals as a basis for
paying, training, rewarding, penalizing, reassigning, promoting,
demoting, retaining and removing employees.
B. Under procedures developed by the Manager, the performance
appraisal system shall provide for the following:
(1) Levels of performance standards shall be established to practically
permit the accurate evaluation of job performance on the basis of
objectively developed criteria related to the job in question,
§ 5-65 RADNOR CODE § 5-67
C:122
including, as a minimum, dependability, quality and quantity of
work performed. Other criteria may be added or changed at the
discretion of the Manager.
(2) Each employee to be evaluated after this plan's adoption shall be
given a written copy of the criteria that will be used in evaluating
his job performance. Any subsequent changes made to the
appraisal criteria shall be given, in writing, to each employee in a
timely manner.
(3) Each department head shall present to each employee under his/
her supervision, no later than on such employee's anniversary date
of hire, a written evaluation of that employee's performance during
the previous year. Newly hired employees or current employees
whose performance is judged less than satisfactory may be
evaluated after six months of service or at other intervals, at the
discretion of the department head and with the approval of the
Manager. Initial performance appraisals administered under this
plan shall commence as soon as practical following this plan's
adoption, but no later than January 1, 1990.
(4) The Manager shall review the rating of each employee appraised
and may, at his discretion, change the rating. The Manager's
decision shall be final, subject to only those grievance procedures
in ratified collective bargaining agreements that specifically apply
to this plan.
(5) An employee who disagrees with the rating contained in a
performance appraisal may, within five working days of the date of
receipt of such rating, appeal, in writing, to the Manager, listing the
reasons for the appeal. The Manager shall review feedback from
the employee and the respective department head and shall render
a decision within five working days; the Manager's decision shall be
final, subject to only those grievance procedures in ratified
collective bargaining agreements that specifically apply to this
plan.
(6) Each performance appraisal shall be made a part of the employee's
personnel file. The employee shall receive a copy of each
evaluation.
(7) Subject to provisions contained in § 5-60 of this chapter and in
ratified collective bargaining agreements, employees who have one
or more appraisals showing less than satisfactory or below average
job performance may be subject to actions, including but not
limited to job training, counseling, reassignment, demotion,
probation and termination.
§ 5-67 CHARTER § 5-68
C:123
§ 5-68. Suggestions.
The Board shall establish a system for the receipt and acknowledgment of
suggestions of employees for improving Township service.
§ 5-69. Police personnel policies.
The Police Department Manual is hereby incorporated by reference and
made a part of this chapter.69
§ 5-70. Civil service provisions. [Amended 4-13-1981 by Ord. No.
81-12; 1-28-1991 by Ord. No. 91-08; 11-23-1992 by Ord. No. 92-21;
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 96-33; 10-23-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-25;
7-19-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-28; 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-15;
10-13-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13; 1-5-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-16;
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-11]
A. Definition of terms; word usage.
(1) Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words
and phrases, whenever used in this section, shall be construed to
have the meanings indicated herein:
ALTERNATE COMMISSIONER — An individual appointed by the
Appointing Authority in a First Class Township to serve as an
Alternate Civil Service Commissioner.
APPLICANT — Any individual who applies in writing to the
Commission in response to a legally advertised notice of vacancy
and/or examination for any position full time in the Police
Department.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Radnor, County of Delaware, Pennsylvania.
CERTIFICATION — The submission to the Appointing Authority
pursuant to its request of the top three names taken from the
Eligibility List created by the Civil Service Commission.
CHAIRPERSON — The Chairperson of the Civil Service
Commission of the Township of Radnor, County of Delaware,
Pennsylvania.
COMMISSION — The Civil Service Commission of the Township of
Radnor, County of Delaware, Pennsylvania.
ELIGIBILITY LIST — The document created by the Commission
after completion of the examination requirements set forth in
Subsection D(1) through (6) for Patrol Officer and Subsection E(1)
through (4) for higher ranks.
69.Editor's Note: The Police Department Manual is on file and available for inspection in the
office of the Police Chief.
§ 5-68 RADNOR CODE § 5-70
C:124
EXAMINATION — The series of examinations given to applicants
to determine their qualifications for a position in the Police
Department.
FURLOUGH LIST — The list containing the names of persons
temporarily laid off from positions in the Police Department
because of a reduction in the number of police officers.
PATROL OFFICER — For purposes of this section, an entry level
sworn full-time position in the Police Department.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Township
of Radnor.
POLICE OFFICER — A person employed by the Police Department
as an Act-120-certified law enforcement officer, including a Patrol
Officer, Corporal, Sergeant, Lieutenant, Captain, Deputy
Superintendent and Superintendent.
PROBATIONER — A police officer in the Police Department who
has been appointed or promoted, but who has not yet completed
the one-year probationary period specified in Subsection D(14).
RANK — Recognized ranks in the Police Department are:
REDUCTION IN RANK — A change to a different rank where the
employee fulfilled all of the requirements of this section for both
the prior and current rank. However, a decrease in salary without
a change to a different rank shall not necessarily constitute a
reduction in rank.
REMOVAL — The permanent separation of a police officer from the
Police Department.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Civil Service Commission of
Radnor.
SUSPENSION — The temporary separation without pay of a police
officer from the Police Department.
VICE CHAIRPERSON — A Commissioner of the Civil Service
Commission elected by the Commissioners to preside over
meetings in the Chairperson's disability, absence or recusal.
(a) Patrol Officer;
(b) Corporal;
(c) Sergeant;
(d) Lieutenant;
(e) Captain;
(f) Deputy Superintendent; and
(g) Superintendent.
§ 5-70 CHARTER § 5-70
C:125
(2) Gender. The words "he," "his," "him," and "men" when used in this
section represent both the masculine and feminine genders.
B. The Commission.
(1) Civil Service Commission.
(a) The Commission shall consist of three Commissioners who
shall be qualified electors of the Township of Radnor and shall
be appointed by the Appointing Authority for an initial term of
six years and with only one reappointment, not to exceed 12
years. Any vacancy occurring in the Commission for any reason
whatsoever shall be filled by the Appointing Authority for the
unexpired term within the period of 30 days after such vacancy
occurs.
(b) Each member of the Commission, before entering upon the
discharge of the duties of his office, shall take an oath or
affirmation to support the Constitution of the United States
and of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to perform his
official duties with fidelity. No Civil Service Commissioner shall
receive compensation.
(c) The Board of Commissioners may appoint no more than three
qualified electors of the Township to serve as alternate
members of the Commission. The term of office shall be six
years with only one reappointment. When serving in the stead
of a Commissioner, an Alternate Commissioner shall be
entitled to participate in all proceedings and discussions of the
Commission to the full extent as provided by law for
Commission members, including specifically the right to cast a
vote as a voting member during the proceedings, and shall
have all the powers and duties set forth in the First Class
Township Code and as otherwise provided by law. Any
Alternate Commissioner not serving in the stead of a
Commissioner may participate in any proceeding or discussion
of the Commission, but shall not be entitled to vote as a
member of the Commission unless designated as a voting
alternate member pursuant to Section 628 of the First Class
Township Code.
(2) Offices incompatible with Civil Service Commissioner. No
Commissioner or Alternate Commissioner shall at the same time
hold an elective or appointed office under the United States
government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Township of
Radnor, or any political subdivision of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, except that one member of the Commission may be a
member of the Board of Township Commissioners.
(3) Organization of Commission; quorum.
§ 5-70 RADNOR CODE § 5-70
C:126
(a) The Commission first appointed shall organize within 10 days
of its appointment and shall elect one of its members as its
Chairperson, one as its Vice Chairperson and one as its
Secretary. The Commission shall thereafter meet and organize
on the first Monday of January year. Three members of the
Commission shall constitute a quorum, and no action of the
Commission shall be valid unless it shall have the concurrence
of at least two members.
(b) If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a
quorum is not reached, the Chairperson shall designate as
many Alternate Commissioners to sit on the Commission as
may be needed to provide a quorum. Any Alternate
Commissioner shall continue to serve on the Commission in all
proceedings involving the matter or case for which the
Alternate Commissioner was initially designated until the
Commission has made a final determination of the matter or
case. Designation of an Alternate Commissioner shall be made
on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining
seniority among all Alternate Commissioners.
(c) For purposes of hiring and promoting police officers under this
section, each step of the hiring or promotional process
requiring official action by the Commission shall be considered
a separate matter or case under Subsection B(3)(b), above, and
each step of the hiring or promotional process need not be
voted upon or approved by the same composition of
Commissioners or Alternate Commissioners, as the case may
be, provided that the quorum requirement has been satisfied.
(4) Duties of Chairperson and Secretary. The Chairperson or, in his or
her absence, the Vice Chairperson, shall preside at all meetings
and hearings of the Commission, decide all points of order or
procedure and perform any duties required by law or this section.
The Chairperson shall carry on at the direction of the Commission
all official correspondence of the Commission, send out all notices
required by law and this section, keep a record of each examination
or other official action of the Commission, and perform all other
duties required by law or this section. The Secretary shall carry on
at the direction of the Commission all official correspondence of the
Commission, send out all notices required by law and these rules,
keep a record of each examination or other official action of the
Commission, and perform all other duties required by law or these
rules.
(5) Meetings. Except for the annual organizational meeting, all
meetings shall be held either at the call of the Chairperson or at the
call of two members of the Commission. The Commission shall have
the discretion to determine whether meetings shall be open to the
public when not specifically regulated by law or this section. The
Chairman of the Commission shall give each Commissioner and
§ 5-70 CHARTER § 5-70
C:127
Alternate Commissioner 48 hours' written notice of each and every
meeting of the Commission.
(6) Clerks and supplies. The Appointing Authority shall furnish the
Commission with such supplies and clerical assistance as may be
necessary for the Commission to fulfill its duties. In addition, the
Commission may retain counsel, and any other consultants or
experts as are necessary. The elected and appointed officials of the
Township of Radnor shall assist the Commission with all reasonable
and appropriate efforts, including compensation for any counsel or
experts retained by the Commission. Physicians, psychiatrists,
psychologists and other qualified medical professionals shall be
appointed by the Appointing Authority.
(7) Amendment of section. The Commission may recommend to the
Appointing Authority that this section be amended, revised, voided
or replaced for any reason by action of a majority of the
Commission at any properly convened meeting of the Commission.
Before any changes to this section may become effective, those
changes after adoption by the Commission must be approved by the
Appointing Authority.
(8) Minutes and records. The Commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings and records of examinations and other official actions.
All records of the Commission shall be preserved and disposed of
according to the Retention and Disposition Schedule for Records of
Pennsylvania Municipalities issued by the Local Government
Records Committee under the authority of the Municipal Records
Act, 1968 P.L. 961, Number 428, 53 P.S. § 9001. Any and all records
related to any disciplinary action filed with the Commission shall be
open to public inspection subject to reasonable regulation. The
Chairperson shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote
of each member upon each question. If the member is absent or
fails to vote, the Chairperson shall indicate that fact in the minutes.
(9) Investigations. The Commission shall have the power to make
investigations concerning all matters relating to the administration
and enforcement of this section. The Chairperson of the
Commission is authorized to administer oaths and affirmations in
connection with such investigations.
(10) Subpoenas.
(a) The Commission shall have the power to issue subpoenas over
the signature of the Chairperson, or designee, to acquire the
attendance of witnesses and the production of records and
papers pertaining to any hearing, investigation or inquiry. The
fees of such witnesses for attendance and travel shall be the
same as for witnesses appearing in the Court of Common
Pleas, County of Delaware, Pennsylvania, and shall be paid
from appropriations for the incidental expense of the
§ 5-70 RADNOR CODE § 5-70
C:128
Commission. All elected and appointed officials, police officers,
and employees of the Township of Radnor shall attend and
testify when required to do so by the Commission without
additional compensation.
(b) If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena
issued by the Commission, upon conviction of such refusal or
neglect in a summary proceeding, that person shall be
sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $100, and in default of
the payment of such fine and cost shall be imprisoned not to
exceed 30 days.
(c) If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena, the
Commission may apply by petition to the Court of Common
Pleas, County of Delaware, Pennsylvania, for its subpoena,
requiring the attendance of such persons before the
Commission or the court to testify and to produce any records
and papers necessary, and in default thereof shall be held in
contempt of court.
(11) Annual report. The Commission shall make an annual report to the
Township Commissioners containing a brief summary of its work
during the year which shall be available for public inspection.
C. Applications to the Police Department.
(1) Eligibility for examination. In order to be eligible for participation
in any examination for a position with the Police Department, every
applicant must submit a completed application form to the
Commission before the deadline stated by the Commission for that
specific examination. The applicant must make an oath or
affirmation that the application is completed truthfully, and the
applicant is subject to the penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 relating
to unsworn falsification to authorities.
(2) Nondiscrimination in employment. The Township of Radnor is an
equal opportunity employer. It is the policy of the Township of
Radnor and the Commission to grant equal employment
opportunities to qualified persons without regard to race, religion,
color, national origin, gender, age, veteran's status, marital status
or non-job-related physical or mental handicap or disability. The
Township of Radnor and the Commission will provide equal
opportunities in employment and promotion. No disciplinary or
other adverse action by the Appointing Authority or Commission
taken against a police officer covered by this section shall be based
on race, religion, color, national origin, gender, age, veteran's
status, marital status or non-job-related physical or mental
handicap or disability.
(3) Availability. Application forms shall be available to all interested
persons in the office of the Township of Radnor Secretary and from
§ 5-70 CHARTER § 5-70
C:129
such other offices and officers that the Commission, from time to
time, may choose to designate.
(4) Age. All applicants for the position of Patrol Officer must have
reached their 21st birthday on or before the deadline for
submitting completed applications.
(5) General qualifications for Patrol Officer.
(a) Every applicant for the position of Patrol Officer in the Police
Department shall possess at the time of filling the application a
high school diploma or equivalent, have successfully
completed Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Municipal Police
Officers' Education and Training Commission Act 120 training
and thereby be eligible for certification by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania Municipal Police Officers' Education and
Training Commission. Every applicant for the position of Patrol
Officer shall be a United States citizen, be physically and
mentally fit to perform the full duties of a Police Officer, and
possess a valid motor vehicle operator's license at the time of
appointment.
(b) Veterans' preference points. Pursuant to the Veterans'
Preference Act, 51 Pa.C.S.A. § 7104(a), any applicant for the
position of Patrol Officer, whether lateral or nonlateral, who
qualifies as a "soldier" under this Act, shall have 10 points
added to his total score if he had received passing scores in all
other areas of testing and qualification. Any applicant claiming
veterans' preference shall be responsible for providing any and
all relevant documents to the Commission.
(6) General qualifications: Deputy Superintendent, Captain,
Lieutenant, Sergeant and Corporal.
(a) All applicants for a promotional position shall currently be
Radnor Police Officers and have continuous prior service with
the Police Department of the Township of Radnor as follows:
[1] An applicant for the position of Corporal shall have at least
three years of experience as a Patrol Officer in the Police
Department of the Township of Radnor.
[2] An applicant for the position of Sergeant shall have at least
four years of experience as a Patrol Officer or higher rank
in the Police Department of the Township of Radnor.
[3] An applicant for the position of Lieutenant shall have at
least six years of experience as a Patrol Officer or higher
rank with the Police Department of the Township of
Radnor and two years of experience as a Sergeant or
higher rank with the Police Department of the Township of
Radnor.
§ 5-70 RADNOR CODE § 5-70
C:130
[4] An applicant for the position of Captain or Deputy
Superintendent shall have at least 10 years of experience
as a Patrol Officer or higher rank with the Police
Department of the Township of Radnor and two years of
experience as a Lieutenant or higher with the Police
Department of the Township of Radnor.
(7) Rejection of applicant. The Commission may refuse to examine or, if
examined, may refuse to certify as eligible after examination any
applicant who is found to lack any of the minimum qualifications for
examination prescribed in this section for the particular position
for which the applicant has applied. In addition, the Commission
may refuse to examine or, if examined, may refuse to certify as
eligible any applicant who is incapable of performing all the
essential functions of the position or who has a physical or mental
condition which restricts the person's ability to perform all of the
essential functions of the position applied for, or who is a habitual
substance abuser, who is guilty of any crime involving moral
turpitude, or who has been dismissed from public service for
delinquency or misconduct in office.
(8) Public notice. The Commission shall conspicuously post, at least
three weeks prior to the deadline for accepting applications, in the
Township of Radnor Municipal Building Administration Office and
the Township of Radnor Police Department notice of the time and
place of the initial examination, together with the information as to
the type of position to be filled, the requirements for that position,
where applications may be obtained for the examination, and the
deadline for filing applications. In addition, at least three weeks
prior to the deadline for accepting applications, publication of the
notice shall occur in at least one newspaper of general circulation
or a newspaper circulating generally in the Township of Radnor.
(9) Recording and filing applications. Applications for the position in
the Police Department to be filled shall be received at the Township
of Radnor Municipal Building Administration Office only after an
examination has been properly advertised and before the deadline
for receiving applications which must be set forth in the public
advertisement. Applications and required documents will be
received by the Township of Radnor Secretary or his/her designee
in full, and no portion thereof shall be accepted. That person shall
record the receipt of the application. Applicants for the position of
Patrol Officer shall submit the following documents with the
application: a photocopy of his driver's license; a photocopy of
documentation certifying receipt of his high school diploma or
equivalent; a photocopy of documentation certifying completion of
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Municipal Police Officers'
Education and Training Commission Act 120 training; proof of
citizenship; and, if veterans' preference is being sought, a
photocopy of his/her honorable discharge or DD-214 from the
§ 5-70 CHARTER § 5-70
C:131
United States Armed Forces. Any application containing material
errors or omissions may, at the discretion of the Commission, be
returned to the applicant for correction, provided that such action
by the Commission shall not serve to extend the applicant's filing
deadline.
(10) Hearing for disqualified applicants. If any applicant or person is
aggrieved by the refusal of the Commission to examine or to certify
the applicant as eligible after examination, the Commission shall,
at the written request of the applicant, within 10 days appoint a
time and place for a public hearing, at which time the Commission
shall take testimony and review its refusal to provide examination
or certification. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the
procedures set forth in the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. The applicant or aggrieved party must make his request for a
hearing in writing within 10 calendar days of the date when he
knew or should have known of the Commission's action which is
being challenged. The decision of the Commission shall be final.
(11) Fees. Radnor Township may set a reasonable fee to be charged in
connection with the filing of an application for Patrol Officer. The
fee shall be identified in the public notice required by Subsection
C(8). There shall be no fee assessed in connection with any
application for promotion.
D. For the examination of applicants for the position of Patrol Officer.
(1) Hiring procedures for the position of Patrol Officer. The
Commission shall have two separate procedures for screening and
ranking applicants for Patrol Officer. One, for lateral transfers, will
limit applicants to current Act-120-certified Pennsylvania municipal
police officers and current Pennsylvania State Troopers, in each
case with at least two years of full-time service as of the application
filing deadline. The other, for nonlateral transfers, will be open to
anyone who meets the requirements of Subsection C(4) and (5). At
the time a testing cycle for a Patrol Officer is announced, the
Commission shall specify whether the testing cycle is open to
lateral transfers or to nonlateral transfers.
(2) The lateral transfer examination for a Patrol Officer shall consist of
two oral examinations which will be graded on a one-hundred-point
scale with each exam representing 50% of the final score. Both oral
examinations shall include questioning applicants regarding how
they would respond to relevant law enforcement situations and
other matters which reasonably test the applicants' ability to
perform police work as a Patrol Officer. One oral examination shall
be conducted by a panel designated by the Commission. The other
examination shall be conducted by a panel designated by the
Superintendent. In addition, each applicant will undergo a physical
fitness test. This physical fitness test will be graded on a pass/fail
basis for every applicant. After an applicant has been extended an
§ 5-70 RADNOR CODE § 5-70
C:132
offer of employment, final appointment shall be contingent upon
the applicant passing a medical and psychological examination as
well as passing a background investigation.
(3) The nonlateral examination procedure for Patrol Officer shall
consist of a written and an oral examination which will be graded
on a one-hundred-point scale with the written examination
representing 50% of the final score and the oral examination
representing 50% of the final score. In addition, each applicant will
undergo a physical fitness test. This physical fitness test will be
graded on a pass/fail basis for every applicant. After an applicant
has been extended an offer of employment, final appointment shall
be contingent upon the applicant passing a medical and
psychological examination as well as passing a background
investigation.
(4) Written examination for nonlateral Patrol Officer. The written
examination for applicants for nonlateral Patrol Officer shall be
graded on a one-hundred-point scale. Only the applicants receiving
a grade of 75% or higher will continue in the application process
and participate in the oral examination. Within 30 days after the
administration of the written examination, all applicants shall be
given written notice of their test results, and the passing applicants
shall be scheduled for an oral examination appointment.
(5) Oral examination for nonlateral Patrol Officer. The applicants for
Patrol Officer who scored 75% or higher in the written examination
shall be given an oral examination which will be graded on a onehundred-
point scale with a score of 75% or higher necessary for
passing. The oral examination shall include questioning applicants
regarding how they would respond to relevant law enforcement
situations and other matters which reasonably test the applicants'
ability to perform police work as a Patrol Officer. Within 30 days
after the applicants' oral examination, they shall be informed of the
score in their oral examination and total overall score, and each
passing applicant shall be informed of the date for physical fitness
testing.
(6) Physical fitness testing for Patrol Officer. All applicants for the
position of Patrol Officer must meet the relevant age and gender
standard for all four of the following requirements:
For males:
Event
Age 20 to
29
Age 30 to
39
Age 40
to 49
Age 50
to 59
Age 60
+
300 meter
run
62.1 63.0 77.0 87.0 n/a
Bench
press*
0.93 0.83 0.76 0.68 0.63
§ 5-70 CHARTER § 5-70
C:133
For males:
Event
Age 20 to
29
Age 30 to
39
Age 40
to 49
Age 50
to 59
Age 60
+
Sit-ups 35 32 27 21 17
1.5 mile
run
13:08 13:48 14:33 16:16 18:39
For females:
Event
Age 20 to
29
Age 30
to 39
Age 40 to
49
Age 50
to 59
Age 60
+
300 meter
run
75.0 82.0 106.7 n/a n/a
Bench
press*
0.56 0.51 0.47 0.42 0.40
Sit-ups 30 22 17 12 4
1.5 mile run 15:56 16:46 18:26 20:17 22:34
* For bench press, six attempts may be made to complete one
repetition equal to body weight times ratio.
(7) Background investigation.
(a) The Commission shall request the Superintendent to arrange
for a background investigation for applicants on the eligibility
list. An investigation will be conducted on the top applicants to
ensure a sufficient certified eligibility list for each opening. The
background investigation shall include interviews with the
applicant's family, acquaintances, current and former
employers, current and former neighbors, references and
current and former teachers and school officials. In addition,
the applicant's record of criminal history shall be investigated.
The applicant may be interviewed directly when the
information collected during the background investigation
requires clarification or explanation.
(b) All applicants shall execute an appropriate authorization for
release of personal information, and cooperate fully in
providing information upon request to ensure a thorough and
complete investigation. After completion of the background
investigation, the Superintendent shall make a
recommendation to the Commission as to whether or not the
applicant is an appropriate candidate for consideration for
appointment as a Patrol Officer.
(c) As part of the background investigation, all applicable
applicants shall undergo a polygraph test(s) based upon a
personal data questionnaire that an applicant shall be required
to complete and submit to the polygraph examiner. The
§ 5-70 RADNOR CODE § 5-70
C:134
polygraph examination will adhere to the professional
standards of the American Polygraph Association. If the
examiner shall deem any of the applicant's responses to be
deceptive, the examiner shall inform the applicant and give
the applicant the opportunity to explain, deny, or admit the
deception. If the applicant denies being deceptive or if the
examiner finds an explanation to be unsatisfactory, the
applicant shall be given the opportunity to reanswer the
question or, if determined by the examiner to be necessary, to
retake the test.
(d) Eligibility of the applicant shall be based upon the criteria set
forth in Subsection C(7) of this section and on passing the
polygraph examination. The Commission's recommendation
shall be in writing and if the recommendation is to disqualify,
then a detailed written explanation of the reasons for
disqualification must be included. The Commission shall make
the final determination as to whether the information collected
during the background investigation warrants rejection of the
candidate.
(e) Within 30 days after the Commission considers the
recommendation of the Superintendent or his/her designee,
each applicant will be informed whether he has passed the
background investigation. Disqualified applicants may appeal
pursuant to Subsection C(10).
(8) Certification of the list of eligible candidates and appointment.
(a) At the completion of the examination requirements set forth in
Subsection D(1) through (7), the Commission shall rank all
passing applicants receiving the highest score at the top of the
Eligibility List and the applicant receiving the lowest passing
score at the bottom of the Eligibility List. Applicants who
qualify for veterans' preference points shall have those points
added to their passing score prior to being ranked on the
Eligibility List. In the case of tied scores, the tie shall be broken
in favor of the earliest time/date stamp on the application.
(b) The Eligibility List shall be valid for one year from the date the
Commission ranks all passing applicants, assigns veterans
points and formally adopts the Eligibility List. The Commission
may, at its sole discretion, by a vote of the majority of the
Commission at a duly authorized Commission meeting, extend
the Eligibility List up to an additional 12 months. In the
absence of a lawful extension by the Commission, the
Eligibility List shall expire. The Commission may, at its sole
discretion, void an Eligibility List at any time for any reason.
(9) Vacancy. The Appointing Authority may fill any vacancy in an
existing position of Patrol Officer in the Police Department which
§ 5-70 CHARTER § 5-70
C:135
occurs as a result of expansion of the Police Department,
retirement, resignation, disability or death, by the reappointment
or reinstatement of a former employee who has been furloughed.
Any officer, who has been furloughed for more than one year, will
be required to undergo a medical examination, a psychological
examination and a full background investigation, inclusive of
criminal conviction search.
(10) Vacancy appointment. If no Furlough List exists or if positions
remain to be filled after all names on the Furlough List have been
offered reemployment, every vacant position, except that of
Superintendent, shall be filled only in the following manner:
(a) The Appointing Authority shall notify the Commission of any
vacancy which is to be filled and shall request the certification
of three names from the Eligibility List;
(b) If three names are not available, then the Commission shall
certify the name(s) remaining on the Eligibility List.
(11) Conditional Appointment. When the Appointing Authority deems it
appropriate to make an appointment to fill a Patrol Officer vacancy,
it shall make a conditional appointment from any of the three
names certified as eligible, subject to that person passing the
medical and psychological examinations. When one or more of the
three applicants on the certified list is a veteran, then the veteran
shall be selected.
(12) Procedures after conditional appointment. After the Appointing
Authority selects an applicant from the certified list of three for
appointment to fill a vacancy, the candidate shall submit to a
medical examination and a psychological examination by the
appropriate medical experts. The applicant shall be notified of his
conditional appointment contingent upon passing these two
components. The medical and psychological examinations shall be
as specified in Subsection D(15).
(13) Disqualification. Should the applicant be disqualified based upon
failure of any of the following components: written examination,
oral examination, physical agility test, medical examination,
psychological examination or background investigation; the
Commission shall then certify another name to be included with the
two previously certified names for consideration by the Appointing
Authority.
(14) Probationary period. Every successful applicant appointed to the
position of Patrol Officer with the Police Department shall serve a
one-year probationary period. During the probationary period, the
probationer may be dismissed only for cause for the reasons set
forth in Subsection C(7). However, at the end of the one-year
probationary period, if the conduct of the probationer has not been
satisfactory to the Appointing Authority, the probationer shall be
§ 5-70 RADNOR CODE § 5-70
C:136
notified in writing that the appointment will not be permanent.
At that time, the probationer's employment shall end. Any
probationer, who is not informed in writing that his performance
has been unsatisfactory, shall receive a permanent appointment.
Any probationer who is notified in writing that his appointment will
not be made permanent has no rights of appeal under this section.
(15) Medical and psychological examinations. Physical examinations
shall be under the direction of a physician or other qualified
medical professional. Psychological medical examinations shall be
under the direction of a psychiatrist or psychologist.
(a) The physician or other qualified medical professional and the
psychiatrist or psychologist shall be appointed by the
Appointing Authority and shall render an opinion as to whether
the conditional appointee has a physical or mental condition
which calls into question his ability to perform all of the
essential functions of the position for which he was
conditionally appointed.
(b) If the opinion rendered by the physician, other qualified
medical professional, psychiatrist or psychologist calls into
question the conditional appointee's ability to perform any
essential functions of a position, a person designated by the
Appointing Authority shall meet with the conditional appointee
for the purpose of having one or more interactive discussions
on whether the conditional appointee can, with or without
reasonable accommodation, perform all the essential functions
of the position.
(c) If, at the conclusion of the interactive discussion under
subsection D(15)(b), the Appointing Authority determines that
the conditional appointee is not qualified, the Appointing
Authority shall give written notice to the conditional appointee
and the Civil Service Commission.
(d) As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:
MEDICAL EXAMINATION — Any examination, procedure,
inquiry or test designed to obtain information about medical
history or a physical or mental condition which might
disqualify an applicant if it would prevent the applicant from
performing, with or without a reasonable accommodation, all
of the essential functions of the position.
PHYSICIAN — Shall have the meaning given to it in 1 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1991 (relating to definitions).
QUALIFIED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL — An individual, in
collaboration with or under the supervision or direction of a
physician, as may be required by law, who is licensed:
§ 5-70 CHARTER § 5-70
C:137
As a physician assistant pursuant to the Act of December
20, 1985 (P.L. 457, No. 112), known as the "Medical
Practice Act of 1985," or the Act of October 5, 1978 (P.L.
1109, No. 261), known as the "Osteopathic Medical
Practice Act"; or
[1]
As a certified nurse practitioner pursuant to the Act of May
22, 1951 (P.L. 317, No. 69), known as "The Professional
Nursing Law."
[2]
E. Procedure for the examination of candidates for the positions of
Corporal, Sergeant, Lieutenant, Captain and Deputy Superintendent.
(1) General examination requirements for promotions.
(a) Corporal and Sergeant. The examination for the positions of
Corporal and Sergeant shall be a written and oral examination
which will be graded on a one-hundred-point scale with the
written examination representing 50% of the final score and
the oral examination representing 50% of the final score. After
a candidate has been extended an offer of promotion, the
promotion shall be final.
(b) Lieutenant. The examination for the position of Lieutenant
shall be a written and oral examination which will be graded on
a one-hundred-point scale with the written examination
representing 50% of the final score, and the oral examination
representing 50% of the final score. After a candidate has been
extended an offer of promotion, the promotion shall be final.
(c) Captain. The examination for the position of Captain shall be
an oral examination which will be graded on a one-hundredpoint
scale. After a candidate has been extended an offer of
promotion, the promotion shall be final.
(d) Deputy Superintendent. The examination for the position of
Deputy Superintendent shall be an oral examination which will
be graded on a one-hundred-point scale. After a candidate has
been extended an offer of promotion, the promotion shall be
final.
(2) Oral examinations.
(a) All applicants for the positions of Corporal, Sergeant,
Lieutenant, Captain and Deputy Superintendent shall be given
an oral exam which will be graded on a one-hundred-point
scale. The oral examination process designated by the
Commission shall, in addition to any other issues deemed
appropriate by the Commission or its designee(s), include
questioning applicants regarding how they would respond to
relevant law enforcement situations and other matters which
§ 5-70 RADNOR CODE § 5-70
C:138
reasonably test the officer's ability to perform police work in
that particular rank.
(b) The manner in which the oral examination process is
conducted, as well as the identity of the individuals who will
actually administer the oral examinations, shall be determined
by the Commission.
(3) Certification of the list of eligible candidates for promotion.
(a) At the completion of the promotional examination
requirements set forth in Subsection E(1) and (2), the
Commission shall, for each promotion test, rank all passing
applicants receiving the highest score at the top of the
Eligibility List and the applicant receiving the lowest passing
score at the bottom of the list. In the case of tied scores, the tie
shall be broken in favor of the earliest time/date stamp on the
candidate's letter of intent to be examined.
(b) The Eligibility List shall be valid for one year from the date the
Commission ranks all passing applicants and formally adopts
the Eligibility List. The Commission may, at its sole discretion,
by a vote of the majority of the Commission at a duly
authorized Commission meeting, extend the Eligibility List up
to an additional 12 months. In the absence of a lawful
extension by the Commission, the list shall expire. The
Commission may, at its sole discretion, void an Eligibility List
at any time for any reason.
(4) Probationary period. Every successful applicant appointed to a
promotional position with the Police Department shall serve a oneyear
probationary period. A promoted officer, during probation,
may be returned to a prior rank only for cause for the reasons set
forth in Subsection C(7). However, at the end of the one-year
probationary period, if the conduct of the probationer has not been
satisfactory to the Appointing Authority, the probationer shall be
notified in writing that the appointment will not be permanent. At
that time, a promoted officer shall return to his previous rank. Any
probationer who is not informed in writing that his performance
has been unsatisfactory shall receive a permanent appointment to
the new position. Any probationer who is notified in writing that his
appointment will not be made permanent has no rights of appeal
under this section.
F. Suspensions, removals and reductions in rank.
(1) Grounds for disciplinary action.
(a) No person appointed to a position in the Police Department
pursuant to this section may be suspended without pay or
removed and no person promoted in rank pursuant to this
§ 5-70 CHARTER § 5-70
C:139
section may be reduced in rank except for the following
reasons:
[1] Physical or mental disability affecting his ability to
continue in service, in which case the person shall receive
an honorable discharge from service;
[2] Neglect or violation of any official duty;
[3] Violation of any law of this commonwealth which provides
that such violation constitutes a misdemeanor or felony;
[4] Inefficiency, neglect, intemperance, disobedience of order,
or conduct unbecoming an officer;
[5] Intoxication while on duty;
[6] Engaging or participating in conducting of any political or
election campaign otherwise than to exercise his own right
of suffrage, except that this clause shall only apply to a
police officer while on duty or in uniform or while using
any Township property.
[7] Engaging or participating in the conduct of any political or
election campaign for an incompatible office pursuant to
Section 1401 of the First Class Township Code.
(b) No police officer shall be removed for religious, racial, color,
national origin, gender, age, veteran's status, marital status or
non-job-related physical or mental handicap or disability, or
political reasons.
(2) Furloughs. If, for reasons of economy or other valid reasons, it shall
be deemed necessary by the Appointing Authority to reduce the
number of police officers in the Police Department, then the
Appointing Authority shall furlough the person or persons,
including probationers, last appointed to the respective force.
(a) Such removal shall be accomplished by furloughing in
numerical order commencing with the person last appointed
until such reduction shall have been accomplished.
(b) In the event that the Appointing Authority decides to increase
the number of police officers in the Police Department, the
furloughed police officers shall be reinstated in order of their
seniority in the Police Department if the furloughed police
officer accepts reinstatement in writing within 30 days of
receiving notice of the opening.
(c) Any furloughed police officer must accept reinstatement in
writing within 30 days of receiving notice of the opening or
shall forego the reinstatement.
§ 5-70 RADNOR CODE § 5-70
C:140
(3) Notice of suspension, removal or reduction in rank.
(a) Whenever a police officer is suspended, removed or reduced in
rank, the specific charges warranting such actions shall be
stated in writing by the Appointing Authority clearly and in
sufficient detail to enable the police officer to understand the
nature of the charges against him and to allow him an
opportunity to respond to those charges. The charges shall
specify the subsection of Subsection F(1) which provides the
basis for the disciplinary action as well as an explanation of the
factual circumstances upon which the appointing authority
relied in finding a violation of Subsection F(1).
(b) Hearings shall be before the Commission. Within five days
after the imposition of disciplinary action, a written statement
of the charges shall be delivered to the officer either by
personal service or by certified mail. In addition, the charges
shall notify the officer of the right to appeal under Subsection
F(4) of this section. A copy of the statement of charges shall
also be served upon the members of the Civil Service
Commission.
(4) Hearings on suspension, removals and reductions in rank.
(a) The police officer who has been suspended, removed or
reduced in rank may appeal such decision by written notice to
the Chairperson, Township of Radnor Civil Service
Commission, 301 Iven Avenue, Wayne, PA 19087, requesting a
hearing. The notice must be received by the Commission no
later than 10 days from the police officer's receipt of the notice
under Subsection F(3)(b). The officer may make written
answers to any charges filed not later than the date fixed for
the hearing. Failure of the officer to provide written answers to
any of the charges shall not be deemed an admission by the
officer.
(b) Hearings shall be conducted by the Commission. The
Commission shall schedule a hearing within 10 days from
receipt of the Police Officer's written request for a hearing. At
any such hearing, the officer against whom the charges have
been made may be present and represented by counsel, may
call witnesses and present testimony and documentation in
defense. The Township of Radnor may also be represented by
counsel, call witnesses and present evidence as is necessary to
support the charges. A stenographic record of all testimony
shall be taken at every hearing and preserved by the
Commission.
(c) All testimony shall be given under oath administered by the
Chairperson or, in the absence of the chair, the Vice
Chairperson. The Commission shall have the power to issue
§ 5-70 CHARTER § 5-70
C:141
subpoenas as set forth in Subsection B(10). The hearing shall
be open to the public unless, prior to the commencement of the
hearing, a written or oral request to close the hearing is made
by either the charged officer or the Township of Radnor.
(d) In conducting a hearing under this section, the Commission's
standard of review shall be to determine whether a
preponderance of evidence has been presented to support the
reason for the disciplinary action. The Commission may
request post-hearing briefs, and shall issue a written decision
containing specific findings of facts and conclusions of law
within 60 days of receipt of the hearing transcript.
(e) In the event the charges are dismissed, the record shall be
sealed and not be available for public inspection. Additionally,
the police officer sought to be suspended, removed or demoted
shall be reinstated with full pay for the period of the
suspension, removal or demotion, and no charges relating to
the suspension, removal or reduction in rank shall be officially
recorded in the officer's record.
§ 5-70 RADNOR CODE § 5-70
C:142
Chapter 9
ASSESSMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 260.
§ 9-1. Options for payment of special assessments.
Upon the completion of any project for which special assessment charges
are to be levied by the Township, the Finance Director shall send a special
assessment statement to each affected property owner, providing the
following options for the payment of all unpaid assessments previously
levied and assessments to be levied:
A. The total amount of the assessment may be paid in full before a
specified date without any interest or penalty. Said date shall be shown
on the statement and shall be at least 90 days from the date when
receipt of the statement is anticipated.
B. Any assessment levied before January 1, 1999, may be paid in five or 10
equal installments.
C. Any assessment levied on or after January 1, 1999, may be paid in five,
10, or 15 equal installments.
D. Persons who elect an installment option may elect to pay said
installments in one annual payment in accordance with § 9-1 E or,
beginning with installments due on or after January 1, 1999, in two
semiannual payments each year in accordance with § 9-1F. In all cases,
the first installment payment shall be due on or before the date
specified in § 9-1A.
E. One annual installment payment. Each succeeding annual installment
specified in § 9-1B and § 9-1C shall be due on or before April 30 or
October 31 of succeeding years, whichever date is closer to one year
from the due date of the first installment.
F. Two semiannual installment payments. The first of each succeeding
semiannual installment payments made on assessments specified in
§ 9-1C shall be due on or before April 30 or October 31 of succeeding
years, whichever date is closer to one year from the due date of the first
installment, and each succeeding semiannual payment shall be due six
months thereafter. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-30]
G. Interest on the unpaid balance of any installment shall be per annum, at
the highest rate permissible by law at the time each installment is due,
and shall be paid at that time. In the event any installment payment is
received after its due date, a penalty of 5% shall be charged on the
§ 5-70 CHARTER § 9-1
C:143
§ 9-2. Failure to pay; lien; execution.
Chapter 15
CODE APPEALS BOARD
CHARTER REFERENCES
Citizen participation on boards — See § 8.02.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5,
Art. VI.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 19.
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 156.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
§ 15-1. Establishment; composition.
A Code Appeals Board is hereby established which shall consist of five
qualified persons appointed by the Board of Commissioners. The Board
shall consist of two architects or structural engineers licensed within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; a general contractor, master plumber and
master electrician, all of whom shall be licensed in their respective trades
with the Township of Radnor.
unpaid balance of the assessment on top of which said interest shall be
paid.
H. The Township shall send reminder notices to persons who elect an
installment option, but failure to send or to receive such a notice shall
not affect the due date and any applicable interest and penalty charges.
A. All assessments not paid in full on or before the date specified in § 9-1A
shall be liened by the Township Solicitor, and the cost of filing and
satisfying this lien shall be charged against the property owner.
B. The Solicitor, after consultation with the Township Manager and
Finance Director, shall proceed to collect delinquent payments owed by,
and may, if necessary, execute liens against, property owners who have
failed to make an installment payment specified in § 9-1B or § 9-1C for
two or more consecutive years. A list of all said delinquent property
owners shall be provided to the Board of Commissioners at least 30
days before any lien is so executed.
§ 9-1 RADNOR CODE § 15-2
C:144
§ 15-2. Terms of office of members.
Members of this Board shall hold office for periods of five years or until
a successor is appointed by the Board of Commissioners; except that the
terms of office for members appointed pursuant to this chapter shall be
fixed so that no more than one member shall be replaced during any one
calendar year.
§ 15-3. General powers; quorum.
The Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman; create, alter and
rescind rules for procedure; and hold meetings as frequently as the proper
and efficient discharge of its business shall require. A majority of the Board
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any and all business.
§ 15-4. Responsibilities.
The Board shall have responsibility for reviewing Chapter 125, Building
Construction; Chapter 156, Electrical Standards; Chapter 166, Fire
Prevention; Chapter 195, Mechanical Standards; Chapter 218, Plumbing;
and Chapter 222, Property Maintenance, for the Township and
recommending to the Board of Commissioners any modification or updating
of the chapters when determined necessary. The Board shall also be
responsible for reviewing and recommending changes in procedures for
the issuance of permits and preparing examinations for the licensing of
contractors, as well as serving as an Appeals Board for those persons
aggrieved by decisions of the Director of Community Development in the
interpretation of the aforementioned chapters.
Chapter 19
CODE ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code Appeals Board — See Ch. 15.
§ 19-1. Administrative authority.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Radnor hereby confers
upon the Township Manager, and those employees as the Township
Manager may determine necessary, the administrative authority to enforce
ordinances enacted under this Code.
§ 19-2. Administrative warrants.
The Director of Community Development shall have the authority to request
from the District Justice administrative warrants, provided that one or more
of the following requirements are met:
§ 15-2 CHARTER § 19-2
C:145
Chapter 25
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Liability insurance — See Ch. 5, § 5-4. Code of Ethics — See Ch. 39.
§ 25-1. Definitions. [Added 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — The Political Subdivision Tort Claims Act; Act of October 5, 1980,
P.L. 693; 42 Pa. C.S.A. § 8501 et seq.
EMPLOYEE — Includes any person acting on behalf of a governmental
unit whether compensated or not, including elected officers, members of
a governing body, volunteer firemen and others (excluding independent
contractors) who are designated to act for the unit, and such term shall have
the same meaning when used herein as that set forth in the Act.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor.
A. Written affidavits received from neighbors verifying personal
observations which indicate the occupancy of a premise is in violation
of Township regulations.
B. Police incident reports received which cite potential violations of
Township zoning, property maintenance or health code regulations.
C. Number of motor vehicles observed on a continuing basis parked on the
premises, to include motor vehicles with out-of-state license plates.
D. Excessive trash observed on a continual basis at the premises.
E. Failure by the owner and/or tenant to respond to a written request by
the Township for an inspection of the premises.
F. Failure to allow Township employees access to the premises for an
inspection following written notice.
G. Failure by the owner and/or tenant to allow access to the premises for
an inspection following written notice of violation.
H. Failure by the owner to respond to a written request by the Township to
provide a current lease or any other such legal document requested to
indicate the names of the current tenants.
§ 19-2 RADNOR CODE § 25-2
C:146
§ 25-2. Indemnification granted; notice required.
The Township shall indemnify to the fullest extent permitted by law any and
all persons who may serve or who have served at any time as employees
of the Township and their heirs, administrators, successors and assigns
against any and all judgments against such persons in any action, suit or
proceeding in which they or any of them are made parties or a party by
reason of being or having been employees of the Township where there
is a final judicial determination that the act of the employee which gave
rise to the action, suit or proceeding was or the employee in good faith
reasonably believed that such act was within the scope of the office or
duties of such person, provided that the employee being indemnified shall
have given to the Township timely prior written notice of the claim of
such employee for such indemnification, as required by the Act. For this
purpose, notice shall be deemed to be timely if given not later than 14 days
after the commencement of the action resulting in the judgment for which
indemnification is claimed.
§ 25-3. Defense.
When an action is brought against an employee and either it is alleged
that the act which gave rise to the claim was within the scope of the office
or duties of the employee or the Board of Commissioners determines that
such act was within the scope of such office or duties or the employee
in good faith reasonably believed the act was within the scope of such
office or duties, then, upon written request of the employee made not more
than 14 days after the commencement of the action, as provided in the
Act, the Township shall defend the action on behalf of the employee at its
own expense or, at its option, provide independent representation for the
employee also at the expense of the Township; and the Township shall also
pay on behalf of such employee amounts payable in any settlement, which
settlement has been approved by a disinterested majority of the Board of
Commissioners or, in the absence thereof, approved by independent counsel
for the Township.
§ 25-4. Protection denied for crimes and misconduct.
Notwithstanding the foregoing sections of this chapter, the Township shall
not indemnify an employee where there is a final judicial determination,
and the Township shall not provide any legal defense where the Board of
Commissioners reasonably determines, that the act of the employee which
gave rise to the action, suit or proceeding constituted a crime, actual fraud,
actual malice or willful misconduct.
§ 25-2 CHARTER § 25-4
C:147
Chapter 30
EDUCATIONAL SERVICE AGENCY
CHARTER REFERENCES
Finances generally — See Art. VII.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fiscal affairs generally — See Ch. 5, Art. VII.
§ 30-1. Establishment.
By authority vested in townships by the Act of 1979, P.L. 503, No. 108,70 the
Township of Radnor hereby establishes an Educational Service Agency.
§ 30-2. Composition; terms of office.
The Educational Service Agency shall be composed of three individuals,
each of whom shall be a resident of the Township, at least 18 years of
age, who shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners for three-year
overlapping terms coinciding with the calendar year, provided that in the
case of the three individuals appointed at the time of establishment of the
Educational Service Agency, the term of one shall expire on the first day of
January of the first year after the establishment, the term of one shall expire
on the first day of January of the second year after the establishment and
the term of the third member shall expire on the first day of January of the
third year following establishment.
§ 30-3. Qualifications for membership.
No elected Township or school district official shall be eligible to
appointment to or membership on the Educational Service Agency. A
vacancy shall occur in the Educational Service Agency in the case of any
member who ceases to be a resident of the Township or who otherwise
becomes disqualified for appointment or membership.
§ 30-4. Vacancies.
Vacancies in the Educational Service Agency occurring for any reason shall
be filled by appointment by the Board of Commissioners of a successor to
serve for the remainder of the term of the individual being replaced.
70.Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 802.1.
§ 25-4 RADNOR CODE § 30-5
C:148
§ 30-5. Function.
The function of the Educational Service Agency shall be to employ and
supervise school crossing guards, also referred to as "special school police,"
to direct traffic at or near schools. In order to enable the Educational
Service Agency to perform that function, the Township delegates to the
Educational Service Agency the authority to appoint and supervise crossing
guards or special school police as authorized by law.
§ 30-6. Duties.
The Educational Service Agency shall have the following authority, and it
shall be its duty to:
A. Prepare annually and, on or before the first day of November of each
year, submit to the Board of Commissioners for approval a budget
showing its contemplated income and its proposed expenditures for the
succeeding year.
B. Annually adopt the budget as submitted under Subsection A above, as
modified by the Township.
C. From time to time employ and/or discharge and fix the compensation of
crossing guards or special school police to serve in the Township.
D. Exercise supervision and control over the crossing guards or special
school police by:
(1) Establishing, administering and enforcing rules and regulations for
the work and conduct of the crossing guards or special school
police.
(2) Establishing work schedules and designating the locations where
and the time when the various individuals are to be on duty.
(3) Establishing position classifications, if deemed necessary, and
designating the individuals to serve in each classification.
(4) Providing for supervision as necessary.
(5) Exercising any and all other prerogatives normally associated with
personnel management.
E. From moneys budgeted and available, supervise all payments for the
services of crossing guards or special school police and supervise all
other expenditures as are prescribed by law or superior body or agency
or are otherwise deemed necessary or appropriate.
F. Supervise, in addition to moneys budgeted by the Township, any
payments by the school district or any other gift, grant, devise or
bequest.
G. Establish a system of accounts for all moneys under its supervision.
§ 30-5 CHARTER § 30-7
C:149
§ 30-7. Township to provide funds.
The Township shall budget and make available to the Educational Service
Agency the moneys that the Township is required to pay as compensation
to special school police by law or other agreement executed with the school
district, as permitted by law, as well as other moneys as necessary to cover
expenditures budgeted for the Educational Service Agency, as provided in
§ 30-6 of this chapter.
§ 30-8. Duration.
The Educational Service Agency hereby recognized and formally
established shall continue until changed or abolished by action of the
Township or until the suspension of Act 108 of 1979, as adopted by the
legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accord with the terms
thereof.71
Chapter 33
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Citizens Council on Environmental
Affairs — See Ch. 34.
Air pollution — See Ch. 98.
§ 33-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established an advisory council to be known as the "Radnor
Township Environmental Advisory Council (EAC)."
§ 33-2. Membership.
The EAC shall consist of seven at-large members appointed by the Board
of Commissioners, provided that there shall be six at-large members during
the period that begins 31 days following the effective date of this chapter
and that ends on December 31, 2008. In addition, at the discretion of
the Council, there may be up to four nonvoting liaisons with one each
representing the Planning Commission, Parks and Recreation Board, Board
of Health, and Shade Tree Commission.
§ 33-3. Terms of office.
A. The term for members of the EAC shall be four years.
71.Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 802.1.
§ 30-7 RADNOR CODE § 33-3
C:150
§ 33-4. Qualifications.
All members of the EAC shall be residents and electors of the Township.
Members shall have demonstrated training, experience or interest in the
field of environmental sciences or related fields.
§ 33-5. Vacancies.
Vacancies on the EAC shall be filled by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 33-6. Duties.
The EAC shall have the following duties:
B. The term of any EAC member who, as of the effective date of this
chapter, is an at-large member shall be automatically extended for one
year. The term of any EAC member who, as of the effective date of this
amendment, is a representative of another board or commission shall
cease 31 days following said effective date, except the term of the
representative of the Planning Commission shall cease as of December
31, 2008.
A. To serve as a clearinghouse for information and a forum for inquiries
and issues of an environmental nature from citizens and any other
Township Board and to assist in answering the inquiry and/or resolving
the issue presented.
B. When requested, to act in an advisory capacity to the Board of
Commissioners, the Planning Commission, the Parks and Recreation
Board, and any other board or commission and the Township staff on
rezoning, subdivision and land development applications and other
matters dealing with the protection, promotion, conservation,
management, and use of natural resources, including but not limited to
air, land and water resources, flood hazard districts, wetlands,
groundwater, recharge areas, steep slopes, woodlands, and streams.
C. When requested or necessary, to recommend plans and programs,
including amendments to the Code of Radnor Township, to the
appropriate agencies for identification and resolution of environmental
problems, promotion and conservation of natural resources and for the
protection and improvement of the quality of the environment within
Radnor Township.
D. To encourage voluntary environmental programs and community
participation therein.
E. To undertake such other environmental tasks as requested by the Board
of Commissioners.
§ 33-3 CHARTER § 33-7
C:151
§ 33-7. Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.
The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of the EAC shall be members of and
selected by the full Council and shall serve for terms of one year.
§ 33-8. Records of meetings; annual reports.
The EAC shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall make
an annual report which shall be made known and available to the public.
Minutes of each meeting shall be forwarded to the Board of Commissioners
and to other boards and commissions as the Chair or Council shall
designate.
§ 33-9. Governmental assistance; sources of funding.
Chapter 34
ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS, CITIZENS COUNCIL ON
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Advisory Council — See Ch.
83.
Air pollution — See Ch. 98.
Littering — See Ch. 190.
Recycling — See Ch. 240, Art. III.
Trees — See Ch. 263.
§ 34-1. Establishment; responsibilities.
There is established a Citizens' Council on Environmental Affairs under the
aegis of the Public Works Committee with the following responsibilities:
A. The EAC is authorized to receive assistance from other governmental
entities. Assistance from the Township staff may be sought by
appropriate inquiry through the Township Manager's Office.
B. The EAC is further authorized explore sources of funding, including but
not limited to grants and gifts, for environmental and other EACsponsored
projects. The Council shall consult with the Township
Manager regarding the receipt of funding from sources other an the
Township and the Manager shall refer all such inquiries to the Board of
Commissioners.
A. To establish an anti-litter and beautification program for the township
in conjunction with the school systems, businesses, neighborhoods and
other groups of the township.
B. To promote recycling of newspaper, glass and aluminum and examine
ways to reduce the cost of refuse collection in the township.
C. To perform environmental studies and reviews as appropriate.
§ 33-7 RADNOR CODE § 34-1
C:152
Chapter 39
ETHICS, CODE OF
CHARTER REFERENCES
Conflicts of interest — See § 9.05.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Standards of conduct — See Ch. 5, §§ 5-10 and
5-65.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 25.
§ 39-1. Findings and purpose.
The proper operation of Township government requires that public officials
and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people;
that governmental decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of
the governmental structure; that public office and employment not be used
for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of
its government and its employees. In recognition of these goals, there is
hereby established a Code of Ethics for all officials and employees, whether
elected or appointed; or paid or unpaid. The purpose of this code is to
establish ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and employees
by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best
interests of the Township and by directing full disclosure by such officials
and employees of all private financial, political, personal or other interests
in matters affecting the Township. The provisions and purpose of this code
and such rules and regulations as are hereby established are declared to be
in the best interests of the Township of Radnor.
§ 39-2. Responsibilities of public officers and employees.
Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office
for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution
of the United States and the Constitution of this state and to carry out
impartially the laws of the nation, state and municipality and thus to foster
respect for all government. They are bound to observe in their official acts
the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties
of their office regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the
public interest must be their primary concern. Their conduct in both their
official and private affairs should be above reproach.
§ 39-3. Dedicated service.
A. Officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and
performance established as the standard for their positions by the
appropriate authority.
§ 34-1 CHARTER § 39-3
C:153
§ 39-4. Fair and equal treatment.
§ 39-5. Conflicts of interest.
B. Officials and employees shall under no circumstances exceed their
authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and they shall work
in full cooperation with other public officials and employees where so
directed by the appropriate Township authority, unless prohibited from
so doing by law or by officially recognized confidentiality of their work.
A. Interest in appointments. Canvassing of members of the Board of
Commissioners or the Township Manager, directly or indirectly, in order
to obtain preferential consideration in connection with any appointment
to the municipal service, except with reference to positions filled by
appointment by the Commissioners, shall be reported to the full Board
of Commissioners, with a full explanation of the details related to such
contact.
B. Use of public property. No official or employee shall request or permit
the use of Township-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property
for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are
available to the public generally.
C. Obligations to citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which
is available to every other citizen.
A. No official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any
business transaction or shall have a financial or other interest, direct or
indirect, which in any way involves the proper discharge of his official
duties in the public interest or would tend to impair his independence of
judgment or action in the performance of his official duties.
B. Specific conflicts of interest are enumerated below for the guidance of
officials and employees:
(1) Incompatible employment. No official or employee shall engage in
or accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service would conflict or
interfere with or influence him in the proper discharge of his
official duties or would tend to impair his independence of
judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. This
includes taking action in matters where there is a promise of future
business arising from the action taken, of a reciprocal nature or
otherwise.
(2) Disclosure of confidential information. No official or employee
shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential
information concerning the property, government or affairs of the
Township, nor shall be use such information to advance the
financial or other private interest of himself or others.
§ 39-3 RADNOR CODE § 39-5
C:154
(3) Gifts and favors. No official or employee shall accept any gift or
promise of future benefit, whether in the form of service, loan,
thing or promise, from any person, firm or corporation which to his
knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner
whatsoever in business dealings with the Township; nor shall any
such official or employee accept any gift, favor or thing of value
that may tend to influence him in the discharge of his duties or
grant in the discharge of his duties any improper favor, service or
thing of value. Casual business luncheons, dinners or refreshments
shall not constitute a "gift" within the meaning of this subsection.
(4) Representing private interests before boards, commissions or
judicial bodies.
(a) No official or employee whose salary is paid in whole or in part
by the Township shall render advice, consult with or appear in
behalf of private interests before any board, commission or
judicial body where the Township is involved directly and the
interest of the party is adverse to the position of the Township.
(b) A Commissioner or other official may appear before Township
boards, commissions and authorities on behalf of constituents
in the course of his duties as a representative of the electorate
or in the performance of public or civic obligations. However,
no commissioner or other official or employee shall accept
compensation for such appearance or representation.
(5) Contracts with the Township. Any official or employee who has any
financial interest in any business entity, transaction or contract
with the Township or in the sale or rental of real estate, materials,
supplies or services to the Township shall make known to the Board
of Commissioners such interest in any matter on which he may be
called to act in his official capacity. He shall refrain from voting
upon or otherwise participating in the transaction or the making of
such contract or sale.
(6) Disclosure of interest.
(a) Any Township official or any Township employee who has a
financial or other private interest in any legislation either
pending or proposed on which the Township will take any
action or make any recommendation shall disclose on the
records of the Board and other appropriate authority the
nature and extent of such interest.
(b) Any other official or employee who has a financial or other
private interest and who participates in discussion with or
gives an official opinion to the Board shall disclose on the
records of the Board and other appropriate authority the
nature and extent of such interest.
§ 39-5 CHARTER § 39-6
C:155
§ 39-6. Political activities.
§ 39-7. Violations and penalties.72
Violation of any provisions of this code may constitute a cause for
suspension, removal from office or employment or other disciplinary action
to be invoked under applicable law by the Board of Commissioners.
Chapter 44
FINANCIAL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessments — See Ch. 9.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 39
Pensions and annuities — See Ch. 62.
Taxation — See Ch. 260.
A. No Township official or employee shall utilize Township facilities,
equipment or supplies, directly or indirectly, in political campaigns or to
the benefit of any political candidate, except where such Township
facilities are available to the general public for rent. [Amended
10-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-33]
B. No Township employee shall during working hours or when on
Township business take part in any political activity or solicit any
contribution or subscription to any political party or candidate.
C. No official or employee, whether elected or appointed, shall promise an
appointment to any municipal position as a reward for any political
activity.
72.Editor's Note: Former §§ 39-7, Ethics Boards, and 39-8, Applicability of Code, were
repealed 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-08. This ordinance also redesignated § 39-9 as §
39-7.
§ 39-6 RADNOR CODE § 39-7
C:156
ARTICLE I
Investment of Township Funds
[Adopted 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1173; amended in its entirety
4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-17]
§ 44-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the noted
meanings:
BOND PROCEEDS — Financial proceeds derived from the sale of general
obligation bonds or notes or other types of tax-exempt securities.
CASH — Certificates of deposit, bank checking and savings accounts,
money market/mutual funds, and other short-term instruments, generally
maturing in 90 days or less.
COLLATERALIZATION — Process by which a bank or other financial
institution pledges securities, property, or other deposits to secure funds
invested by the Township. For example, Pennsylvania banks that accept
funds from Radnor Township in excess of amounts covered by federal
deposit insurance (generally, $250,000) are required to pledge 120% of the
excess amount in United States Treasury bills as collateral in the event of
that bank's default.
COMMERCIAL PAPER — An unsecured short-term promissory note issued
by corporations, with maturities ranging from two to 270 days.
CREDIT RISK — The risk of financial loss due to the failure of the security
issuer or backer.
DERIVATIVE — A type of financial investment, whose value is derived from,
or depends on, the value of one or more other types of investment (examples
include interest rate swaps, reverse repurchase agreements, etc.).
DIVERSIFICATION — The process of investing financial assets among a
range of securities by type of investment, sector, maturity, and quality
rating.
EQUITY — Common or preferred stock, which shall be restricted to highquality,
readily marketable securities of corporations that are actively
traded on all major exchanges.
FIDUCIARY RESPONSIBILITY — The obligation of an official to provide
fiscal stewardship towards financial assets under his/her control.
FIXED INCOME — High-quality, marketable securities with assets invested
in obligations guaranteed by the United States Treasury or other federal
agencies or investment grade corporate bonds and notes, including
convertibles with a rating of A or higher.
GENERAL OPERATING FUNDS — Generally, governmental-type, internal
service, and proprietary funds whose assets finance the day-to-day
73.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Ch. 44, Financial Policies, Art. I, Deposits,
adopted 2-22-1988 by Res. No. 88-07.
§ 44-1 CHARTER § 44-1
C:157
operations of the Township, such as the general fund, General Debt Service
Fund, Sewer Fund, Stormwater Management Fund, Liquid Fuels Fund,
Capital Improvement Fund, Police Investigation Fund, Police Equitable
Sharing Fund, Commemorative Shade Tree Fund, Parks Improvement and
Open Space Fund, Educational Service Agency Fund, and Willows Fund.
INTEREST RATE RISK — The risk associated with declines or rises in
interest rates, which cause an investment in a fixed-income security to
increase or decrease in value.
MARKET RISK — The risk that the value of a security will rise or decline as
a result of changes in market conditions.
MARKET VALUE — Current market price of a security.
MARK-TO-MARKET — The process whereby the book value or collateral
value of a security is adjusted to reflect its current market value as of any
given date.
MATURITY — The date on which payment of a financial obligation is due.
OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFIT (OPEB) PLAN — Financial assets
of the Township deposited into the Post-Employment Benefits Obligation
Trust Fund to be held for the payment of accrued but unused leave time,
post-retirement healthcare, and any other post-retirement benefit that falls
within the OPEB category.
PENSION PLANS — Financial assets of the Township's Police Pension Trust
Fund and the Civilian Employee Pension Trust Fund, which are held for the
payment of benefits to retired employees.
PRINCIPAL — The face, or par, value of an investment instrument.
PRUDENT INVESTMENT PRINCIPLES — A standard that generally limits
investment activities to those that a prudent, or reasonable, investor would
engage in.
REPURCHASE AGREEMENT — An agreement of one party to sell securities
at a specified price to a second party and a simultaneous agreement of the
first party to repurchase the securities at a specified price or at a specified
later date.
SWAP — An investment instrument whereby one asset is traded for another.
TREASURY BILLS — Short-term United States government debt securities
with maturities of no longer than one year and issued in minimum
denominations of $ 10,000.
TREASURY BONDS — Long-term United States government debt securities
with maturities of 10 to 30 years and issued in minimum denominations of
$1,000.
TREASURY NOTES — Intermediate United States government debt
securities with maturities of one to 10 years and issued in denominations
ranging from $1,000 to $1,000,000 or more.
§ 44-2. Scope, goals and objectives.
§ 44-1 RADNOR CODE § 44-2
C:158
A. The purpose of this article shall be to provide guidance to Radnor
Township ("Township") officials in discharging their fiduciary
responsibility to prudently invest Township funds by identifying
objectives, assigning responsibilities, and addressing certain risk
factors to enhance investment performance.
B. Scope. This article shall apply to all financial assets of the Township,
including general operating funds, bond proceeds, and pension fund
assets, and any of its component units, except as otherwise noted.
C. Objectives. The primary objectives of this article shall be as follows:
(1) Safety. Investments generally shall be made foremost with the
preservation of principal in mind and by minimizing the effects of
the following types of risk:
(a) Credit risk. The Township shall minimize credit risk by:
[1] Limiting the investment of funds to the safest types of
securities.
[2] Prequalifying the financial institutions, broker/dealers,
intermediaries, and advisors with which the Township will
conduct business.
[3] Diversifying investments so that potential losses on
individual securities will be minimized.
(b) Interest rate risk. The Township shall minimize the risk that
the market value of securities in the portfolio will fall due to
changes in general interest rates by:
[1] Structuring investments so that securities mature to meet
cash requirements for ongoing operations, thereby
avoiding the need to sell securities on the open market
prior to maturity;
[2] Investing funds primarily in shorter-term securities,
money market mutual funds, or similar investment pools
where appropriate.
(c) Market risk. Investment decisions generally shall not be made
to anticipate possible changes in equity, fixed income, or other
market conditions.
(2) Liquidity. Investments shall be structured to ensure that adequate
funds are on hand to pay reasonably anticipated Township
obligations (such as payroll, scheduled debt payments, other
operating expenses, and pension benefits) in a timely manner.
Because all possible cash demands cannot be anticipated, the
portfolio should consist of investments with active or resale
markets.
§ 44-2 CHARTER § 44-2
C:159
§ 44-3. Permissible investments: governmental funds.
(3) Return.
(a) Investment earnings are of secondary importance compared to
safety and liquidity objectives. Except as otherwise indicated,
investments generally shall be structured to attain a market
average rate of return based on performance benchmarks
established herein. These benchmarks shall be periodically
reviewed by the Finance Director and may be adjusted with the
approval of the Township Manager to reflect changes in the
economic performance of the selected investment instruments.
(b) Investments as a rule shall be structured to exceed those
benchmarks only when consistent with prudent investment
principles and only if safety and liquidity objectives can be met.
(4) Securities generally shall not be sold before they mature except as
follows:
(a) A security that assumes an unforeseen underlying risk may be
sold early to minimize loss of principal.
(b) Liquidity needs of the Township require the security be sold.
(c) Based on financial management recommendation with proper
qualitative analysis.
D. Public trust and ethics.
(1) Township officials in the investment process shall act as
responsible custodians of the public interest and shall avoid any
transaction that may impair public confidence in the governance of
the Township.
(2) Officials involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with the proper
execution and management of Township investments or that could
impair their ability to make impartial decisions.
(3) Officials involved in the investment process shall be governed by
the Code of Ethics of the Township, and they also shall abide by the
Code of Ethics of the Government Finance Officers Association (see
Appendix A), incorporated as a part hereof.74
A. Township general operating funds and bond proceeds may be invested
in cash, fixed income, and equity instruments and shall be in
accordance with federal, state, and other applicable laws and
regulations, as follows:
74.Editor's Note: Appendix A, Code of Ethics of the Government Finance Officers Association,
is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 44-2 RADNOR CODE § 44-3
C:160
(1) General operating funds. These shall be invested pursuant to
Pennsylvania Act 72 of 1971, as amended (53 P.S. § 56705.1). Types
of investment instruments permissible include, United States
Treasury bills, obligations backed by the full faith and credit of the
United States government or its agencies, shares of money market
or mutual funds of companies that invest solely in authorized
investments, funds pooled by other municipalities and
governmental entities, including the Pennsylvania Local
Government Investment Trust, certificates of deposit, guaranteed
investment contracts, repurchase agreements, and commercial
paper to the extent they are collateralized according to law.
(a) Investment credit quality restrictions.
[1] An "approved institution" is any financial institution with
total assets in excess of $2,000,000,000 and which carries
a short-term debt rating of A1 or better by Standard &
Poor's or Moody's Rating Services. All United States banks
must be members of the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation.
[2] Commercial paper must be rated A1 or better by Standard
& Poor's or Moody's Rating Services. A split rating is
acceptable so long as one of the ratings is A1 or better.
[3] Money market funds must have over $1,000,000,000 in
assets, must be managed by major bank trust department
portfolio managers, and must be regulated by United
States Government under Investment Company Act rule
2a-7 and/or 3c7. The funds will seek to maintain a onedollar-
per-share net asset value.
[4] All investments in municipal bonds or agencies must be
rated AA or better by Standard & Poor's or Moody's Rating
Services.
(2) Bond proceeds. These shall be invested in any instruments
authorized for general operating funds and in other types of
investments permitted by the Pennsylvania Local Unit Debt Act (53
Pa.C.S.A., Chapters 80 through 82); these latter generally include
any type of securities in which the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
is authorized to invest.
(3) Prohibited investments. Only those investments identified in
Subsection A of this section are permissible. Neither the Township
Administration nor outside investment managers are permitted to
invest in any investment outside of what is permissible in
Subsection A of this section. Such prohibited investments include,
but are not limited to, hedge, derivative or asset-backed
investments or other nonpermissible investments that jeopardize
the objectives of this investment policy as set forth in § 44-2 of this
article.
§ 44-3 CHARTER § 44-3
C:161
B. Safekeeping and custody. As a rule, all Township investments shall be
stored in safekeeping by an unrelated third party not underwriting a
particular investment.
(1) Authorized financial dealers and institutions. The Finance Director
shall maintain a list of financial institutions authorized to provide
investment services and of approved security brokers/dealers.
(2) Financial dealers/brokers who desire to offer investment
transactions to the Township shall supply the following, as
requested by the Finance Director:
(a) Proof of Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA)
certification.
(b) Proof of state registration.
(c) Certification of having read and understood and agreeing to
comply with this article.
(d) Certification that the financial institution in which the
investment is being purchased from has a rating of Al or better
from either Standard & Poor's or Moody's Rating Services;
(3) The Finance Director shall conduct, at least annually, a review of
the performance and qualifications of the financial condition and
registration status of qualified financial brokers/dealers, as well as
financial institutions holding Township investments.
C. Performance measures. The performance of Township investments shall
be measured annually by the following criteria:
(1) Safety. The extent to which any investments lost principal during a
calendar year.
(2) Liquidity. The extent to which any investment had to be liquidated
before its maturity to meet an expense.
(3) Return. The extent to which the average return of all investments
met their objectives. To measure whether investments of general
operating funds and bond proceeds meet their return objectives,
the Finance Director shall use the following or other appropriate
indexes as benchmarks: ninety-one-day Treasury bill yield; sixmonth
certificate of deposit rate (CD); and twelve-month CD rate.
The performance of pension plan assets shall be measured in
accordance with § 44-4B.
D. Reporting. An annual report shall be provided to the Board of
Commissioners that includes, at a minimum, the following information
for invested general operating funds, bond proceeds, and pension plan
assets:
(1) Listing of individual investments held at the end of the year.
§ 44-3 RADNOR CODE § 44-3
C:162
§ 44-4. Police and civilian employee pension plans and other postemployment
benefit obligation plan.
(2) Realized and unrealized gains or losses resulting from appreciation
or depreciation by listing the cost and market value of securities
over one-year duration that are not intended to be held until
maturity.
(3) Dollar-weighted yield to maturity of portfolio on investments as
compared to applicable benchmarks, as described in § 44-3C.
(4) Listing of investments by maturity dates.
(5) Percentage of the total portfolio that each type of investment
represents.
(6) Analysis of credit risk and other appropriate factors.
E. Investment procedures. The Finance Director may establish
appropriate staff procedures that govern the investment of Township
funds pursuant to this article under the direction of the Township
Manager.
A. Objectives. The objectives of the police and civilian employee pension
plans ("plans") and Other Post-Employment Benefit Fund shall be to:
(1) Pension plans: provide full funding for retirement benefits for each
plan's respective participants and beneficiaries.
(2) Other Post-Employment Benefit Obligation Plan: provide full
funding for retirement-related obligations, including accrued but
unused leave time, retiree healthcare and any other benefit the
Township is obligated to provide to both uniformed and civilian
retirees
(3) Maximize return within reasonable and prudent levels of risk.
(4) Ensure that the plans' assets will be invested in accordance with all
relevant legislation and regulations in a manner consistent with
fiduciary standards.
B. Investment guidelines.
(1) Time horizon. The plans' objectives are based on a five-year
investment horizon so that interim fluctuations should be viewed
with appropriate perspective; that is, with the view that the
chances and duration of investment losses are carefully weighed
against the long-term potential for appreciation of assets.
(2) Diversification. Investments shall be diversified with the intent to
minimize the risk of investment loss. Consequently, the total
portfolio of each plan will be constructed and maintained to provide
§ 44-3 CHARTER § 44-4
C:163
prudent diversification of the concentration of holdings in
individual issues, issuers, countries, governments or industries.
(a) Not more than 5% of the total stock portfolio valued at market
may be invested in common stock of any one corporation.
(b) Not more than 25% of stock valued at market may be held in
any one industry category.
(c) Fixed income securities of any one issuer shall not exceed 5%
of the total fixed income portfolio at the time of purchase (this
shall not apply to issues of the United States Treasury or other
federal agencies).
(d) Derivatives shall not be purchased for the purpose of portfolio
leveraging.
(3) Asset allocation.
(a) To achieve the greatest likelihood of meeting the plans'
objectives and the best balance between risk and return for
optimal diversification, the plans' assets shall be allocated in
accordance with the ranges for each asset class as follows:
[1] Police pension plan.
Asset Class
Allocation
(percentage)
Equities, domestic 27.5% to 37.5%
Equities, international 13.0% to 23.0%
Fixed income 36.5% to 46.5%
Real estate 0.0% to 8.0%
Cash equivalents 0.0 to 10.0%
[2] Civilian pension plan.
Asset Class
Allocation
(percentage)
Equities, domestic 27.5% to 37.5%
Equities, international 13.0% to 23.0%
Fixed income 36.5% to 46.5%
Real estate amity 0.0% to 8.0%
Cash equivalents 0.0% to 10.0%
(b) The pension boards, with approval of the Township Manager,
are authorized to adjust the allocation targets from time to
time as circumstances warrant.
§ 44-4 RADNOR CODE § 44-4
C:164
(4) Rebalancing procedures. The asset allocation ranges established
under § 44-4B(3) represent a long-term perspective. As such, rapid,
unanticipated market shifts or changes in economic conditions may
cause the asset mix to fall outside the policy range. These
divergences should be of a short-term nature, and the respective
plans' pension boards, under the direction of the Township
Manager, shall be responsible for rebalancing the assets and
ensuring that money managers selected by the pension boards
keep divergences as brief as possible. Money managers shall have
discretion to temporarily invest a portion of the assets in cash
reserves when they deem it appropriate. However, the managers
shall be evaluated against their peers on the performance of the
total funds under their direct management.
(5) Risk tolerances. The objectives of these plans cannot be achieved
without incurring a certain amount of principal volatility.
Therefore, the plans shall be managed in a style that seeks to
minimize principal fluctuations over the established time horizon
and that is consistent with the plans' stated objectives.
(6) Performance expectations.
(a) The investment objectives for these plans shall be to achieve
an average total annual rate of return equal to or greater than
the plan's stated actuarial return assumptions. Performance
will be measured against specific benchmarking of the pension
assets against the biggest possible index in each of the asset
classes (see § 44-4D(2)(b) for examples of possible
benchmarks). The actual returns may vary significantly from
these targets on a year-to-year basis.
(b) The pension boards, with approval of the Township Manager,
are authorized to adjust these performance targets from time
to time as circumstances warrant.
C. Guidelines for portfolio holdings.
(1) Equities. Equity holdings shall be restricted to high-quality, readily
marketable securities of corporations that are actively traded on all
major exchanges.
(2) Fixed income.
(a) Fixed investments shall be high-quality, marketable securities
with a preponderance of the investments in United States
Treasury, federal agencies, and United States Governmentguaranteed
obligations, and investment-grade corporate
issues, including convertibles.
(b) The overall Moody's or Standard & Poors' rating of the fixedincome
assets shall be at least A. In cases where the yield
spread adequately compensates for additional risk, securities
§ 44-4 CHARTER § 44-4
C:165
of below-investment-grade ratings can be purchased up to a
maximum of 15% of total market value of fixed-income
securities.
(c) Active bond management is hereby encouraged and may
require transactions that will temporarily lower the investment
return or change the maturity of the plans' portfolios in
anticipation of market changes. Holdings of individual
securities shall be large enough for liquidation.
(3) Cash. Cash and short-term instruments maturing in 90 days or less
shall be registered to a maximum of 10% of total assets at all times.
Cash equivalent reserves shall consist of cash instruments having a
quality rating of A-2, P-2 or higher.
(4) Safekeeping. A custodian appointed by the pension boards for
safekeeping shall hold all securities. The custodian shall produce
statements at least monthly listing the name and value of all assets
held.
D. Control procedures.
(1) Review of investment objectives. An investment advisor, selected
by the pension boards, shall regularly review the appropriateness
of this portion of the Township investment policy for achieving the
plans' stated objectives.
(2) Review of investment performance.
(a) The investment advisor shall report quarterly to the pension
boards to review the plans' investment performance. In
addition, the investment consultant will be responsible for
keeping the pension boards advised of any material change in
all money managers' personnel, investment strategy, and other
pertinent information potentially affecting the performance of
all investments.
(b) The investment advisor shall compare the investment results
on a quarterly basis to appropriate benchmarks, as well as
market index returns in both equity and debt markets.
Examples of benchmarks and indexes that will be used are the
S&P 500 Index for large companies; Russell 2000 Index for
small companies; MSCI Europe, Australia and Far East Index
(EAFE) for international equities; Barclays Capital Index for
fixed-income securities; and the United States 91-Day Treasury
Bill Index for cash equivalents.
(3) The Township Manager or the pension boards from time to time
may engage the services of an additional consultant to review the
performance of the investment advisor, money managers, and this
policy.
§ 44-4 RADNOR CODE § 44-5
C:166
§ 44-5. through § 44-9. (Reserved)
§ 44-5 CHARTER § 44-5
C:167

ARTICLE II
General Fund; Revenues; Capital Funding
[Adopted 8-18-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-5]
§ 44-10. Fund balance. [Amended 6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-05]
A. Title. This article shall be known as the "Radnor Township
Governmental Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 54 Fund
Balance Policy."
B. Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this article
shall have the meanings given to them in this section unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
ASSIGNED FUND BALANCE — Includes spendable fund balance
amounts established by management of the Township that are intended
to be used for specific purposes that are neither considered restricted
nor committed.
COMMITTED FUND BALANCE — Amounts that can be used only for
the specific purposes determined by a formal action (ordinance or
resolution) of the Radnor Township Commissioners (the level of
decision-making authority in the Township). Commitments may be
changed or lifted only by the Radnor Township taking the same formal
action (ordinance or resolution) that imposed the constraint originally.
Resources accumulated pursuant to stabilization arrangements
sometimes are reported in this category.
FUND BALANCE — As defined by the Governmental Accounting,
Auditing and Financial Reporting of the Government Finance Officers
Association (GFOA), "fund balance is the difference between assets and
liabilities reported in a governmental fund."
NONSPENDABLE FUND BALANCE —
RESERVATIONS OF FUND BALANCE — Reserves established by the
Township Commissioners (committed fund balance) or Township
management (assigned fund balance).
RESTRICTED FUND BALANCE — Amounts that can be spent only for
specific purposes:
Amounts that are:
(a) Not in spendable form; or
(b) Legally or contractually required to be maintained intact.
(1)
Not in spendable form includes items that are not expected to be
converted to cash (such as inventories and prepaid amounts) and
items such as long-term amount of loans and notes receivable, as
well as property acquired for resale. The corpus (or principal) of
a permanent fund is an example of an amount that is legally or
contractually required to be maintained intact.
(2)
§ 44-10 CHARTER § 44-10
C:169
UNASSIGNED FUND BALANCE — Unassigned fund balance is the
residual classification for the general fund. This classification
represents fund balance that has not been assigned to other funds
and that has not been restricted, committed, or assigned to specific
purposes within the general fund. Unassigned fund balance may also
include negative balances for any governmental fund if expenditures
exceed amounts restricted, committed, or assigned for those specific
purposes.
UNRESTRICTED FUND BALANCE — The total of committed fund
balance, assigned fund balance and unassigned fund balance.
Stipulated by external resource providers such as creditors (by
debt covenants), grantors, contributors or laws or regulations of
other governments; or
(1)
Imposed by law through constitutional provisions or enabling
legislation.
(2)
C. Purpose.
(1) The Township hereby establishes and will maintain fund balance,
as defined herein, in accordance with Governmental Accounting
and Financial Standards Board Statement No. 54, fund balance
Reporting and Governmental Fund Type Definitions. Fund balance
shall be composed of nonspendable, restricted, committed,
assigned and unassigned amounts.
(2) A fund balance policy is adopted in order to secure and maintain
investment-grade credit ratings, meet seasonal shortfalls in cash
flow, and reduce susceptibility to emergency or unanticipated
expenditures and/or revenue shortfalls. Fund balance information
is used to identify the available resources to repay long-term debt,
reduce property taxes, add new governmental programs, expand
existing ones, or enhance the financial position of the Township, in
accordance with policies established by the Township
Commissioners.
(3) This fund balance policy establishes:
(a) Fund balance policy for the general fund;
(b) Reservations of fund balance for the general fund;
(c) The method of budgeting the amount of estimated unrestricted
fund balance available for appropriation during the annual
budget adoption process (prior to the actual, audited fund
balance being known) and what actions may need to be taken if
the actual fund balance is significantly different than the
budgetary fund balance; and
(d) Establish the spending order of operating revenues and fund
balances.
§ 44-10 RADNOR CODE § 44-10
C:170
D. Fund balance policy (general fund).
(1) Restricted fund balance. There is no restricted fund balance in the
general fund or amounts that can be spent only for specific
purposes:
(a) Stipulated by external resource providers such as creditors (by
debt covenants), grantors, contributors, or laws or regulations
of other governments; or
(b) Imposed by law through constitutional provisions or enabling
legislation will be budgeted and reported in special revenue
funds, capital project funds or debt service funds.
(2) Committed fund balance.
(a) Commitment of fund balance may be made for such purposes,
including, but not limited to:
[1] Major maintenance and repair projects;
[2] Meeting future obligations resulting from a natural
disaster;
[3] Accumulating resources pursuant to stabilization
arrangements;
[4] Establishing reserves for disasters; and/or
[5] For setting aside amounts for specific projects.
(b) Commitment of fund balance may be made from time to time
by ordinance or resolution of the Township Commissioners.
Commitments may be changed or lifted only by the Township
Commissioners taking the same formal action that imposed the
constraint originally (ordinance or resolution). The use
(appropriation) of committed fund balances will be considered
in conjunction with the annual budget adoption process or by
budget amendment approved by ordinance or resolution of the
Township Commissioners during the fiscal year.
(3) Assigned fund balance.
(a) Assignment of fund balance may be:
[1] Made for a specific purpose that is narrower than the
general purposes of the government itself; and/or
[2] Used to reflect the appropriation of a portion of existing
unassigned fund balance to eliminate a projected deficit in
the subsequent year's budget in an amount no greater
than the projected excess of expected expenditures over
expected revenues.
§ 44-10 CHARTER § 44-10
C:171
(b) Assigned fund balance shall reflect management's intended
use of resources as set forth in the annual budget (and any
amendments thereto). Assigned fund balance may or may not
be appropriated for expenditure in the subsequent year
depending on the timing of the project/reserve for which it was
assigned.
(4) Nonspendable fund balance. Nonspendable fund balance is
established to report items that are not expected to be converted to
cash such as inventory and prepaid items; items not currently in
cash form such as the long-term amount of loans and notes
receivable as well as property acquired for resale; and items legally
or contractually required to be maintained intact such as the
corpus (or principal) of a permanent fund.
(5) Minimum level of unassigned fund balance.
(a) Unassigned fund balance is the residual classification for the
general fund and represents fund balance that has not been
restricted, committed or assigned to specific purposes within
the general fund.
(b) If, after the annual audit, prior committed or assigned fund
balance causes the unassigned fund balance to fall below 12%
of general fund budgeted operating expenditures, the Finance
Director will so advise Township Commissioners in order for
the necessary action to be taken to restore the unassigned fund
balance to 15% of general fund budgeted operating
expenditures.
(c) The Township Manager will prepare and submit a plan for
committed and/or assigned fund balance reduction,
expenditure reductions and/or revenue increases to the
Township Commissioners. The Township shall take action
necessary to restore the unassigned fund balance to
acceptable levels within two years.
E. Reservations of fund balance (general fund).
(1) Committed fund balance. Radnor Township hereby establishes the
following committed fund balance reserves in the general fund.
(a) Financial stabilization.
[1] The financial stabilization fund balance is committed by
Radnor Township at two months of the average regular
monthly budgeted operating expenditures as
recommended by the GFOA which sets forth, at a
minimum, that general purpose governments, regardless
of size, maintain no less than one or two months of regular
general fund budgeted operating expenditures. The
calculation of the average regular monthly budgeted
§ 44-10 RADNOR CODE § 44-10
C:172
operating expenditures will be the full year budgeted
operating expenditures divided by 12, and the financial
stabilization fund balance will be twice the amount
calculated.
[2] To the extent that Act 511 revenues grow to exceed 30% of
the total general fund revenues in any given year, the
Township will commit up to an additional 10% of general
fund expenditures over the target fund balance required in
Subsection D(5)(b). The purpose for the additional 10% is
to further mitigate against sudden, unexpected and large
decreases in the Act 511 revenues, which have shown to
be sensitive to economic shifts. Please see § 44-11,
Nonrecurring revenues, for additional guidance on the
potential source of funds for the additional 10% required
by this section of the fund balance policy.
[3] It will be the responsibility of the Township's Finance
Director to report the current committed fund balances in
the Township's annual audited financial statements.
(2) Assigned fund balance.
(a) The Radnor Township Commissioners hereby establish the
following assigned fund balance reserves in the general fund:
[1] Assignment to subsequent year's budget. The subsequent
year's budgetary fund balance reserve is assigned by
Township management as set forth in the annual budget
(and any amendments thereto) to appropriate a portion of
existing unassigned fund balance to eliminate a projected
deficit in the subsequent year's budget in an amount no
greater than the projected excess of expected
expenditures over expected revenues.
[2] Assignment to encumbrances. The Radnor Township Home
Rule Charter provides for capital expenditure
appropriations to continue in force until the purpose for
which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned,
within a two-year period from inception.
(b) It will be the responsibility of Township Finance Director to
report the current assigned fund balances in the Township's
annual audited financial statements.
F. Budgeting.
(1) Appropriation of unrestricted fund balance. The actual amount of
unrestricted fund balance (total of committed fund balance,
assigned fund balance and unassigned fund balance) is not known
until the completion of the annual audit which takes place
approximately four months after the end of the fiscal year being
§ 44-10 CHARTER § 44-10
C:173
audited. However, an estimate of unrestricted fund balance must
be made during the annual budget adoption process (generally,
September through December) which is prior to the end of the
fiscal year, December 31.
(2) Estimated beginning fund balance. In order to achieve the most
accurate estimate possible, the Township Manager or designee
shall project both sources of funds (revenues, prior years'
unrestricted fund balances carried forward and other financing
sources) and uses of funds (operating and nonoperating
expenditures), including accruals, for each department in each
governmental fund through December 31 of the then-current fiscal
year. These projections will be shown in a separate column for each
fund in the proposed and final budget documents. The difference
between the estimated actual sources of funds and estimated
actual uses of funds is the calculated estimated beginning fund
balance for the subsequent fiscal year. If planned for use in the
subsequent fiscal year, committed and assigned fund balance may
be included in the estimated beginning fund balance.
(3) Estimated ending fund balance.
(a) For the year being budgeted, a calculation of estimated ending
fund balance shall also be made. This calculation shall be the
difference between the budgeted sources of funds and the
budgeted uses of funds as described above.
(b) Since the uses of funds are restricted, committed or assigned
in all other governmental fund types, there is no policy to the
amount of ending fund balance unless the project is completed
and the fund should be closed. In this situation, a residual
equity transfer will be made to zero-out any remaining fund
balance.
(c) If, after the annual audit, the actual general fund unassigned
fund balance is greater than 18% of budgeted operating
expenditures in the general fund, the excess may be used in
one or a combination of the following ways:
[1] Left in the general fund to earn interest and roll forward
into the subsequent year's beginning fund balance;
[2] Appropriated by ordinance or resolution of the Township
Commissioners for a one-time expenditure or opportunity
that does not increase recurring operating costs;
[3] Committed to increase a formal stabilization arrangement
or reserve (including but not limited to economic
stabilization, contingency reserves or disaster reserves);
or
§ 44-10 RADNOR CODE § 44-10
C:174
§ 44-11. Nonrecurring revenues. [Amended 6-9-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-05]
[4] Appropriated for start-up expenditures of new programs
undertaken at mid-year, provided that such action is
considered in the context of Commissioners-approved
multiyear projections of revenues and expenditures.
G. Spending order of operating revenues and fund balances. The Township
will first use federal, then state, and lastly Township revenues to meet
its financial obligations. The Township uses restricted amounts to be
spent first when both restricted and unrestricted fund balance is
available unless there are legal documents/contracts that prohibit
doing this, such as in grant agreements requiring dollar-for-dollar
spending. Additionally, the Township would first use committed fund
balance, followed by assigned fund balance and then unassigned fund
balance when expenditures are incurred for purposes for which
amounts in any of the unrestricted fund balance classifications could be
used.
H. Annual review and determination of fund balance policy. Compliance
with the provisions of this policy shall be reviewed as a part of the
annual budget adoption process, and the amounts of restricted,
committed, assigned, nonspendable and the minimum level of
unassigned fund balance shall be determined during this process.
I. Additional information, requirements and responsibilities. It will be the
responsibility of the Township Finance Director to keep this policy
current.
A. It is the policy of Radnor Township that one-time or limited-term
financial resources shall not be used for current or future ongoing
operating expenses.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this article, "nonrecurring revenues" shall
consist of, but not be limited to, proceeds from asset sales, debt
refinancing, one-time grants, legal settlements, large unbudgeted/
unplanned revenues, and similar nonrecurring resources.
C. Appropriate uses of nonrecurring revenues shall include:
(1) Maintaining the targeted fund balances in the General Fund;
(2) Building the additional 10% General Fund budget stabilization set
forth in § 44-10, Fund balance, Subsection E(1)(a);
(3) The early retirement of debt or funding of other long-term
liabilities of the Township (examples include the funding of any
underfunded pension obligations and/or underfunded OPEB
obligations);
§ 44-10 CHARTER § 44-11
C:175
§ 44-12. Pay-as-you-go capital funding.
(4) Funding capital improvements or building fund balances in the
Capital Improvement Fund; and
(5) Other nonrecurring expenditures.
D. Depending on the nature, timing, and source of the nonrecurring
revenue, the Board may pass special legislation specifically detailing
the use of the nonrecurring revenues. However, absent any special
legislation that specifically allocates how nonrecurring revenue is to be
allocated, the priority of allocation shall be in the order of § 44-11C,
above.
A. It is the goal of Radnor Township to fund all assets with expected useful
lives of less than 10 years, including vehicles, equipment, and minor
improvements to buildings and grounds (those less than $25,000 in
costs), whenever possible with cash on hand as opposed to utilizing
borrowed funds.
B. It is the policy of the Township to achieve this goal through the
following means:
(1) Annual fund transfer from the general fund, which began in 2008
with a transfer of $150,000 and shall be budgeted to increase each
year by a minimum of $25,000;
(2) All proceeds from the sale of fixed assets shall be dedicated to the
Capital Improvement Fund for this purpose;
(3) Five percent of all revenues received through Notices of
Assessment as a result of the audits of delinquent Act 511 accounts
shall be dedicated to the Capital Improvement Fund for this
purpose;
(4) The Board, at its sole discretion, may levy a tax millage rate on real
property that is dedicated to the Capital Improvement Fund for this
purpose.
§ 44-11 RADNOR CODE § 44-12
C:176
Chapter 46
FIRE INVESTIGATOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire control management — See Ch. 164. Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
§ 46-1. Appointment.
§ 46-2. Supervisor.
The Fire Investigator reports directly to the Director of Community
Development or his/her duly authorized representative.
§ 46-3. Fire Investigator duties.
A. The Fire Investigator and Deputy Fire Investigator shall be appointed
by the Township Manager and the Radnor Township Board of
Commissioners, under their authority as defined in the Radnor
Township Code and they shall serve until a successor is duly appointed.
B. The Fire Investigator and Deputy Fire Investigator shall be sworn into
office at a public meeting of the Radnor Township Board of
Commissioners for the purpose of giving them official status and
authority to investigate fires.
C. The Fire Investigator and Deputy Fire Investigator are part-time
positions that are compensated on an hourly basis at a rate determined
by the Radnor Township Board of Commissioners and shall receive no
compensation or benefits other than their hourly compensation. Out-ofpocket
expenses incurred and mileage reimbursement for the use of a
personal car while working are reimbursable.
D. Radnor Township shall carry workers' compensation, liability, and
errors and omission coverage for the Fire Investigator and Deputy Fire
Investigator.
A. The Radnor Township Fire Investigator is responsible for investigating
the origin, cause, and circumstances of all Fire Department incidents in
the Township to which he/she responds. He/she also provides
specialized liaison at emergency scenes as requested, in cooperation
with the officer in charge from the individual responding fire companies
in whose district the incident occurs, and the Radnor Township Police
Department, and for such other duties as may, from time to time, be
assigned to him/her by the Director of the Department of Community
Development or the Radnor Township Manager. Further, he/she is
responsible for completing Fire Investigator investigation reports for
incidents that he/she has investigated and for submitting a Fire
§ 44-12 CHARTER § 46-3
C:177
§ 46-4. Division of responsibility within Department of Community
Development.
All issues and questions dealing with the Fire Code and any other code used
by Radnor Township and administered by the Community Development
Department shall be referred to the Fire Code Official or designated
Township representative for resolution. All issues and questions relating to
fires and other emergencies investigated by the Fire Investigator, with the
exception of requests for Fire Investigator reports, shall be referred to the
Fire Investigator or Radnor Township Police Department, if applicable, for
resolution. Fire Investigator report requests are released by the Community
Development Department secretarial staff after approval by the Community
Development Department.
§ 46-5. Interaction between Fire Investigator and Radnor Police
Department.
The Fire Investigator is responsible for investigating the origin and cause
and circumstances of all Fire Department incidents in Radnor Township.
The Police Department will assist with the investigation as requested by
the Fire Investigator. If the Fire Investigator makes the determination that
the cause is or may be incendiary, the investigation becomes a criminal
investigation and the Police Department assumes primary responsibility for
it. At that time, the Fire Investigator shifts to an advisory role and provides
technical assistance in the areas of origin, cause, and circumstance to the
Police Department.
§ 46-6. Incident notifications.
Department monthly activity report to the Director of Community
Development. The monthly activity report contains a summary of
response information submitted to him/her by the Township Fire
Companies and a listing of responses of special interest. The Fire
Investigator(s) shall be a sworn position in Radnor Township without
police powers.
B. In the absence of the Fire Investigator, the Deputy Fire Investigator
shall act as Fire Investigator and shall have the full authority and carry
out the responsibilities of the Fire Investigator.
A. The Fire Investigator or his/her Deputy shall be notified as soon as
possible by the police officer or fire officer in charge of an emergency
scene whenever one or more of the following circumstances occur:
(1) When a fire or explosion results in property damage;
(2) When an injury or death of a citizen or emergency responder
occurs as a result of a fire or explosion;
(3) When a police officer or fire officer in charge of the incident
believes that an investigation should take place;
§ 46-3 RADNOR CODE § 46-6
C:178
§ 46-7. Authorization of emergency expenditures.
(4) When a vehicle, train or aircraft fire results in damage to a vehicle
or other property. If a damaged vehicle is not obstructing traffic
and, in the opinion of the police officer in charge of the scene, it is
reasonable to do so, the vehicle should be left at the scene until the
Fire Investigator has arrived and has a chance to investigate; if a
police officer on the scene has the vehicle(s) towed because of
safety or other concerns, the Fire Investigator shall be informed of
the vehicle's destination by the police officer in charge of the scene.
When personal injury or death occurs as a result of the vehicle fire,
the vehicle should be left at the scene until the arrival of the Fire
Investigator;
(5) Hazardous material spills;
(6) Bomb threats;
(7) Any other circumstances in which a police or fire officer in charge
of an emergency scene believes appropriate.
B. If the Fire Investigator or Deputy Fire Investigator has not arrived at
the incident scene and the responding fire department is ready to leave
the scene and return to service, the scene should be turned over to the
Radnor Township Police Department, whose officer in charge at the
scene will secure the scene until the Fire Investigator arrives.
C. The Fire Investigator (Radnor Car 1) or the Deputy Fire Investigator
(Radnor Car 1A) should be contacted through the Delaware County
Emergency Communications Center by police or fire radio or by
telephone (610-892-8404).
D. When a building emergency exists, and assistance is required from the
Community Development Department, a Fire Code Official or Codes
Official for Radnor Township shall be notified.
A. The Fire Investigator is empowered at the scene of a fire or other
emergency to contact Fire Code Officials when required. In
consultation with the Fire Company and Police Department officials at
the scene, they shall decide how to best secure the scene for health and
safety purposes, and to protect the integrity of the scene when further
investigation is necessary. Fire Code Officials shall determine what
infrastructure and resources may be necessary and to authorize
expenditure of a reasonable amount of Township funds.
B. To this end, upon the request of the Fire Investigator, the commanding
police officer at the emergency scene will assign one or more police
officers to temporarily secure the area until more permanent securing
(such as fencing or boarding up) can be implemented. In addition,
whenever the Fire Investigator and Deputy Fire Investigator are
unavailable for making such a decision at an emergency scene, one of
§ 46-6 CHARTER § 46-7
C:179
§ 46-8. Media information release.
§ 46-9. Fire Investigator and Deputy Fire Investigator availability.
the following Township officials should be contacted for appropriate
response to the scene and/or decision-making, in the following order:
(1) Fire Codes Official.
(2) Codes Official.
(3) Director of Public Works.
(4) Superintendent of Police.
(5) Township Manager.
A. For incidents in which one of the Township Fire Companies is in charge,
information about Fire Department operations shall be released to the
news media and the public at large only by the fire officer in charge of
the incident or his/her representative.
B. For liability and other reasons, all information concerning the origin
and cause of a fire shall be released to the news media and the public at
large only by the Fire Investigator or the Deputy Fire Investigator. Only
in their absence may such information be released by one of the
following Township officials, and only after consultation with the Fire
Investigator or Deputy Fire Investigator:
(1) Superintendent of Police.
(2) Township Manager.
C. For incidents at which the Radnor Township Police Department is in
charge, all information concerning the origin and cause of a fire shall be
released to the news media and the public at large only by the Radnor
Township Police Department following their protocols.
D. Any information concerning a criminal investigation related to a fire
shall be released to the news media and the public at large only by the
Superintendent of Police, the Lieutenant or their designee. Only in their
absence may such information be released by one of the following
Radnor Township officials, and only after prior consultation with the
Superintendent of Police, Lieutenant or Township Manager.
A. In the event that both the Fire Investigator and the Deputy Fire
Investigator are unavailable, the Fire Chief in whose district of Radnor
Township the scene is located, or his/her representative, shall follow
these procedures:
(1) For any small fire loss to a structure, vehicle fire, or minor injury
where the cause is accidental, the Fire Chief or his/her
representative will gather required information, including
§ 46-7 RADNOR CODE § 46-9
C:180
Chapter 50
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 78.
information about the property, fire, owners, and tenants, and other
witnesses. If the Fire Chief or representative is not certain of the
area of origin or any part of the ignition sequence, the fire will be
classified as undetermined and the Fire Investigator or Deputy will
complete the investigation when available. Radnor Township Police
Department will assist with initial scene interviews upon request.
(2) Larger fire loss.
(a) For larger fire loss to structure or major injury where the cause
appears to be accidental, the Fire Chief or representative will
gather as much of the information as possible. The Fire
Investigator or Deputy will follow up when available.
(b) If the Fire Chief or representative is not sure that the cause is
accidental or, if the cause appears to be incendiary, they will
notify the Radnor Police Sergeant on duty and ask that a
detective be assigned to assist with initial scene interviews and
other parts of the investigation. The Fire Chiefs' role is to
determine origin and cause, if possible, and the police role is to
conduct any possible criminal investigation. If it is necessary to
secure the scene, Radnor Township Police Department will do
that on their own initiative or at the Fire Chief's request. The
fire officer or police officer in charge will notify the
Pennsylvania State Police Fire Investigator and ask that he/she
respond to the scene. If the Fire Chief is not available to assist
with the Pennsylvania State Police Fire Investigator scene
investigation, Radnor Police Department should be asked to
provide a detective to serve as a liaison. In all cases, Radnor
Police Department is to be kept informed.
(c) The Fire Investigator or Deputy Fire Investigator will follow up
when available.
§ 46-9 CHARTER § 46-9
C:181

ARTICLE I
Cooperative Purchasing Agreement
[Adopted 5-24-1976 by Ord. No. 1627]
§ 50-1. Agreement authorized.
The President of the Board of Commissioners is hereby authorized to
execute, on behalf of the Township of Radnor, a Cooperative Purchasing
Agreement with other Pennsylvania municipalities.
§ 50-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Cooperative Purchasing Agreement is to enable the
Township of Radnor, as it may choose to do from time to time, to jointly
solicit and receive bids with other Pennsylvania municipalities for the
purchase and use of equipment, materials, supplies and services.
§ 50-3. Objectives.
The objectives of the Cooperative Purchasing Agreement are to enable
the Township of Radnor to receive a larger number of bids for various
contracts and, by means of high-volume purchasing with other Pennsylvania
municipalities, purchase and use equipment, materials, supplies and
services at a lower cost.
§ 50-4. Duration.
The term of the Cooperative Purchasing Agreement shall be perpetual, but
any participating municipality can withdraw from the agreement at any
time by giving all other participating municipalities at least 60 days prior
written notice of its intention to withdraw.
§ 50-5. Organizational structure; rules and regulations.
Each of the municipalities entering into the Cooperative Purchasing
Agreement shall appoint one representative to serve on a committee which
shall be known as the "Main Line Cooperative Purchasing Council," which
shall advertise for bids and receive sealed bids for the purchase and use
of equipment, materials, supplies and services for which any two or more
participating municipalities may wish to jointly advertise. Thereafter, the
Council shall determine and certify to each participating municipality the
lowest responsible bidder, after which each municipality may make its
own separate contract with such lowest responsible bidder. The Main Line
Cooperative Purchasing Council shall make such rules and regulations as it
deems necessary to conduct its business in accordance with the purposes of
the Cooperative Purchasing Agreement.
§ 50-6. Financing.
The cost of advertising and receipt of any particular bid shall be shared
equally by those municipalities participating in any particular bid. All other
§ 50-1 CHARTER § 50-6
C:183
costs properly incurred by the Main Line Cooperative Purchasing Council
shall be shared equally by all municipalities which have entered into the
Cooperative Purchasing Agreement.
§ 50-7. Property.
The Main Line Cooperative Purchasing Council is hereby empowered to
purchase, lease or accept donations of such real or personal property as is
necessary to conduct its business, and it shall manage such property. The
Main Line Cooperative Purchasing Council is hereby empowered to dispose
of any such property in conformance with law as it deems necessary, by
written resolution.
§ 50-8. Membership.
The initial members of the Cooperative Purchasing Agreement may be the
Township of Lower Merion, the Township of Haverford and the Township
of Radnor, all being political subdivisions within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. These three municipalities shall each become members by
adopting an ordinance pursuant to the requirements of Pennsylvania Act
No. 180 of July 12, 1972,75 and by thereafter executing the Cooperative
Purchasing Agreement. Any other Pennsylvania municipality may become a
member of the Cooperative Purchasing Agreement upon the occurrence of
the following acts in the following sequence:
A. Any municipality desiring membership shall submit a written request
for membership to the Main Line Cooperative Purchasing Council.
B. The Main Line Cooperative Purchasing Council shall accept or reject
any application for membership by written resolution of the appointed
representatives sitting thereon, all within 45 days after receipt of such
application. Failure to act within the forty-five-day period shall be
deemed to be a denial of the application.
C. The municipality seeking admission must adopt an ordinance pursuant
to the requirements of Pennsylvania Act No. 180 of July 12, 1972.
D. The duly authorized official of the municipality seeking admission must
execute the Cooperative Purchasing Agreement.
75.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 50-6 RADNOR CODE § 50-8
C:184
ARTICLE II
Fingerprint Analysis Unit
[Adopted 1-28-1980 by Res. No. 80-03]
§ 50-9. Establishment.
A Fingerprint Analysis Unit shall be established for the purpose of providing
cooperative fingerprint analysis and identification services for said
municipalities and said municipalities76 hereby legally bind themselves as
follows.
§ 50-10. Purpose.
The purpose of the Fingerprint Analysis Unit will be to provide analysis and
comparison of any and all fingerprints arising from a violation of state and
federal laws.
§ 50-11. Duration.
This agreement shall be for an indefinite term subject to dissolution by the
respective municipalities as hereinafter set forth. It is the intention of the
parties to continue the program, if it is successful in meeting its goals,
beyond the expiration date of federal funding.
§ 50-12. Boundaries.
Boundaries of police districts for those individuals participating in the
Fingerprint Analysis Unit shall be the corporate limits of the participating
townships.
§ 50-13. Operating procedure.
A. The Fingerprint Analysis Unit will provide analysis and comparison of
any and all fingerprints arising from a violation of state or federal law.
The collection of fingerprints will remain the responsibility of the
individual participating departments.
B. In incidents of a violent or major violation of those laws listed in Part I
of the Uniform Crime Report, the Fingerprint Analysis Unit will, upon
request, process the scene of such an incident and conduct fingerprint
processing procedures wherever possible.
C. When subpoenaed, the Fingerprint Analysis Unit will provide expert
testimony and evidence in criminal court.
D. The Fingerprint Analysis Unit will act as a repository for all fingerprint
records collected and those past records from participating
departments deemed valuable for future investigation.
76.Editor's Note: This resolution established a joint municipal cooperation agreement
between the Townships of Haverford, Marple, Newtown, Radnor and Springfield.
§ 50-9 CHARTER § 50-14
C:185
§ 50-14. Apportioning of costs.
The local share of all costs incurred through the Fingerprint Analysis Unit
shall be divided equally among the five townships. Such costs shall include
but shall not be limited to wages, employee benefits, travel, equipment
supplies, operating expenses, training and insurance.
§ 50-15. Jurisdiction.
Those individuals participating in the Fingerprint Analysis Unit shall be
subject to the existing policies of jurisdiction and power of the municipality
where they are working at any given time. Such individuals shall be
responsible to and supervised by the Chief of Police in the township where
they are working at any given time.
§ 50-16. Headquarters.
A headquarters and laboratory space for the unit shall be established at the
Marple Police Building.
§ 50-17. Termination of agreement.
In the event that any township wishes to withdraw from this agreement and
participation in the Fingerprint Analysis Unit, it may do so by giving six
months written notice prior to the start of the next fiscal year, which begins
on December 11 of each year.
§ 50-14 RADNOR CODE § 50-17
C:186
ARTICLE III
Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted 2-22-1988 by Res. No. 88-06]
§ 50-18. Participation authorized.
Radnor Township shall join with other local governmental units in
Pennsylvania, in accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,
by becoming a settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment
Trust (the "Trust").
§ 50-19. Purchasing and redemption powers.
The Township is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from time to
time with available funds and to redeem some or all of those shares from
time to time as funds are needed for other purposes. These actions may be
taken by Township officers designated for this purpose by § 5-47D of the
Code of the Township of Radnor.
§ 50-20. Custody of Township funds.
The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of
Township funds that are invested by the purchase of shares in the Trust.
§ 50-21. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,77 the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust.78
B. The Township's participation in the Trust shall be terminable at any
time by resolution.
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for investing
available Township funds in obligations that are otherwise legal
investments, as part of a pooled arrangement with other local
governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages
of pooled investments.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
Township funds except through the purchase of shares in the Trust.
E. The Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
77.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
78.Editor's Note: The Declaration of Trust is on file and available for inspection in the office
of the Township Secretary.
§ 50-18 CHARTER § 50-21
C:187
§ 50-22. Deposits limited.
F. Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as the
Township deems necessary or appropriate to meet its cash
management requirements.
A. Township deposits in all funds of the Trust shall be limited as follows:
(1) The total amount of Township funds deposited in all funds of the
Trust at any given time shall not exceed $1,000,000.
(2) The weighted average maturity of all Township funds deposited in
the Trust at any given time shall not exceed 90 days (with such
weights including all Township time investments), as determined
by the Township Manager and Finance Director.
B. This section shall not apply to any proceeds that the Township receives
through the sale of a bond issue.
§ 50-21 RADNOR CODE § 50-22
C:188
ARTICLE IV
Delaware Valley Municipal Health Insurance Trust
[Adopted 1-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-01]
§ 50-23. Execution of agreement and addendum.
§ 50-24. Purpose.
The participation of Radnor Township in the Delaware Valley Health
Insurance Trust is authorized for the purpose of obtaining high quality
health benefits at the most reasonable cost to Radnor Township and its
employees.
§ 50-25. Conditions.
As set forth in the Trust Agreement and Addendum thereto, and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Radnor Township in the Delaware Valley Health Insurance Trust:
A. The President and Secretary of Radnor Township are hereby authorized
to execute the Trust Agreement (and Addendum thereto) and any other
agreements necessary for its participation in the Delaware Valley
Municipal Health Insurance Trust, also known as the "Delaware Valley
Health Insurance Trust." The Delaware Valley Health Insurance Trust
Agreement and Addendum thereto are attached hereto as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein by reference.
B. The Trust Agreement and Addendum attached hereto are on file for
inspection and review at the municipal offices of Radnor Township,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania. This Trust Agreement may be
subsequently modified or amended but in no event shall such
amendments or modifications materially adversely affect the right of
the Radnor Township to participate in the Delaware Valley Health
Insurance Trust.
A. Each participating municipality must meet the admission and eligibility
requirements set forth therein;
B. Each participating municipality agrees to pay all contributions when
due as provided in the Trust Agreement and any bylaws thereafter
adopted by the Trust;
C. Each participating municipality uses its best efforts to provide
appropriations for the payment of any contributions required to achieve
the purposes and objectives of the Trust;
D. Each participating municipality cooperate fully in achieving the
purposes and objectives of the Trust; and
E. Each participating municipality comply with all other conditions of the
Agreement.
§ 50-23 CHARTER § 50-26
C:189
§ 50-26. Term of participation.
That Radnor Township agrees to participate in the Delaware Valley Health
Insurance Trust for a minimum period, as specified in the attached Trust
Agreement and Addendum thereto, and thereafter may withdraw for any
reason whatsoever provided that it has fulfilled all its financial obligations
to the Trust upon withdrawal.
§ 50-27. Effective date.
The effective date of the participation of Radnor Township in the Delaware
Valley Health Insurance Trust will be January 1, 2007.
§ 50-28. Delegation of powers.
Each participating municipality delegates to the Board of Trustees of the
Delaware Valley Health Insurance Trust the powers enumerated in the Trust
Agreement.
§ 50-29. Funds.
All contributions paid by Radnor Township shall be made with funds
appropriated by Radnor Township for that purpose.
§ 50-30. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of Trustees
and Executive Committee selected by the Board of Trustees in accordance
with the Trust Agreement.
§ 50-31. Annual appropriations.
The funds required for the operation of the Trust shall be provided by the
participating municipalities through annual appropriations.
§ 50-32. Contracts for policies of group insurance and benefits.
The Delaware Valley Health Insurance Trust is empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits, including
social security, for any of its employees.
§ 50-33. Compliance with agreement and addendum.
As a condition of participating in the Delaware Valley Health Insurance
Trust, Radnor Township agrees to comply with all the terms and conditions
in the attached Trust Agreement and Addendum thereto.
§ 50-34. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, as
amended, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 50-26 RADNOR CODE § 50-34
C:190
ARTICLE V
Municipal Utility Alliance
[Adopted 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-44]
§ 50-35. Background.
§ 50-36. Authorization to execute and make purchases.
§ 50-37. Notice.
Written notices under Section 18(a) of the Amended and Restated
Agreement for Radnor Township shall be sent to the following individuals at
the address shown:
A. Pursuant to § 3.01 of the Charter of Radnor Township and the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq., the
Township of Radnor may enter into agreements with other local
governments for joint purchasing of utility products and services in
volume.
B. The Municipal Utility Alliance (M'UA) was created by the Pennsylvania
League of Cities and Municipalities (PLCM) for the specific purpose of
acting as a consultant for local governments and municipal authorities
in the bidding and purchasing of utility products and services pursuant
to an intergovernmental cooperation agreement of April 7, 2009, which
has been amended and restated, and is attached hereto and made a
part hereof as Exhibit A (hereinafter the "Amended and Restated
Agreement").79
C. The Township of Radnor wishes to enter into a proposed joinder
agreement (hereinafter the "Joinder Agreement") attached hereto and
made a part hereof as Exhibit B to join the MUA according to the terms
of the Amended and Restated Agreement.80
A. The President of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Radnor
is hereby authorized and directed to execute and deliver a Joinder
Agreement to the Amended and Restated Agreement and to execute
and deliver such additional instruments or documents as may be
necessary or appropriate to carry forth the terms of the Amended and
Restated Agreement and the transactions to be effected under the
Amended and Restated Agreement.
B. The Township Manager is hereby authorized to deliver a written
commitment to purchase the specific services through the MUA
program and to execute a purchase and sales agreement with the
supplier on the terms and conditions as negotiated and obtained by the
MUA, provided that the conditions set forth in Section 12 of the
Amended and Restated Agreement have been met.
79.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
80.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 50-35 CHARTER § 50-37
C:191
Radnor Township
301 Iven Road
Wayne, PA 18907
Attn: Township Manager
§ 50-38. Specific findings.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Amended and
Restated Agreement.
B. The term of the Amended and Restated Agreement, as provided in
Section 16 thereof, continues in effect for two years after the initial
term (as defined therein), subject to automatic annual renewals.
C. The purpose and objectives of the Amended and Restated Agreement
are to enter into an intergovernmental contract to obtain favorable
utility pricing, with the MUA acting as a consultant in the bidding and
purchasing of utility products and services.
D. The financial terms of the Amended and Restated Agreement are set
forth in Section 8 of the Amended and Restated Agreement.
E. No new organizational structure is necessary to implement the
Amended and Restated Agreement, except to the extent that certain
notice and covenants of new participating agencies are addressed in
the Amended and Restated Agreement.
F. The Amended and Restated Agreement contains no provisions
applicable to the ownership of property by the respective parties.
G. Radnor Township and the MUA, acting through the PLCM, shall
continue to have the power to separately enter into contracts for
policies of group insurance and employee benefits, including social
security, for its employees.
§ 50-37 RADNOR CODE § 50-38
C:192
Chapter 56
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
§ 50-38 CHARTER § 50-38
C:193

ARTICLE I
Creation
§ 56-1. Intent and authorization.
It is the desire and intention of the Board of Commissioners to organize an
Authority under the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (the Act approved
May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented).81
§ 56-2. Name.
The name of the proposed Authority shall be "Radnor Township Municipal
Authority."
§ 56-3. Articles of Incorporation.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation for the proposed Authority are as
follows:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
In Compliance with the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (the Act
approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented),82 the
Township of Radnor, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, pursuant to an
Ordinance duly enacted by the Board of Commissioners of said Township
authorizing the formation of a municipal Authority, does hereby certify:
1. The name of the Authority shall be "RADNOR TOWNSHIP MUNICIPAL
AUTHORITY."
2. The said Authority is formed under the "Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945" (the Act approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and
supplemented) for all the purposes authorized by said Act.
3. No other Authority has heretofore been organized under the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented, or
under the Act approved June 28, 1935, P.L. 463,83 and is in existence in
or for the Township of Radnor, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, either
acting alone or jointly with other municipalities. However, concurrently
with the organization of this Authority the Township of Radnor is
organizing a Parking Authority under the provisions of the Act of June
5, 1947, P.L. 458, as amended and supplemented.84
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
82.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
83.Editor's Note: The Act approved June 28, 1935, was the predecessor of the Municipality
Authorities Act.
84.Editor's Note: The Parking Authority referred to was created 6-26-1956 by Ord. No. 882
and terminated 5-23-1967 by Ord. No. 1327.
§ 56-1 CHARTER § 56-3
C:195
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is "The Township of Radnor,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania."
The names and addresses of the members of the Board of Township
Commissioners, the municipal authorities of the Township of Radnor,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania, are as follows.85
5 The Board of the Authority shall consist of five members, each of whom
shall be a citizen of the Township of Radnor.
6. The names and addresses and the term of office of the first members of
the Board of said Authority are as follows.86
The term of office of each member of the original Board shall commence
on the date of his appointment and the fixed terms of each such member
as set forth above shall be computed from the first day of January next
succeeding the date of incorporation of the Authority. Whenever a vacancy
in the Board has occurred or is about to occur by reason of the expiration
of the term of any member, or has occurred by reason of death, resignation
or otherwise, the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Radnor,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania, shall appoint a member for a term of five
years to fill a vacancy occurring by reason of the expiration of a term or for
the unexpired term when the vacancy has otherwise occurred. Members
whose terms have expired shall hold office until their successors have been
appointed and may be appointed to succeed themselves.
IN WITNESS THEREOF the Township of Radnor, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, has executed these Articles of Incorporation by its proper
officers thereunto duly authorized and under its municipal seal this ..........
day of .................... A.D. 1956.
TOWNSHIP OF RADNOR
By
President
Attest:
Secretary
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
ss.:
85.Editor's Note: The names and addresses were omitted by the publisher. A complete copy of
former Ch. 14 is on file and available for inspection in the office of the Township Secretary.
86.Editor's Note: The names, addresses and terms of office were omitted by the publisher. A
complete copy of former Ch. 14 is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Township Secretary.
§ 56-3 RADNOR CODE § 56-3
C:196
COUNTY OF DELAWARE
On this .......... day of ...................., A.D. 1956, before me, the subscriber
.............................. personally appeared, RICHARD W. BARRINGER,
Secretary of the said Township of Radnor, Delaware County, Pennsylvania,
who being duly sworn according to law, says that he was personally present
at the execution of the foregoing Articles of Incorporation and saw the
common or corporate seal of the said Township duly affixed thereto; that
the seal so affixed thereto is the common or corporate seal of the said
Township; that the foregoing Articles of Incorporation were duly sealed
and delivered by .................... of the said Township, as and for the act and
deed of the said Township, for the uses and purposes therein mentioned,
and that the names of this deponent as Secretary and of ....................
as President of the said Township, subscribed to the above Indenture in
attestation of its due execution and delivery, are of their and each of their
respective handwritings.
____________________________
Sworn and subscribed before me, the day and year aforesaid. Witness my
hand and seal.
§ 56-4. Members; terms of office.
The members of the original Board of Radnor Township Municipal Authority
named in the proposed Articles of Incorporation are hereby specifically
appointed members of said Board for the terms of office set after their
respective names. The term of each member of the original Board shall
commence on the date of his appointment, and the fixed term of each such
member as set forth in said Articles shall be computed from the first day of
January next succeeding the date of incorporation of the Authority.
§ 56-5. Execution; authority of officers.
The Articles of Incorporation of the proposed Authority, in substantially
the form set forth in § 56-3 of this article, shall be executed on behalf
of the Township of Radnor by the President of the Board of Township
Commissioners and under its Municipal Seal attested by the Township
Secretary, and such officers are hereby authorized, empowered and
directed to acknowledge the same on behalf of the Township of Radnor, to
file said Articles with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
to give notice thereof and to do all things necessary and appropriate to
effect and establish said proposed Authority in conformity with the
provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and
supplemented.87
87.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 56-3 CHARTER § 56-6
C:197
§ 56-6. Initial projects.
The first projects to be undertaken by said Authority shall be the acquiring,
holding, constructing, improving, maintaining and operating, owning and
leasing, in the capacity of either lessor or lessee, of a Township Building and
sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof. Said Authority shall not undertake
any other project unless and until the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Radnor shall enact a further ordinance authorizing said
Authority to undertake another project or projects.
§ 56-6 RADNOR CODE § 56-6
C:198
ARTICLE II
Additional Projects
§ 56-7. Projects authorized.
The Radnor Township Municipal Authority, as established in Article I, is
hereby authorized to acquire, hold, construct, improve, maintain, operate,
own or lease, in the capacity of either lessor or lessee, projects pertaining
to parking spaces, playgrounds, parks and recreation grounds and facilities.
§ 56-8. Construal of provisions.
This Article shall be construed to enlarge the provisions of § 56-6 of Article
I to the extent herein specified, and in all other respects said Article I shall
remain in full force and effect.
§ 56-7 CHARTER § 56-8
C:199
Chapter 62
PENSIONS AND ANNUITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 5, § 5-7.
§ 56-8 RADNOR CODE § 56-8
C:200
ARTICLE I
Civilian Employees' Plan
[Adopted 10-28-1991 by Ord. No. 91-44; amended in its entirety
10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-29]
§ 62-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCRUED BENEFIT — As of any given date, the benefit determined under
§ 62-5B.
ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS — The total amount contributed by any
participant to this fund or its predecessor by way of payroll deduction or
otherwise, plus interest credited at 5% per annum. Such interest shall be
credited and compounded annually from the last day of the plan year in
which the contribution is deposited until the first day of the month in which
distribution shall occur. Accumulated contributions shall also include an
additional amount as set forth in § 62-4F for each participant eligible to
receive such additional amount.
ACT — The Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act,
enacted as P.L. 1005 (Act 205 of 1984), as amended.88
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT — Two forms of payment of equal actuarial
present value on a specified date based on mortality according to the
UP-1984 Mortality Table and an interest rate of 7%.
ACTUARY — The person, partnership, association or corporation which at
an given time is serving as actuary, provided that such actuary must be an
approved actuary as defined in the Act.
AGGREGATE SERVICE — The total period of the participant's employment.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, any participant who shall have
received a distribution of accumulated contributions with respect to a
period of employment shall not have such period included in aggregate
service unless, upon recommencement of employment, the amount so
distributed shall be repaid to the fund with interest, calculated at a rate of
7% and in the same manner as described in the definition of "accumulated
contributions."
BASIC MONTHLY EARNINGS — The total compensation of the employee,
whether salary or hourly wages, including overtime pay, holiday pay,
longevity pay and any other form of compensation paid by the employer for
services rendered. Basic monthly earnings shall also include fixed, periodic
amounts paid for periods during which the participant is not actively
employed, which amounts are paid directly by the employer or through
a program to which the employer has made contributions on behalf of
the employee, other than under this plan (including, without limitation, a
workers' compensation program or payments made under the Pennsylvania
88.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 62-1 CHARTER § 62-1
C:201
Heart and Lung Act, the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 or other
applicable laws). The compensation used in determining an employee's
basic monthly earnings shall be limited on an annual basis to the amount
specified for government plans pursuant to Code Section 401(a)(17), as
adjusted under Code Section 415(d).[Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-5]
BENEFICIARY — The person or entity designated by the participant to
receive any benefits payable under this plan by reason of the death of
the participant unless expressly provided otherwise. In the event that a
participant does not designate a beneficiary or his/her beneficiary does not
survive him/her, the beneficiary shall be his/her surviving spouse; or if there
is no surviving spouse, his/her issue, per stirpes; or if there is no surviving
spouse or surviving issue, his/her parents, if then surviving; or if there is
no surviving spouse, issue or parents, his/her brothers and sisters, if then
surviving; or if there is no surviving spouse, issue, parents or brothers or
sisters, his/her estate; but if no personal representative has been appointed,
to those persons who would be entered to his/her estate under the intestacy
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania if s/he had died intestate and a
resident of Pennsylvania.
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of Radnor Township.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Township Manager (Manager)
appointed by the Board.
CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
EARLY RETIREMENT DATE — The first of the month coincident with or
next following the month in which a Participant retires if such date is
before his/her normal retirement date but on or after the date on which s/
he has both completed 15 years of aggregate service and has attained age
55.[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-20]
EMPLOYEE — Any individual employed by the employer on a regular fulltime
and nonseasonal basis. For purposes of this definition, "employed
on a full-time basis" means that the individual is normally scheduled to
work a minimum of 35 hours per week. "Employee," as used herein, shall
not include sworn police officers, elected officials, or any appointed
management employee with whom the employer has entered into an
individual employment agreement that excludes such official's participation
in this pension plan.
EMPLOYER — Radnor Township, a home rule municipality located in
Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
EMPLOYMENT[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-20] —
Any period of time for which an employee is entitled to a salary paid
by the employer for services rendered and any period for which an
employee is absent from work because of an approved leave of absence.
An approved leave of absence shall include:
A.
§ 62-1 RADNOR CODE § 62-1
C:202
FINAL MONTHLY AVERAGE SALARY — The average monthly salary
received by the participant and paid by the employer during the last 36
months immediately preceding retirement. Any single sum payments for
accumulated but unused sick time or other single sum payments to an
employee for performance or other purposes shall not be included in the
calculation of final monthly average salary unless otherwise authorized by
collective bargaining or individual employment agreements.
INSURER or INSURANCE COMPANY — A legal reserve life insurance
company, which may issue a policy under this plan.
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The first of the month coincident with or
next following the date on which the participant has attained age 62 and
has completed a minimum of five years of credited service.
PARTICIPANT — An employee who has met the participation requirements
of the plan as provided in § 62-3A.
Any period of time for which salary continuation payments are
payable, such as vacation, holidays, sickness or periods covered by
entitlement to workers' compensation or similar benefits;
(1)
Any period of voluntary or involuntary military service so long
as the employee returns to active employment within six months
following such longer period as may be required by law or the
terms of a collective bargaining agreement;
(2)
Any period of leave, paid or unpaid, taken under the Family and
Medical Leave Act of 1993; and
(3)
Such other period of time which the Board, in its sole discretion,
may determine to be an approved leave of absence.
(4)
Employment shall include, for plan years beginning January 1, 2001,
any period of qualified military service as determined under the
requirements of Chapter 43 of Title 38, United State Code, provided
that the participant returns to employment following such period of
qualified military service, and the participant makes payment to the
plan in an amount equal to the employee contributions that would
otherwise have been paid to the plan during such period of qualified
military service. The amount of employee contributions shall be based
upon an estimate of the compensation that would have been paid
to the participant during such period of qualified military service as
determined by the average compensation paid to the participant during
the 12 months immediately preceding the period of qualified military
service. The amount of employee contributions so calculated must be
paid into the plan before the end of the period that begins on the date of
reemployment and ends on the earlier of the date that ends the period
that has a duration of three times the period of qualified military service
or the date that is five years after the date of reemployment.
B.
§ 62-1 CHARTER § 62-1
C:203
PENSION FUND or FUND — The fund or funds administered under the
terms of this plan, which shall include all money, property, investments,
policies and contracts standing in the name of the plan.
PLAN — The plan set forth herein, as amended from time to time, and
designated as the "Radnor Township Civilian Employees Pension Plan."
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The Civilian Pension Board appointed by the
Board of Commissioners to administer the provisions of the plan pursuant
to § 62-2B. In the event that no appointment of such Pension Board is
made, the Plan Administrator shall consist of (a) the Township Manager
(Manager), the Finance Director and the Assistant Finance Director or
another management official selected by the Manager.
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning on January 1 and ending
on December 31 of each year.
POLICY or CONTRACT — A retirement annuity or retirement income
endowment policy (or a combination of both) or any other form of insurance
contract or policy which shall be deemed appropriate in accordance with
the provisions of the Act.
RESTATEMENT DATE — January 1, 1998, the date upon which this
amendment and restatement of the plan becomes effective.
SALARY — Regular fixed amounts paid at periodic intervals including
regular salary or hourly wages, longevity pay, holiday pay, vacation pay, sick
pay and personal leave pay plus overtime compensation, shift differential
and payments made in accordance with United States Department of
Transportation regulations covering drug testing for an employee required
to have and maintain a commercial driver's license, as so authorized by
collective bargaining agreements. Salary used to calculate benefits
hereunder shall be limited on an annual basis to the amount specified for
government plans pursuant to Code Section 40l(a)(17), as adjusted under
Code Section 415(d).[Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-5]
§ 62-2. Administrative provisions.
A. Plan operated under supervision of the Board of Commissioners.
(1) The operation of the plan shall be supervised by the Board. The
Board shall have the power and authority, either directly or through
the Plan Administrator, to do all acts and to execute, acknowledge
and deliver all instruments necessary to implement and effectuate
the purpose of this plan.
(2) The Plan Administrator shall keep such records as may be
necessary for the determination of the status of each participant
and the presumptive share of each participant in the fund as
determined by the actuary.
(3) The Board shall have authority and shall be charged with the
performance of the duties set forth in this plan, but shall have the
authority, by general rule or special decision, to determine and
§ 62-1 RADNOR CODE § 62-2
C:204
make provisions for such items necessary for the proper carrying
out and enforcement thereof that are not specifically provided by
this plan at all times, subject to change by proper ordinance or
resolution.
B. Civilian Pension Board.
(1) The Board of Commissioners, at its sole discretion, may appoint or
direct the Township Manager to convene a Civilian Pension Board
to act as Plan Administrator pursuant to Subsection A. The Civilian
Pension Board shall be composed of the following nine individuals,
each having one vote on related matters:
(a) The President of the Board of Commissioners, who shall serve
as co-chair of the Pension Board.
(b) Another member of the Board of Commissioners, who shall be
appointed annually by the President of the Board.
(c) The Township Manager, who shall serve as the Chief
Administrative Officer of the plan and co-chair of the Pension
Board.
(d) The Finance Director, who shall serve as the Chief Financial
Officer of the plan.
(e) The Assistant Finance Director or another management official
selected by the Manager.
(f) One active plan participant selected by the Manager; this
employee may not serve for more than four years
consecutively.
(g) Two active plan participants, selected by the Radnor
Association of Township employees (RATE) or any successor
organization designated to represent certain participants in
collective bargaining.
(h) One retired employee, who is receiving a monthly pension from
the plan, selected by the Manager in consultation with the
Pension Board and RATE.
(2) The Civilian Pension Board shall meet at least once each quarter to
discuss the allocation of plan assets, investment performance and
other business related to the plan. Certain information about plan
participants and retirees (such as pension benefits, beneficiaries,
etc.) shall be kept confidential by all Pension Board members.
C. Investment policies. The Plan Administrator shall develop policies and
procedures governing the allocation and investment of all plan assets. It
is the intent of the Board that all assets of the plan shall be invested in a
prudent manner designed to meet the actuarially determined funding
needs of the plan. If it so elects, the Plan Administrator may elect to
§ 62-2 CHARTER § 62-2
C:205
§ 62-3. Participation.
§ 62-4. Contributions.
invest all or a portion of the pension fund's assets in policies issued by
an insurer.
A. Eligibility requirements. As a condition of employment, each employee
shall participate herein as of the date on which his/her employment first
commences or recommences.
B. Designation of beneficiary. Any new, full-time employee who becomes a
participant hereunder shall provide a written notice, which designates
his/her beneficiary or beneficiaries, to the Plan Administrator at the
time his/her participation commences. (The beneficiary shall receive a
refund of accumulated contributions if such refund is payable pursuant
to § 62-6A.) The participant's election of any such beneficiary or
beneficiaries may be rescinded or changed, without the consent of the
beneficiary or beneficiaries, at any time, provided that the participant
provides the employer with written notice of the changed designation.
A. Participant contributions. Each participant shall make regular monthly
contributions to the plan at a rate of 5% of his/her basic monthly
earnings.
B. Payment of participant contributions. A participant's contributions shall
be deducted from his/her basic monthly earnings in each month, or
other periodic increments thereof of his/her aggregate service during
which s/he receives payments of basic monthly earnings.
C. Reduction of participant contributions. Notwithstanding the preceding
Subsections A and B, if an actuarial study performed by the Actuary
shows that the condition of the pension fund is such that payments into
the pension fund by participants may be reduced below the minimum
percentages prescribed in Subsection A, or may be eliminated, and that
if such payments are reduced or eliminated, contributions by the
employer will not be required to keep the pension fund actuarially
sound, the Board of Commissioners may, on an annual basis, by
ordinance or resolution, reduce or eliminate payments into the pension
fund by participants.
D. Payments of state aid. Payments of general municipal pension system
state aid or any other amount of state aid received in accordance with
the Act from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which are received by
the employer and deposited into the pension fund governed by this
plan, shall be used as follows:
(1) First, to reduce the unfunded liability, or after such liability has
been funded;
(2) Next, to apply against the annual obligation of the employer for
future service costs;
§ 62-2 RADNOR CODE § 62-4
C:206
§ 62-5. Retirement benefits.
(3) Or, to the extent that the payment may be in excess of such
obligation, to reduce participant contributions hereunder.
E. Employer contributions. The remainder of the annual contributions
required under the provisions of the Act, as determined by the Actuary
in accordance with the Act, shall become the obligation of the employer
and shall be paid into the pension fund by annual appropriations
enacted by the Board.
F. Longevity contributions.
(1) The employer, to the extent it is able to do so and without using any
state aid, shall contribute to an account established on behalf of
each participant after completing 10 years of aggregate service.
The initial amount contributed, calculated from the date of hire of
the participant to the date of completion of 15 years of aggregate
service, shall be equal to:
(a) For employment prior to January 1, 1986, 2% of annual
earnings;
(b) For employment after December 31, 1985, and prior to January
1, 1988, 3% of annual earnings;
(c) For employment after December 31, 1987, and prior to January
1, 1990, 4% of annual earnings; and
(d) For employment after December 31, 1989, 5% of annual
earnings.
(2) Interest shall be credited at the rate of 2% per annum, in the
manner set forth in § 62-1, the definition of "accumulated
contributions."
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, in the case of a
participant who dies while an employee after completing five years
of aggregate service, but prior to completing 10 years of aggregate
service, longevity contributions will be made based upon the
vesting percentage set forth in § 62-8C.
G. No reversion to the employer. At no time shall it be possible for plan
assets to be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for the
exclusive benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries, except that
contributions made by the employer may be returned to the employer
if:
(1) The contribution was made due to mistake of fact and the
contribution is returned within one year of the mistaken payment of
the contribution; or
(2) The plan is terminated as provided in § 62-12.
§ 62-4 CHARTER § 62-5
C:207
A. Normal retirement. Each participant shall been entitled to normal
retirement benefits, provided that s/he retires from employment on or
after his/her normal retirement date.
B. Normal retirement benefit. Each participant entitled to normal
retirement benefits pursuant to Subsection A shall receive during his/
her lifetime a monthly retirement income equal to 50% of his/her final
monthly average salary, reduced by 1/20 for each year of aggregate
service less than 20 full years. Benefit payments shall commence as of
the first of the month coincident with or next following the retirement
date.
C. Late retirement. A participant may continue to work beyond his/her
normal retirement date, subject to the employer's rules and regulations
regarding retirement age. If a participant who has met the
requirements of Subsection A continues to work beyond his/her normal
retirement date, no retirement benefits shall be paid until employment
ceases. The retirement benefit of a participant who retires after his/her
normal retirement date shall be calculated on the basis of his final
monthly average salary as of such participant's actual date of
retirement. Benefit payments shall commence as of the first of the
month coincident with or next following the actual retirement date.
D. Early retirement. Each participant who completes 15 years of
aggregate service and attains age 55 while in employment may elect to
retire and receive an immediate benefit equal to his/her accrued
benefit, which shall be actuarially reduced for early commencement in
accordance with the factors prescribed in § 62-1, or receive a deferred
benefit equal to his/her accrued benefit with payment commencing as of
the first of the month coincident with or next following his/her normal
retirement date. Other special early retirement benefits shall be paid to
eligible participants in accordance with early retirement plans that may
be authorized by collective bargaining agreements. [Amended
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-20]
E. Payment of benefits. Except as otherwise provided herein, retirement
payments under this section shall be payable as of the first day of the
month coincident with or next following the participant's retirement
date and the first day of each month thereafter during the participant's
lifetime.
F. Special provision for restated plans. The benefit amount of any
participant who may have retired prior to the restatement date shall not
be in any way altered by the provisions of this plan, except where
otherwise expressly indicated herein, and shall continue to be
determined on the basis of the terms of the plan in effect on the day
preceding the restatement date.
G. Maximum benefit limitations. Notwithstanding any provision of this
plan to the contrary, for plan years beginning January 1, 2001, no
benefit provided under this plan attributable to contributions of the
§ 62-5 RADNOR CODE § 62-5
C:208
employer shall exceed, as an annual amount, the amount specified in
Code Section 415(b)(l)(A) as adjusted pursuant to Code Section 415(d),
assuming the form of benefit shall be a straight life annuity (with no
ancillary benefits). The limitations described in this Subsection G shall
be governed by the following conditions and definitions: [Amended
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-20]
(1) Benefits paid or payable in a form other than a straight life annuity
(with no ancillary benefits) or where the employee contributes to
the plan or makes rollover contributions shall be adjusted on an
actuarially equivalent basis to determine the limitation contained
herein;
(2) In the case of a benefit which commences prior to the attainment of
age 62 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on
an actuarially equivalent basis to the amount determined pursuant
to this section commencing at age 62; however, in the case of a
qualified participant (a participant with respect to whom a period
of at least 15 years of service, including applicable military service,
as a full-time employee of a police or fire department is taken into
account in determining the amount of benefit), the limitation
contained herein shall not apply; [Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-5]
(3) In the case of a benefit which commences after attainment of age
65 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on an
actuarially equivalent basis to the amount determined commencing
at age 65;
(4) Benefits paid to a participant which total less than $10,000 from all
defined benefit plans maintained by the employer expressed as an
annual benefit shall be deemed not to exceed the limitation of this
section provided that the employer has not at any time maintained
a defined contribution plan in which the participant has
participated; however, in the case of a participant who is not
receiving a disability retirement benefit, with fewer than 10 years
of participation the limitation expressed in this Subsection G(4)
shall be reduced by 1/10 for each year of participation less than 10
but in no event shall this limitation be less than $1,000;
(5) The limitations expressed herein shall be based upon plan years for
calculation purposes, shall be applied to all defined benefit plans
maintained by the employer as one defined benefit plan and to all
defined contribution plans maintained by the employer as one
defined contribution plan, and shall be applied and interpreted
consistent with Code Section 415 and regulations thereunder as
applicable to government plans in general and this plan in
particular; and
(6) In the case of a survivor benefit under § 62-6, the adjustment under
Subsection G(2) hereof shall not apply and the applicable limitation
§ 62-5 CHARTER § 62-5
C:209
shall be the limitation contained herein without regard to the age
or years of service of the benefit recipient. [Amended 3-8-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-5]
H. Required distributions.
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary,
distributions shall not commence later than the later of April 1
following the calendar year in which the participant attains age
70 1/2; or April 1 following the calendar year in which the
employee retires.
(2) Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary, if the
participant dies after distribution of his/her interest has begun, the
remaining portion of his interest shall continue to be distributed at
least as rapidly as under the method of distribution in effect prior to
the participant's death.
(3) Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary:
(a) If the participant dies before distribution of his/her interest in
the plan commences, distribution of the participant's entire
interest shall be completed by December 31 of the calendar
year containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's death,
unless Subsection H(3)(b) applies.
(b) If the designated beneficiary is the participant's surviving
spouse, the date distributions are required to begin shall not
be earlier than the later of December 31 of the calendar year
immediately following the calendar year in which the
participant died; or December 31 of the calendar year in which
the participant would have attained age 70 1/2. For purposes
of this subsection, if the surviving spouse dies after the
participant but before benefit payments to such spouse
commence, the provisions of this subsection [excepting
Subsection H(3)(b)] shall be applied as if the surviving spouse
were the participant.
I. Assignment. The pension payments provided herein shall not be subject
to attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal process and
shall be payable only to the participant, his/her survivors or his/her
designated beneficiary and shall not be subject to assignment or
transfer.
J. Direct rollovers. This section applies to distributions made on or after
December 31, 2001. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the
contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this
section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner
prescribed by the Plan Administrator, to have any portion of an eligible
rollover distribution that is equal to at least $500 paid directly to an
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
§ 62-5 RADNOR CODE § 62-5
C:210
For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-5]
(1) DIRECT ROLLOVER — A payment by the plan to the eligible
retirement plan specified by the distributee.
(2) DISTRIBUTEE — Includes an employee or former employee. In
addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse
and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse,
who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations
order, as defined in Code Section 414(p), are distributees with
regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse.
(3) ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN — A qualified trust described in
Code Section 401(a), an individual retirement account described in
Code Section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described in
Code Section 408(b), an annuity plan described in Code Section
403(a), an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b), an
eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained
by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and
which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into
such plan from this plan.
(4) ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION —
(a) Any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the
credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover
distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a
series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less
frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy)
of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of
the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or
for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to
the extent such distribution is required under Code Section
401(a)(9); and the portion of any distribution that is not
includible in gross income (determined without regard to the
exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to
employer securities).
(b) For purposes of the direct rollover provisions in this section of
the plan, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an
eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion
consists of after-tax employee contributions that are not
includible in gross income. However, such portion may be paid
only to an individual retirement account or annuity described
in Section 408(a) or (b) of the Code, or to a qualified defined
contribution plan described, in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of the
Code that agrees to separately account for amounts so
transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of
§ 62-5 CHARTER § 62-5
C:211
§ 62-6. Death benefits.
such distribution which is includible in gross income and the
portion of such distribution which is not so includible.
A. Preretirement.
(1) If a participant with less than 10 years of credited service dies
while an employee, his/her beneficiary shall be entitled to a lump
sum payment equal to his/her accumulated contributions. If a
participant with 10 or more years of credited service dies: while an
employee (irrespective of his/her age or whether his/her death was
service-related); or and is a former employee who separated from
employment with a vested deferred benefit and who has not
received a refund of accumulated contributions or has not
commenced to receive a pension benefit from the plan; or and was
receiving long-term disability benefits from the plan at the time of
death and who has not reached his/her normal retirement date, his/
her surviving spouse and/or children shall, as described in this
section below, be entitled to a monthly payment (for 120 months)
equal to 100% of his/her accrued benefit (calculated as the
actuarially equivalent of the normal form of benefit payment as of
the employee's date of death or, if earlier, the date of termination of
employment), beginning on the first of the month coincident with or
next following the date on which the employee would have turned
age 62 or, if the employee is age 62 or older, the employee's date of
death.
(2) The survivor benefit provided in this Subsection A shall be payable
to the widow or widower of the deceased participant until the
earlier of such widow/widower's remarriage or 120 months after
the commencement of said payments. In lieu of receiving monthly
payments, the widow/widower may elect to receive a single sum
actuarially equivalent to the value of the 120 monthly payments. If
there is no widow/widower or if the widow/widower dies or
remarries, the survivor benefit provided in this Subsection A shall
be payable in equal shares to any surviving children. Payments to
each surviving child shall cease as of the earlier of one or more
children's death or the end of the 120-month period. If one or more
children dies while receiving a survivor benefit, such children's
share of said benefit shall be reallocated in equal shares to any
remaining surviving children, then living, until the end of the onehundred-
twenty-month period. In lieu of receiving monthly
payments, any surviving children may elect to receive a single sum
actuarially equivalent to the value of the remaining monthly
payments (said selection must be made before any survivor
receives his/her first monthly payment and said selection shall be
irrevocable). If there are no surviving children or spouse, the
participant's accumulated contributions shall be payable to his/her
estate.
§ 62-5 RADNOR CODE § 62-6
C:212
§ 62-7. Payment of benefits. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-20]
B. Postretirement. If a participant dies after termination of employment,
his/her beneficiary shall be entitled to the survivor benefit applicable to
the benefit payment option selected, except as otherwise provided in
Subsection A. If the benefit payments have not yet commenced, the
payments to the beneficiary shall commence on the first day of the
month coincident with or next following the date the participant would
have reached normal retirement age. If the participant dies after
termination of employment but prior to selection of a benefit option, the
participant will be deemed to have selected the normal form of benefit
option beginning at normal retirement age.
A. Normal form.
(1) The normal form of benefit payment shall be a single life form
guaranteed for 120 months. Benefits shall be payable for the life of
the participant, but if the participant dies prior to receipt of 120
monthly payments, the remainder shall be paid either as monthly
payments continuing until a total of 120 monthly payments have
been made or as a single sum actuarial equivalent to the value of
the remaining monthly payments to a designated beneficiary.
(2) If the participant dies after receiving 120 monthly payments, no
additional payments shall be made. If the participant dies before
having received the aggregate value of his/her participant
contributions made to the plan, a single lump sum equal to the
balance of his/her contributions with interest, less total monthly
payments made as of the date of his/her death, shall be paid to a
designated beneficiary.
B. Optional forms of payment. In lieu of the normal form of benefit
payment, a participant may elect, irrevocably, one of the following
optional forms of payment:
(1) Joint and survivor forms.
(a) Fifty percent survivor. A participant may elect an optional form
of benefit that shall provide for a survivor benefit, equal to 50%
of the monthly retirement benefit which a participant was
receiving at the time of death (as determined under § 62-5B, C
and D, as applicable), shall be payable to the deceased
participant's survivor as provided under this section. This
optional form shall be actuarially equivalent to the normal
form. The survivor benefit provided in this section shall be
payable to the surviving spouse or surviving minor children of
a participant who is receiving normal, late, or early retirement
benefits pursuant to § 62-5B, C and D.
§ 62-6 CHARTER § 62-7
C:213
§ 62-8. Termination of employment.
(b) One hundred percent survivor. A participant may elect an
optional form of benefit that shall provide for a survivor
benefit, equal to 100% of the monthly retirement benefit which
a participant was receiving at the time of death (as determined
under § 62-5B, C and D, as applicable), shall be payable to the
deceased participant's survivor as provided under this section.
This optional form shall be actuarially equivalent to the normal
form. The survivor benefit provided in this section shall be
payable to the surviving spouse or surviving minor children of
a participant who is receiving normal, late, or early retirement
benefits pursuant to § 62-5B, C and D.
(2) Payment of joint and survivor benefits. A survivor benefit provided
under either, Subsection (1)(a) or (b) shall be payable monthly to
the widow or widower of the deceased participant, beginning on
the first of the month next following the death of the participant,
until the earlier of such widow's or widower's death or remarriage.
If there is no widow or widower of the deceased participant or if the
widow or widower dies or remarries, the survivor benefit provided
in Subsection (1)(a) or (b) shall be payable in equal shares to the
deceased participant's child or children who have not attained age
18 as of the date on which survivor benefit payments under this
section would commence. Payments to each surviving child shall
cease as of such child's death or attainment of age 18. Such child's
share of the survivor benefit shall be reallocated in equal shares to
any remaining surviving children, then living, who have not
attained age 18.
A. Rights of terminated employees. If a participant ceases to be an
employee, except as otherwise hereinbefore provided, his/her interest
and rights under this plan shall be limited to those contained in the
following sections of this § 62-8.
B. Payment of accumulated contributions and longevity contributions. A
participant shall be entitled to receive a refund of his/her accumulated
contributions and to any applicable longevity contributions to the plan
in a single cash payment, payable as soon as practicable following the
participant's termination of employment with the employer. Upon
receipt of such accumulated contributions, neither the participant, his/
her beneficiary, his/her surviving spouse nor his/her surviving children
shall be entitled to any further payments from the plan.
C. Vested benefits upon termination. In lieu of receiving a refund of his
accumulated contributions, a participant who has completed five years
of aggregate service with the employer may elect to vest his/her
retirement benefits under the plan by filing a written notice of his/her
intention to vest with the Plan Administrator within 90 days of the date
s/he ceases to be an employee. A participant who exercises such an
option shall be eligible, upon attainment of what would have been his/
§ 62-7 RADNOR CODE § 62-8
C:214
§ 62-9. Actuarial valuations.
her normal retirement date had s/he continued to be an employee, for a
vested retirement benefit equal to his/her accrued benefit, determined
as of the date on which s/he terminated employment multiplied by the
applicable vesting percentage set forth below:
Years of Service Vesting Percentage
5 50%
6 60%
7 70%
8 80%
9 90%
10 100%
A. Actuarial valuations. The plan's actuary shall perform an actuarial
valuation at least once every two years, unless the employer is applying
or has applied for supplemental state assistance pursuant to Section
603 of the Act,89 whereupon actuarial valuation reports shall be made
annually or otherwise in accordance with the Act.
B. Such biennial actuarial valuation report shall be made as of the
beginning of each plan year occurring in an odd-numbered calendar
year. Such actuarial valuation shall be prepared and certified by an
approved Actuary, as such term is defined in the Act. The Board hereby
agrees to make necessary annual actuarially determined payments to
the plan to fully fund the past participation of any employee who wasn't
participating in the plan prior to the Restatement Date but who is
participating in the plan on or after the Restatement Date, including,
but not limited to, said employee's accumulated contributions.
C. The expenses attributable to the preparation of any actuarial valuation
report or investigation required by the Act or any other expense which
is permissible under the terms of the Act and which is directly
associated with administering the plan shall be an allowable
administrative expense payable from the assets of the pension fund.
Such allowable expenses shall include but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) Investment costs associated with obtaining authorized investments
and investment advisory and management fees;
(2) Accounting expenses;
(3) Premiums for insurance coverage on fund assets;
(4) Reasonable and necessary counsel fees incurred for advice or to
defend the fund; and
89.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.603.
§ 62-8 CHARTER § 62-9
C:215
§ 62-10. Duties of Chief Administrative Officer.
Such actuarial reports shall be prepared and filed under the supervision
of the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO). The CAO shall determine the
financial requirements of the plan on the basis of the most recent actuarial
report and shall determine the minimum obligation of the employer with
respect to funding the plan for any given plan year. The CAO shall submit
the financial requirements of the plan and the minimum obligation of the
employer to the Board annually and shall certify the accuracy of such
calculations in conformance with the Act.
§ 62-11. Benefit plan modifications.
Prior to the adoption of any benefit plan modification by the employer, the
CAO shall request and receive a cost estimate of the proposed benefit plan
modification. Such estimate shall be prepared by an approved actuary and
shall disclose the impact of the proposed benefit plan modification on the
future financial requirements of the plan and the future minimum obligation
of the employer with respect to the plan.
§ 62-12. Amendment and termination of plan.
(5) Legitimate travel and education expenses for plan officials;
provided, however, that the plan administrator and other
applicable municipal officials of the employer, in their fiduciary
role, shall monitor the services provided to the plan to ensure that
the expenses are necessary, reasonable and benefit the plan; and
further provided that the plan administrator shall document all
such expenses item by item and, where necessary, hour by hour.
A. Amendment of the plan. The employer may amend this plan at any time
or from time to time by an instrument, in writing, executed in the name
of the employer under its municipal seal by officers duly authorized to
execute such instrument and delivered to the Board; provided, however,
that:
(1) No amendment shall deprive any participant or any beneficiary of a
deceased participant of any of the benefits to which he is entitled
under this plan with respect to contributions previously made;
(2) No amendment shall provide for the use of funds or assets held
under this plan other than for the benefit of employees and no
funds contributed to this plan or assets of this plan shall, except as
provided in Subsection E, ever revert to or be used or enjoyed by
the employer;
(3) No amendment to the plan which provides for a benefit
modification shall be made unless the cost estimate described in
§ 62-11 has been prepared and presented to the Board in
accordance with the Act.
§ 62-9 RADNOR CODE § 62-12
C:216
B. Termination of the plan. The employer shall have the power to
terminate this plan in its entirety at any time by an instrument, in
writing, executed in the name of the employer, in accordance with
collective bargaining agreements and applicable laws and regulations.
C. Automatic termination of contributions. Subject to the provisions of the
Act governing financially distressed municipalities, the liability of the
employer to make contributions to the pension fund shall automatically
terminate upon liquidation or dissolution of the employer, upon its
adjudication as a bankrupt or upon the making of a general assignment
for the benefit of its creditors.
D. Distribution upon termination.
(1) In the event of the termination of the plan, all amounts of vested
benefits accrued by the affected participants as of the date of such
termination, to the extent funded on such date, shall be
nonforfeitable hereunder. In the event of termination of the plan,
the employer shall direct either that the plan administrator
continue to hold the vested accrued benefits of participants in the
pension fund in accordance with the provisions of the plan (other
than those provisions related to forfeitures) without regard to such
termination until all funds have been distributed in accordance
with the provisions; or that the plan administrator immediately
distribute to each participant an amount equal to his/her vested
accrued benefit to the date.
(2) If there are insufficient assets in the pension fund to provide for all
vested accrued benefits as of the date of plan termination, priority
shall first be given to the distribution of any amounts attributable to
mandatory or voluntary employee contributions before assets are
applied to the distribution of any vested benefits attributable to
other sources hereunder.
(3) All other assets attributable to the terminated plan shall be
distributed and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
applicable law and the terms of any instrument adopted by the
employer which effects such termination.
E. Residual assets. If all liabilities to vested participants and any others
entitled to receive a benefit under the terms of the plan have been
satisfied and there remain any residual assets in the pension fund, such
residual assets remaining shall be returned to the employer insofar as
such return does not contravene any provision of law, and any
remaining balance, in excess of employer contributions, shall be
returned to the commonwealth.
F. Exclusive benefit rule. In the event of the discontinuance and
termination of the plan as provided herein, the employer shall dispose
of the pension fund in accordance with the terms of the plan and
applicable law; at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under
the plan shall any part of the corpus or income of the pension fund,
§ 62-12 CHARTER § 62-12
C:217
§ 62-13. Miscellaneous provisions.
after deducting any administrative or other expenses properly
chargeable to the pension fund, be used for or diverted to purposes
other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants in the plan, their
beneficiaries or their estates.
A. Plan not a contract of employment. No employee of the employer nor
anyone else shall have any rights whatsoever against the employer or
the plan administrator as a result of this plan except those expressly
granted to them hereunder. Nothing herein shall be construed to give
any employee the right to remain in the employment of the employer.
B. Masculine/feminine; singular/plural. For purposes of this plan, the
masculine shall be read for the feminine and vice versa, and the
singular shall be read for the plural, wherever the person or context
shall plainly so require.
C. Construction of document. This plan may be executed and/or
conformed in any number of counterparts, each of which shall be
deemed an original and shall be construed and enforced according to
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, excepting such
commonwealth's choice of law rules.
D. Headings. The headings of articles are included solely for convenience
of reference, and if there is any conflict between such headings and the
text of the plan, the text shall control.
E. Severability of provisions. In case any provisions of this plan shall be
held illegal or invalid for any reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not
affect the remaining parts of this plan, and the plan shall be construed
and enforced as if said illegal and invalid provisions had never been
inserted therein.
F. Incapacity of participant. If any participant shall be physically or
mentally incapable of receiving or acknowledging receipt of any
payment of participant benefits hereunder, the plan administrator, upon
the receipt of satisfactory evidence that such participant is so
incapacitated and that another person or institution is maintaining him/
her, may provide for such payment of pension benefits hereunder to
such person or institution so maintaining him/her, and any such
payments so made shall be deemed for every purpose to have been
made to such participant.
G. Liability of officers of the plan administrator and/or employer. Subject
to the provisions of the act and unless otherwise specifically required by
other applicable laws, no past, present or future officer, employee, or
agent of the employer shall be personally liable to any participant,
beneficiary or other person under any provision of the plan.
H. Assets of the fund. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to give
any participant or his/her beneficiary any interest in any specific
§ 62-12 RADNOR CODE § 62-13
C:218
property of the pension fund or any right except to receive such
distributions as are expressly provided for under the plan.
I. Pension fund for sole benefit of participants. The income and principal
of the pension fund are for the sole use and benefit of the participants
covered hereunder, and to the extent permitted by law, shall be free,
clear and discharged from and are not to be in any way liable for debts,
contracts or agreements, now contracted or which may hereafter be
contracted, and from all claims and liabilities now or hereafter incurred
by any participant or beneficiary.
§ 62-13 CHARTER § 62-13
C:219

ARTICLE II
Police Plan
[Adopted 10-28-1991 by Ord. No. 91-45; amended in its entirety
10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-28]
§ 62-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCRUED BENEFIT — As of any given date, the benefit determined under
§ 62-18B, calculated on the basis of final monthly average salary as of the
date of determination and multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which
shall be the participant's aggregate service determined as of such date and
the denominator of which shall be the aggregate service which would be
credited to the participant as of his/her normal retirement date if s/he were
to continue to be employed as an employee until such date. In no event shall
this fraction exceed 1.0.
ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS — The total amount contributed by any
participant to this fund or its predecessor by way of payroll deduction, plus
interest credited at 2% per annum. Such interest shall be credited annually
in the form of a compound interest rate from the last day of the plan year in
which the contribution is deposited up to the first day of the month in which
the participant's employment is terminated.
ACT — The Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act,
enacted as P.L. 1005 (Act 205 of 1984), as amended.90
ACT 24 RETIREMENT DATE — For a participant who has not attained
his/her normal retirement date, the date on which the participant has
completed 20 years of service, regardless of age, pursuant to Act 24 of
1998,91 as may be amended from time to time.[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-21; amended 11-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-12]
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT — Two forms of payment of equal actuarial
present value on a specified date based on mortality according to the
UP-1984 Mortality Table and an interest rate of 7%.
ACTUARY — The person, partnership, association or corporation which at
any given time is serving as Actuary, provided that such Actuary must be an
Approved Actuary as defined in the Act.
AGGREGATE SERVICE — The total period or periods of the participant's
employment as a sworn police officer with the employer, whether or not
interrupted; provided, however, that for purposes only of qualifying for
service increment benefits under § 62-18C of the Township Code, aggregate
service shall be the total period or periods of the participant's employment
as a sworn police officer plus as an employee as defined in § 62-1 of
the Township Code. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, should any
90.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
91.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 771.
§ 62-14 CHARTER § 62-14
C:221
such participant receive a distribution of his/her accumulated contributions
with respect to a period of employment, such period of employment shall
not be included in his/her aggregate service thereafter unless, at the
commencement of his/her next period of employment, he repays to the fund
the amount of such withdrawal with interest. For purposes of this definition,
interest shall accrue as of the date the employee receives a refund of his/
her accumulated contributions and shall be computed at an interest rate of
7% and in the same manner as described in the definition of "accumulated
contributions."[Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4]
BASIC MONTHLY EARNINGS — The total compensation of the employee,
whether salary or hourly wages, including overtime pay, holiday pay,
longevity pay and any other form of compensation paid by the employer
for police services rendered, but shall exclude extra duty pay and uniform
allowances. Basic monthly earnings shall also include fixed, periodic
amounts paid for periods during which the participant is not actively
employed as a member of the employer's regular full-time police force,
which amounts are paid directly by the employer or through a program
to which the employer has made contributions on behalf of the employee,
other than under this plan (including, without limitation, workers'
compensation and payments made under or pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Heart and Lung Act, the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 and other
applicable laws). The compensation used in determining an employee's
basic monthly earnings shall be limited on an annual basis to the amount
specified for government plans pursuant to Code Section 401(a)(17), as
adjusted under Code Section 415(d).[Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-4]
BENEFICIARY — The person or entity designated by the participant to
receive a refund of the participant's accumulated contributions should the
participant die prior to becoming entitled to a retirement benefit. In the
event that a participant does not designate a beneficiary or his/her
beneficiary does not survive him, his/her beneficiary shall be his/her
surviving spouse; or if there is no surviving spouse, his/her issue, per
stirpes; or if there is no surviving spouse or surviving issue, his/her parents,
if then surviving, or if there is no surviving spouse, issue or parents, his/
her brothers and sisters, if then surviving, or if there is no surviving spouse,
issue, parents or brothers or sisters, his/her estate; but if no personal
representative has been appointed, to those persons who would be entitled
to his/her estate under the intestacy laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania if s/he had died intestate and a resident of Pennsylvania.
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Radnor.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Township Manager (Manager)
appointed by the Board.
CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
DISABILITY DATE — The date on which a participant is determined by the
Plan Administrator to be incapacitated due to total and permanent disability
or, if later, the date on which the participant's employment terminates
because of such total and permanent disability.
§ 62-14 RADNOR CODE § 62-14
C:222
EMPLOYEE — Any individual employed by the employer on a regular, fulltime,
nonseasonal basis as a sworn officer of the employer's police force.
For purposes of this definition, "employed on a full-time basis" means that
the individual is regularly scheduled to work a minimum of 40 hours per
week.
EMPLOYER — Radnor Township, a home rule municipality located in
Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
EMPLOYMENT — For purposes of determining aggregate service, shall
mean:[Amended 6-17-2012 by Ord. No. 2002-21; 11-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-12]
The period of time for which an employee is directly or indirectly
compensated or entitled to compensation by the employer for the
performance of duties as a police officer;
A.
Any period of time for which an employee is paid a fixed, periodic
amount in the nature of salary continuation payments for reasons other
than the performance of duties (such as vacation, holidays, sickness,
entitlement to benefits under workers' compensation and the Heart and
Lung Act, the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 or other laws),
either directly by the employer or through a program to which the
employer has made contributions on behalf of the employee, excepting
any time during which the employee is entitled to benefits under this
plan; and
B.
Any period of voluntary or involuntary military service with the armed
forces of the United States of America, provided that:
The participant had been employed as a regular, full-time member
of the employer's police force for a period of at least six months
immediately prior to the period of military service; and
(1)
The participant returns to employment within six months following
his/her discharge from military service or within such longer period
during which his/her employment rights are guaranteed by
applicable law or under the terms of a collective bargaining
agreement with the employer.
(2)
C.
For plan years beginning January 1, 2001, any period of qualified
military service as determined under the requirements of Chapter 43
of Title 38, United States Code, provided that the participant returns
to employment following such period of qualified military service, and
the participant makes payment to the plan in an amount equal to
the employee contributions that would otherwise have been paid to
the plan during such period of qualified military service. The amount
of employee contributions shall be based upon an estimate of the
compensation that would have been paid to the participant during
such period of qualified military service as determined by the average
compensation paid to the participant during the 12 months immediately
preceding the period of qualified military service. The amount of
D.
§ 62-14 CHARTER § 62-14
C:223
FINAL MONTHLY AVERAGE SALARY —
INSURER or INSURANCE COMPANY — A legal reserve life insurance
company that may issue a policy under this plan.
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — [Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-4; 11-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-12]
PARTICIPANT — An employee who has met the participation requirements
of the plan as provided in § 62-16A and who has not for any reason ceased
to be a participant hereunder.
PENSION FUND or FUND — The fund or funds administered under the
terms of this plan, which shall include all money, property, investments,
policies and contracts standing in the name of the plan.
employee contributions so calculated must be paid into the plan before
the end of the period that begins on the date of reemployment and ends
on the earlier of the date that ends the period that has a duration of
three times the period of qualified military service or the date that is
five years after the date of reemployment.
The average monthly salary as defined in this section earned by the
participant and paid by the employer during the final 36 months
immediately preceding retirement. Any single sum payments for
accumulated but unused sick time or back pay awards shall not be
included in the calculation of final monthly average salary.
A.
Final monthly average salary shall be calculated by taking into account
only those periods during which an employee receives salary, as that
term is defined in this section. Therefore, for example, the final monthly
average salary for a participant who is voluntarily or involuntarily
serving in the United States Armed Forces during the final 36 months
of his/her aggregate service shall be based on the thirty-six-month
period during which the employee last received salary (as defined in the
preceding subsection) from the employer.
B.
For participants who began employment prior to January 1, 2007, the
earlier of the:
Date on which the participant has both completed 25 years of
aggregate service with the employer and has attained age 50 while
an employee; or
(1)
Date on which the participant has both completed 20 years of
aggregate service with the employer and has attained age 60 while
an employee.
(2)
A.
For participants who began employment on or after January 1, 2007,
the date on which the participant has both completed 25 years of
aggregate service with the employer and has attained age 50 while an
employee.
B.
§ 62-14 RADNOR CODE § 62-14
C:224
PLAN — The plan set forth herein, as amended from time to time, and
designated as the "Radnor Township Police Pension Plan."
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The Police Pension Board appointed by the
Board of Commissioners to administer the provisions of the plan pursuant to
§ 62-15B. In the event that no appointment of such Pension Board is made,
the Plan Administrator shall consist of the Township Manager, the Finance
Director and the Assistant Finance Director or another management official
selected by the Manager.
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning on January 1 and ending
on December 31 of each year.
POLICY or CONTRACT — A retirement annuity or retirement income
endowment policy (or a combination of both) or any other form of insurance
contract or policy which shall be deemed appropriate in accordance with
the provisions of the Act.
RESTATEMENT DATE — January 1, 1998, the date upon which this
amendment and restatement of the plan becomes effective.
SALARY — The employee's regular base salary or hourly wages and the
following additional forms of compensation: fixed amounts that are paid at
periodic intervals such as longevity pay, holiday pay, and night differential
pay and any irregular or extra forms of compensation, such as overtime
or court pay. Salary, as used herein, shall not include extra duty pay and
uniform allowances. Salary used to calculate benefits hereunder shall be
limited on an annual basis to the amount specified for government plans
pursuant to Code Section 401(a)(17), as adjusted under Code Section
415(d).[Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4]
TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY — Whether a service-connected
disability or non-service-connected disability (pursuant to § 62-19A), a
condition of physical or mental impairment due to which a participant is
permanently unable to perform the usual and customary duties of his/her
employment as a uniformed police officer with the employer, as approved
by the Plan Administrator in consultation with one or more qualified health
care providers.
§ 62-15. Administrative provisions.
A. Plan operated under supervision of the Board of Commissioners.
(1) The operation of the plan shall be supervised by the Board. The
Board shall have the power and authority, either directly or through
the Plan Administrator, to do all acts and to execute, acknowledge
and deliver all instruments necessary to implement and effectuate
the purpose of this plan. The Plan Administrator shall keep such
records as may be necessary for the determination of the status of
each participant and the presumptive share of each participant in
the fund as determined by the actuary.
§ 62-14 CHARTER § 62-15
C:225
(2) The Board shall have the authority and shall be charged with the
performance of the duties set forth in this plan, but shall have the
authority, by general rule or special decision, to determine and
make provisions for such items necessary for the proper carrying
out and enforcement thereof that are not specifically provided by
this plan at all times, subject to change by proper ordinance or
resolution.
B. Police Pension Board.
(1) The Board of Commissioners, at its sole discretion, may appoint or
direct the Township Manager to convene a Police Pension Board to
act as Plan Administrator pursuant to Subsection A. The Police
Pension Board shall be composed of the following nine individuals,
each having one vote on related matters:
(a) The President of the Board of Commissioners, who shall serve
as chair of this Pension Board;
(b) Another member of the Board of Commissioners, appointed by
the President of the Board;
(c) The Township Manager, who shall serve as the Chief
Administrative Officer of the plan and as vice chair of this
Pension Board;
(d) The Finance Director, who shall serve as the Chief Financial
Officer of the plan;
(e) The Assistant Finance Director or another management official
selected by the Manager;
(f) The Superintendent of Police;
(g) Two active plan participants selected by the Township's Police
Department's representative to the Fraternal Order of Police
(FOP) or any successor organization designated to represent
police officers in collective bargaining; and
(h) One retired employee who is receiving a monthly pension from
the plan, selected by the Manager in consultation with the
Pension Board and the FOP representative.
(2) The Police Pension Board shall meet at least once each quarter to
discuss the allocation of plan assets, investment performance and
other business related to the plan. Certain information about plan
participants and retirees (such as pension benefits, beneficiaries,
etc.) shall be kept confidential by all Pension Board members.
C. Acceptance of gifts, grants and bequests. The Plan Administrator is
hereby authorized to take by gift, grant, devise or bequest any money or
property, real or personal, in trust for the benefit of the plan and to
cause the same to be held as a part of the pension fund. The care,
§ 62-15 RADNOR CODE § 62-15
C:226
§ 62-16. Participation in plan.
§ 62-17. Contributions.
management, investment and disposal of said fund is hereby vested
in the Plan Administrator, subject to the provisions of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and of this plan and any amendment
thereto and subject to such direction not inconsistent therewith as the
donors of such funds and property may prescribe.
D. Investment policies. The Plan Administrator shall develop policies and
procedures governing the allocation and investment of all plan assets. It
is the intent of the Board that all assets of the plan shall be invested in a
prudent manner, subject to applicable laws and regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, designed to meet the actuarially
determined funding needs of the plan. If it so elects, the Plan
Administrator may elect to invest all or a portion of the pension fund's
assets in policies issued by an insurer.
A. Eligibility requirements. As a condition of employment, each employee
shall participate herein as of the date on which such employee's
employment first commences or recommences.
B. Designation of beneficiary. Any new, full-time employee who becomes a
participant hereunder shall provide a written notice which designates
his/her beneficiary or beneficiaries to the Plan Administrator at the time
his/her participation commences. (The beneficiary shall receive a
refund of accumulated contributions if such refund is payable pursuant
to § 62-20A.) The participant's election of any such beneficiary or
beneficiaries may be rescinded or changed, without the consent of the
beneficiary or beneficiaries, at any time, provided that the participant
provides the employer with written notice of the changed designation.
A. Participant contributions. Each participant hired prior to January 1,
2013, shall make regular biweekly contributions to the plan at a rate of
3% of his/her basic monthly earnings. Each participant hired on or after
January 1, 2013, shall make regular biweekly contributions to the plan
at a rate of 5% of his/her basic monthly earnings. [Amended
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-21; 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4;
11-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-12]
B. Payment of participant contributions. A participant's contributions shall
be deducted from his/her basic monthly earnings in each month, or
other periodic increments thereof, of his/her aggregate service during
which s/he receives payments of basic monthly earnings.
C. Reduction of participant contributions. Notwithstanding the preceding
Subsections A and B, if an actuarial study performed by the Actuary
shows that the condition of the pension fund is such that payments into
the pension fund by participants may be reduced below the minimum
percentages prescribed in Subsection A, or may be eliminated, and that
§ 62-15 CHARTER § 62-17
C:227
§ 62-18. Retirement benefits.
if such payments are reduced or eliminated, contributions by the
employer will not be required to keep the pension fund actuarially
sound, the Board of Commissioners may, on an annual basis, by
ordinance or resolution, reduce or eliminate payments into the pension
fund by participants.
D. Payments of state aid. Payments of general municipal pension system
state aid, or any other amount of state aid received in accordance with
the Act from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which are received by
the employer and deposited into the pension fund governed by this plan
shall be used as follows:
(1) First, to reduce the unfunded liability, or after such liability has
been funded;
(2) Next, to apply against the annual obligation of the employer for
future service costs;
(3) Or, to the extent that the payment may be in excess of such
obligation, to reduce participant contributions hereunder.
E. Employer contributions. The remainder of the annual contributions
required under the provisions of the Act, as determined by the Actuary
in accordance with the Act, shall become the obligation of the employer
and shall be paid into the pension fund by annual appropriations
enacted by the Board.
F. No reversion to the employer. At no time shall plan assets be used for or
diverted to any purpose other than for the exclusive benefit of the
participants and their beneficiaries, except that contributions made by
the employer may be returned to the employer if:
(1) The contribution was made because of a mistake of fact and
contribution is returned within one year of the discovery of the
mistaken payment of the contribution; or [Amended 3-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-4]
(2) The plan is terminated as provided in § 62-25.
A. Normal retirement. Each participant shall be entitled to normal
retirement benefits, provided that s/he retires from employment on or
after his/her normal retirement date.
B. Normal retirement benefit. Each participant entitled to normal
retirement benefits pursuant to Subsection A shall receive during his/
her lifetime a monthly benefit equal to the greater of: [Amended
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-21; 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4]
(1) Fifty percent of his/her final monthly average salary; or
(2) Three hundred dollars.
§ 62-17 RADNOR CODE § 62-18
C:228
C. Act 24 retirement benefit. Each participant, regardless of age, who
elects to retire after the Act 24 retirement date but before the normal
retirement date pursuant to § 62-14 hereinabove shall receive a benefit
equal to the accrued benefit that is reduced actuarially in accordance
with Act 24 of 1998, as may be amended from time to time. [Amended
3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-492; 11-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-12]
D. Payment of retirement benefits provided in accordance with this
§ 62-18 shall be conditioned upon a participant's being subject to
service from time to time as a police reserve in cases of riot, tumult, or
preservation of the public peace until unfitted for such service, at which
time such participant shall be finally discharged by reason of age or
disability upon written notice from the Board, the Manager, or the
Superintendent of Police.
E. Service increment benefits. In addition to the pension benefit provided
in Subsection B or C, a service increment benefit of $100 per month (or
$1,200 per annum) shall be payable to a participant who has retired
under this § 62-18, if such participant has completed 26 or more years
of aggregate service as of his/her normal retirement date, provided that
a participant retiring on or after January 1, 2008, shall receive a service
increment benefit of $200 per month ($2,400 per annum) with 27 or
more years of aggregate service; $300 per month ($3,600 per annum)
with 28 or more years of aggregate service; $400 per month ($4,800
per annum) with 29 or more years of aggregate service; and $500 per
month ($6,000 per annum) with 30 years or more years of aggregate
service. [Amended 2-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-19]
F. Late retirement. A participant may continue to work beyond his/her
normal retirement date subject to the employer's rules and regulations
regarding retirement age. If a participant who has met the
requirements of Subsection A continues to work beyond his/her normal
retirement date, there shall be no retirement benefits paid until
employment with the employer ceases and retirement begins. The
retirement benefit of a participant who retires after his/her normal
retirement date shall be calculated on the basis of his/her final monthly
average salary as of such participant's actual date of retirement.
G. Payment of benefits. Retirement payments shall be payable as of the
first day of the month coincident with or next following the participant's
retirement date and the first day of each month thereafter during the
participant's lifetime.
H. Special provision for restated plans. The benefit amount of any
participant who may have retired prior to the restatement date shall not
be in any way altered by the provisions of this plan, except where
otherwise expressly indicated herein, and shall continue to be
92.Editor's Note: This ordinance renumbered former Subsection B(2) and (3) as Subsections
C and D, respectively, and former Subsections C through H as E through J.
§ 62-18 CHARTER § 62-18
C:229
determined on the basis of the terms of the plan in effect on the day
preceding the restatement date.
I. Maximum benefit limitations. Notwithstanding any provision of this
plan to the contrary, for plan years beginning January 1, 2001, no
benefit provided under this plan attributable to contributions of the
employer shall exceed, as an annual amount, the amount specified in
Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) as adjusted pursuant to Code Section 415(d),
assuming the form of benefit shall be a straight life annuity (with no
ancillary benefits). The limitations described in this Subsection I shall
be governed by the following conditions and definitions: [Amended
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-21; 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4]
(1) Benefits paid or payable in a form other than a straight life annuity
(with no ancillary benefits) or where the employee contributes to
the plan or makes rollover contributions shall be adjusted on an
actuarially equivalent basis to determine the limitation contained
herein;
(2) In the case of a benefit which commences prior to the attainment of
age 62 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on
an actuarially equivalent basis to the amount determined pursuant
to this section commencing at age 62; however, in the case of a
qualified participant (a participant with respect to whom a period
of at least 15 years of service, including applicable military service,
as a full-time employee of a police or fire department is taken into
account in determining the amount of benefit), the limitation
contained herein shall not apply; [Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-4]
(3) In the case of a benefit which commences after attainment of age
65 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on an
actuarially equivalent basis to the amount determined commencing
at age 65;
(4) Benefits paid to a participant which total less than $10,000 from all
defined benefit plans maintained by the employer expressed as an
annual benefit shall be deemed not to exceed the limitation of this
section provided that the employer has not at any time maintained
a defined contribution plan in which the participant has
participated; however, in the case of a participant who is not
receiving a disability retirement benefit pursuant to § 62-19A, with
fewer than 10 years of participation the limitation expressed in this
Subsection I(4) shall be reduced by 1/10 for each year of
participation less than 10 but in no event shall this limitation be
less than $1,000; [Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4]
(5) The limitations expressed herein shall be based upon plan years for
calculation purposes, shall be applied to all defined benefit plans
maintained by the employer as one defined benefit plan and to all
defined contribution plans maintained by the employer as one
§ 62-18 RADNOR CODE § 62-18
C:230
defined contribution plan, and shall be applied and interpreted
consistent with Code Section 415 and regulations thereunder as
applicable to government plans in general and this plan in
particular; and
(6) In the case of a disability retirement benefit under § 62-19A or a
survivor benefit under § 62-20B, the adjustment under Subsection
I(2) hereof shall not apply and the applicable limitation shall be the
limitation contained herein without regard to the age or years of
service of the benefit recipient. [Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-4]
J. Required distributions.
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to contrary, distributions
shall not commence later than the later of April 1 following the
calendar year in which the participant attains age 70 1/2 or April 1
following the calendar year in which the employee retires.
(2) Distributions beginning before death. Notwithstanding any
provision of the plan to the contrary, if the participant dies after
distribution of his/her interest has begun, the remaining portion of
his/her interest shall continue to be distributed at least as rapidly
as under the method of distribution in effect prior to the
participant's death.
(3) Distribution beginning after death.
(a) If the participant dies before distribution of his/her interest in
the plan commences, distribution of the participant's entire
interest shall be completed by December 31 of the calendar
year containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's death,
unless Subsection J(3)(b) applies.
(b) If the designated beneficiary is the participant's surviving
spouse, the date distributions are required to begin shall not
be earlier than the later of December 31 of the calendar year
immediately following the calendar year in which the
participant died; or December 31 of the calendar year in which
the participant would have attained age 70 1/2. For purposes
of this Subsection J, if the surviving spouse dies after the
participant but before benefit payments to such spouse
commence, the provisions of this Subsection J [excepting
Subsection J(3)(b)] shall be applied as if the surviving spouse
were the participant.
K. Direct rollovers. This Section applies to distributions made on or after
December 31, 2001. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the
contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this
section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner
prescribed by the Plan Administrator, to have any portion of an eligible
rollover distribution that is equal to at least $500 paid directly to an
§ 62-18 CHARTER § 62-18
C:231
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-493]
(1) DIRECT ROLLOVER — A payment by the plan to the eligible
retirement plan specified by the distributee.
(2) DISTRIBUTEE — Includes an employee or former employee. In
addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse
and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse,
who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations
order, as defined in Code Section 414(p), are distributees with
regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse.
(3) ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN — A qualified trust described in
Code Section 401(a), an individual retirement account described in
Code Section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described in
Code Section 408(b), an annuity plan described in Code Section
403(a), an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b), an
eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained
by a state, political subdivision of a state. or any agency or
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and
which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into
such plan from this plan.
(4) ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION —
(a) Any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the
credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover
distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a
series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less
frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy)
of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of
the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or
for a specified period often years or more; any distribution to
the extent such distribution is required under Code Section
401(a)(9); and the portion of any distribution that is not
includible in gross income (determined without regard to the
exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to
employer securities).
(b) For purposes of the direct rollover provisions in this section of
the plan, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an
eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion
consists of after-tax employee contributions that are not
includible in gross income. However, such portion may be paid
only to an individual retirement account or annuity described
in Section 408(a) or (b) of the Code, or to a qualified defined
contribution plan described, in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of the
93.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection I as L.
§ 62-18 RADNOR CODE § 62-18
C:232
§ 62-19. Disability retirement.
Code that agrees to separately account for amounts so
transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of
such distribution which is includible in gross income and the
portion of such distribution which is not so includible.
L. Assignment. The pension payments herein provided shall not be subject
to attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal process and
shall be payable only to the participant, his/her survivors or his/her
designated beneficiary and shall not be subject to assignment or
transfer.
A. Disability benefits. A participant who is totally and permanently
disabled shall be entitled to a monthly disability benefit equal to:
(1) Service-connected disability: 70% of the participant's average
monthly salary paid by the employer for the 12 months ending on
the participant's disability date, provided that said disability results
from the participant's performance in the line of the employee's
active duty as a member of the employer's police force.
(2) Nonservice-connected disability (applicable only to participants
hired before January 1, 2001): 50% of the participant's average
monthly salary paid by the employer for the 12 months ending on
the participant's disability date, provided that said disability does
not result from the participant's performance in the line of the
employee's active duty as a member of the employer's police force
and does not result from the participant's employment with another
employer or as a result of being self-employed. [Amended
3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4]
B. Payment of disability benefits. Disability payments shall be made
monthly as of the first day of each month, commencing as of the first
day of the month coincident with or immediately following the later of
30 days following the participant's disability date; or the expiration of
the period for which the participant is entitled to receive accumulated
sick pay benefits from the employer.
C. Verification of disability benefits. A participant's total and permanent
disability shall be deemed to be terminated:
(1) If the employer determines, on the basis of a medical examination
by a health care provider acceptable to the employer, that the
participant, prior to his/her normal retirement date, has sufficiently
recovered to return to regular work as a police officer;
(2) If the participant refuses to undergo a medical examination prior to
his/her normal retirement date, which may be ordered by the
employer or the plan administrator, provided that the participant
may not be required to undergo a medical examination more often
than once every 12 months; or
§ 62-18 CHARTER § 62-19
C:233
§ 62-20. Death benefits.
(3) If the participant is employed in any capacity as a full-time or parttime
police officer prior to his/her normal retirement date.
D. Termination of disability benefits. Disability benefits payable under this
§ 62-19 shall cease as of the first of the month coincident with or next
following the earliest of Subsection D(1), (2) or (3) below:
(1) The date on which a participant fails to return to his/her position as
an employee of the employer within a reasonable time following the
cessation of his/her total and permanent disability prior to his/her
normal retirement date (as determined under Subsection C above).
In such an event, the participant's date of termination shall be his/
her disability date and his/her interest in the plan (if any) shall be
determined pursuant to § 62-21.
(2) The date on which a participant:
(a) Receiving service-connected disability benefits reaches his/her
normal retirement date. In such an event, the participant shall
be deemed to be retired and shall be entitled to a monthly
normal retirement benefit equal in amount to the monthly
disability benefit to which he was formerly entitled under this
§ 62-19. The benefit provided under this Subsection D(2) shall
be in lieu of the normal retirement benefit described in
§ 62-18B and shall not include the service increment benefit
described in § 62-18C.
(b) Receiving non-service-connected disability benefits attains age
65.
(3) The date of the participant's death. In such an event, any benefit
payable to the participant's beneficiary or surviving spouse or
surviving children shall be determined under § 62-20.
A. Participant without surviving spouse or surviving children.
(1) Preretirement. If a participant who has not attained entitlement to
normal retirement benefits dies during employment; while
receiving disability benefits from the plan pursuant to § 62-19; or
after termination of employment but prior to receiving a refund of
accumulated contributions, and no survivor benefit is payable
under Subsection B, the designated beneficiary of the participant
shall be entitled to receive a refund of the participant's
accumulated contributions to the plan.
(2) Postretirement. No death benefit is payable with respect to a
participant who has commenced receiving normal retirement
benefits and who dies without a surviving spouse or surviving
children under the age of 18.
§ 62-19 RADNOR CODE § 62-20
C:234
B. Survivor benefits.
(1) Postretirement. A postretirement survivor benefit equal to 1 00
percent of the monthly retirement benefit which a participant was
receiving or would have been receiving had he been retired at the
time of his/her death [determined under § 62-18B or C and E or
62-19D(2), as applicable] shall be payable to the deceased
participant's survivor as provided under this Subsection B(1) and
C. The postretirement survivor benefit provided in this Subsection
B(1) shall be payable to the surviving spouse or surviving minor
children of: [Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4]
(a) A deceased participant who would be eligible to receive an
immediate payment of normal retirement benefits if s/he had
elected to retire on the day before his/her death; or
(b) A participant who is receiving normal retirement benefits
pursuant to § 62-18B or 62-19D(2).
(2) Preretirement. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-21]
(a) A preretirement survivor benefit equal to 100% of the
deceased participant's accrued Benefit (determined as of the
participant's date of death or, if earlier, the date on which s/he
terminated employment) shall be payable to the deceased
participant's survivor as provided under this Subsection B(2)
and Subsection C. The preretirement survivor benefit provided
in this Subsection B(2) shall be payable to the surviving spouse
or surviving minor children of:
[1] A participant who died during employment (irrespective of
whether his/her death was service-related; provided that
survivor benefits shall be paid for a participant who was
killed while working on active duty in accordance with this
Subsection B(2)(c);
[2] A former employee who separated from employment with
a vested deferred benefit and who has not received either
a refund of accumulated contributions or commenced to
receive retirement benefits from the plan;
[3] A participant who is receiving service-connected disability
benefits from the plan and who has not reached his/her
normal retirement date;
[4] A participant who is receiving nonservice-connected
disability benefits from the plan and who has not attained
age 65. Such preretirement survivor benefit for the spouse
or minor children of a deceased participant who had been
receiving nonservice-connected disability benefits upon
the date on which the deceased participant would have
§ 62-20 CHARTER § 62-20
C:235
§ 62-21. Termination of employment.
attained age 65, and no further survivor benefits shall
thereafter be payable.
(b) Pursuant to Act 30 of 2002, if a participant dies prior to vesting
his or her pension, the surviving spouse or, if the spouse is
deceased, any children under the age of 18, or under 23 if
attending college, shall be entitled to 100% of the participant's
contributions made to this plan pursuant to § 62-17, plus
interest or other increases in value of the member's investment
in the pension fund, unless the participant has designated
another beneficiary for this purpose. [Added 3-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-4]
(c) Killed in service. In the event a participant is killed in service,
the participant's surviving spouse or eligible dependents (if
any, as defined by Act 51 of 2009) shall receive the benefits
provided for and subject to the terms of Act 51 of 2009, which
benefits are paid exclusively by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania with the exception of any pension benefit to
which the member was entitled prior to the member's death,
solely by virtue of the member's service as a Township police
officer (i.e., either a normal, early, or vested pension benefit).
[Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-494; 11-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-12]
C. Payment of survivor benefits. Survivor benefits payable under § 62-20B
shall commence as of the first day of the month immediately following
the date of death of the participant. The survivor benefit shall be paid
monthly to the surviving spouse of the participant, if any, until the date
of death of the surviving spouse. Upon the death of the surviving
spouse, or if there is no surviving spouse, the Survivor Benefit shall be
paid monthly in equal shares to the surviving dependent children of the
deceased participant until attainment of age 18 or, if attending college,
under or attainment of age 23. The shares payable to the surviving
dependent children shall be adjusted as each child ceases to be eligible
to receive a share of the benefit hereunder. For purposes of this
Subsection C, "attending college" shall mean that the eligible
dependents are registered at an accredited institution of higher
learning and are carrying a minimum course load of seven credit hours
per semester. [Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4]
A. Rights of terminated employees. If a participant ceases to be an
employee except as otherwise hereinbefore provided, his/her interest
and rights under this plan shall be limited to those contained in the
following sections of this article.
94.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection B(2)(b) as B(2)(c) and
deleted former Subsection B(2)c, concerning survivor benefits. See now Subsection C.
§ 62-20 RADNOR CODE § 62-21
C:236
§ 62-22. Actuarial valuations.
B. Payment of accumulated contributions.
(1) If a participant whose employment with the employer has been
terminated for any reason other than death prior to his/her normal
retirement date and s/he is neither eligible for a pension under the
plan nor has s/he elected to vest his/her benefit, such participant
shall be entitled to receive a refund of his/her accumulated
contributions to the plan.
(2) At the former employee's election, his/her accumulated
contributions may be paid under either of the following options:
(a) A single cash payment, payable as soon as practical following
the participant's termination of employment with the employer.
Upon receipt of such accumulated contributions, neither the
participant, his/her beneficiary, his/her surviving spouse, nor
his/her surviving children shall be entitled to any further
payments from the plan.
(b) A retirement income payable at what would have been the
participant's normal retirement date had s/he remained
employed. Such retirement income shall be paid monthly, and
shall be equal to the participant's accumulated contributions.
C. Vested benefits upon termination. In lieu of receiving a refund of his/her
accumulated contributions, a participant who has completed 12 years
of aggregate service with the employer and who ceases to be an
employee of the employer for any reason other than death, retirement
or total and permanent disability may elect to vest his/her retirement
benefits under the plan by filing a written notice of his/her intention to
vest with the plan administrator within 90 days of the date he ceases to
be an employee. A participant who exercises such an option shall be
eligible, upon attainment of what would have been his/her normal
retirement date had s/he continued to be an employee, for a vested
retirement benefit equal to his/her accrued benefit, determined as of
the date on which s/he terminated employment. If a participant elects to
vest his/her benefit but dies prior to the commencement thereof, the
death benefit (if any) payable to him/her shall be determined in
accordance with § 62-20.
A. The plan's actuary shall perform an actuarial valuation at least once
every two years, unless the employer is applying or has applied for
supplemental state assistance pursuant to Section 603 of the Act,
whereupon actuarial valuation reports shall be made annually or
otherwise in accordance with the Act.
B. Such biennial actuarial valuation report shall be made as of the
beginning of each plan year occurring in an odd-numbered calendar
§ 62-21 CHARTER § 62-22
C:237
§ 62-23. Duties of Chief Administrative Officer.
Such actuarial reports shall be prepared and filed under the supervision
of the Chief Administrative Officer ("CAO"). The CAO shall determine the
financial requirements of the plan on the basis of the most recent actuarial
report and shall determine the minimum obligation of the employer with
respect to funding the plan for any given plan year. The CAO shall submit
the financial requirements of the plan and the minimum obligation of the
employer to the Board annually and shall certify the accuracy of such
calculations in conformance with the Act.
§ 62-24. Benefit plan modifications.
Prior to the adoption of any benefit plan modification by the employer, the
CAO shall provide to the Board a cost estimate of the proposed benefit
plan modification. Such estimate shall be prepared by an approved actuary
and shall disclose to the Board the impact of the proposed benefit plan
modification on the future financial requirements of the plan and the future
minimum obligation of the employer with respect to the plan.
§ 62-25. Amendment and termination of plan or fund.
year. Such actuarial valuation shall be prepared and certified by an
approved Actuary, as such term is defined in the Act.
C. The expenses attributable to the preparation of any actuarial valuation
report or investigation required by the Act or any other expense which
is permissible under the terms of the Act and which are directly
associated with administering the plan shall be an allowable
administrative expense payable from the assets of the pension fund.
Such allowable expenses shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) Investment costs associated with obtaining authorized investments
and investment advisory and management fees;
(2) Accounting expenses;
(3) Premiums for insurance coverage on fund assets;
(4) Reasonable and necessary counsel fees incurred for advice or to
defend the fund; and
(5) Legitimate travel and education expenses for plan officials;
provided, however, that the municipal officials of the employer, in
their fiduciary role, shall monitor the services provided to the plan
to ensure that the expenses are necessary, reasonable and benefit
the plan; and further provided that the Plan Administrator shall
document all such expenses item by item and, where necessary,
hour by hour.
§ 62-22 RADNOR CODE § 62-25
C:238
A. Amendment of the plan. The employer may amend his/her plan at any
time or from time to time by an instrument, in writing, executed in the
name of the employer under its municipal seal by officers duly
authorized to execute such instrument and delivered to the Board;
provided, however, that:
(1) No amendment shall deprive any participant or any beneficiary of a
deceased participant of any of the benefits to which he is entitled
under this plan with respect to contributions previously made;
(2) No amendment shall provide for the use of funds or assets held
under this plan other than for the benefit of employees and no
funds contributed to this plan or assets of this plan shall, except as
provided in Subsection E, ever revert to or be used or enjoyed by
the employer; and
(3) No amendment to the plan which provides for a benefit
modification shall be made unless the cost estimate described in
§ 62-24 has been prepared and presented to the Board in
accordance with the Act.
B. Termination of the plan. The employer shall have the power to
terminate this plan in its entirety at any time by an instrument, in
writing, executed in the name of the employer, in accordance with
collective bargaining agreements and applicable laws and regulations.
C. Automatic termination of contributions. Subject to the provisions of the
Act governing financially distressed municipalities, the liability of the
employer to make contributions to the pension fund shall automatically
terminate upon liquidation or dissolution of the employer upon its
adjudication as a bankrupt or upon the making of a general assignment
for the benefit of its creditors.
D. Distribution upon termination.
(1) In the event of the termination of the plan, all amounts of vested
benefits accrued by the affected participants as of the date of such
termination, to the extent funded on such date, shall be
nonforfeitable hereunder. In the event of termination of the plan,
the employer shall direct either that the Plan Administrator
continue to hold the vested Accrued Benefits of participants in the
pension fund in accordance with the provisions of the plan (other
than those provisions related to forfeitures) without regard to such
termination until all funds have been distributed in accordance
with the provisions; or that the Plan Administrator immediately
distribute to each participant an amount equal to his/her vested
accrued benefit to the date.
(2) If there are insufficient assets in the pension fund to provide for all
vested accrued benefits as of the date of plan termination, priority
shall first be given to the distribution of any amounts attributable to
mandatory or voluntary employee contributions before assets are
§ 62-25 CHARTER § 62-25
C:239
§ 62-26. Miscellaneous provisions.
applied to the distribution of any vested benefits attributable to
other sources hereunder.
(3) All other assets attributable to the terminated plan shall be
distributed and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
applicable law and the terms of any instrument adopted by the
employer which effects such termination.
E. Residual assets. If all liabilities to vested participants and any others
entitled to receive a benefit under the terms of the plan have been
satisfied and there remain any residual assets in the pension fund, such
residual assets remaining shall be returned to the employer insofar as
such return does not contravene any provision of law, and any
remaining balance, in excess of employer contributions, shall be
returned to the commonwealth.
F. Exclusive benefit rule. In the event of the discontinuance and
termination of the plan as provided herein, the employer shall dispose
of the pension fund in accordance with the terms of the plan and
applicable law; at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under
the plan shall any part of the corpus or income of the pension fund,
after deducting any administrative or other expenses properly
chargeable to the pension fund, be used for or diverted to purposes
other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants in the plan, their
beneficiaries or their estates.
A. Plan not a contract of employment. No police officer of the employer
nor anyone else shall have any rights whatsoever against the employer
or the plan administrator as a result of this plan except those expressly
granted to them hereunder. Nothing herein shall be construed to give
any police officer the right to remain on the police force of the
employer.
B. Masculine/feminine; singular/plural. For purposes of this plan, the
masculine shall be read for the feminine and the singular shall be read
for the plural, wherever the person or context shall plainly so require.
C. Construction of document. This plan may be executed and/or
conformed in any number of counterparts, each of which shall be
deemed an original and shall be construed and enforced according to
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, excepting such
commonwealth's choice of law rules.
D. Headings. The headings of articles are included solely for convenience
of reference, and if there be any conflict between such headings and the
text of the plan, the text shall control.
E. Severability of provisions. In case any provisions of this plan shall be
held illegal or invalid for any reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not
affect the remaining parts of this plan, and the plan shall be construed
§ 62-25 RADNOR CODE § 62-26
C:240
and enforced as if said illegal and invalid provisions had never been
inserted therein.
F. Incapacity of pensioner. If any pensioner shall be physically or mentally
incapable of receiving or acknowledging receipt of any payment of
pension benefits hereunder, the Plan Administrator, upon the receipt of
satisfactory evidence that such pensioner is so incapacitated and that
another person or institution is maintaining him/her, may provide for
such payment of pension benefits hereunder to such person or
institution so maintaining him/her, and any such payments so made
shall be deemed for every purpose to have been made to such
pensioner.
G. Liability of officers of the plan administrator and/or employer. Subject
to the provisions of the Act and unless otherwise specifically required
by other applicable laws, no past, present or future police officer of the
employer shall be personally liable to any participant, beneficiary, or
other person under any provision of the plan.
H. Assets of the fund. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to give
any participant or his/her beneficiary any interest in any specific
property of the pension fund or any right except to receive such
distributions as are expressly provided for under the plan.
I. Pension fund for sole benefit of participants. The income and principal
of the pension fund are for the sole use and benefit of the participants
covered hereunder, and to the extent permitted by law, shall be free,
clear and discharged from and are not to be in any way liable for debts,
contracts or agreements, now contracted or which may hereafter be
contracted, and from all claims and liabilities now or hereafter incurred
by any participant or beneficiary.
§ 62-26 CHARTER § 62-26
C:241

ARTICLE III
Postemployment Benefit Obligation Plan and Trust
[Adopted 6-10-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
§ 62-27. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the noted
meanings:
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT — The collective bargaining
agreement between the Township and a union that covers retiree medical
benefits for union employees of the Township.
DEPENDENT — An individual who is a dependent as that term is used in
IRC § 105(b). As of the date of adoption of the Plan, a "dependent" was
a dependent as defined in IRC § 152, determined without regard to IRC
§ 152(b)(1), (b)(2), and (d)(1)(B).
IRC — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Radnor, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
PLAN — The Township of Radnor Postemployment Benefit Obligation Plan,
as amended from time to time.
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The Township Manager or the person or entity
designated by the Township to carry out administrative services as are
necessary to implement the Plan.
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-consecutive-month period ending on December
31. The first plan year began on the effective date specified in Section 4 of
this article,95 and ends on December 31, 2012.
RETIREE — A former employee of the Township who terminated
employment with the Township after meeting the conditions set forth in
the applicable bargaining agreement (and for nonuniform, nonbargained
former employees, the applicable salary and benefits ordinance) in order to
receive retiree medical insurance or life insurance.
SPOUSE — The retiree's lawful spouse as determined under the laws of
Pennsylvania.
TRUST — The integral part trust that holds the assets of the Plan.
TRUSTEE — The trustee or trustees of the integral part trust that holds the
assets of the Plan.
UNION — A union representing employees of the Township.
§ 62-28. Establishment of plan and trust.
A. A Postemployment Benefit Obligation Plan and Integral Part Trust
("Trust") is hereby established for the deposit and administration of
95.Editor's Note: "This article" refers to Ord. No. 2013-06. Section 4 of Ord. No. 2013-06
states "Effective Date. This article shall become effective in accordance with the Home
Rule Charter of Radnor Township."
§ 62-27 CHARTER § 62-28
C:243
§ 62-29. Eligibility and benefits.
funds to be used for the exclusive and irrevocable purpose of funding
postemployment benefits. The Trust shall be funded annually through
the budget appropriation process.
B. The Township is hereby appointed as the trustee of the Trust.
C. The Plan Administrator is hereby authorized to execute the trust
agreement with any additional changes to be approved by the Township
Solicitor in substantially the form attached hereto and incorporated
herein as Exhibit A to this article.96
A. Eligibility. The Plan covers retirees, their spouses and their dependents.
No other individual shall be entitled to benefits under the Plan;
provided that the Plan Administrator may direct that benefits be paid to
other individuals if necessary to comply with a court order. Note: no
individual shall be eligible for coverage under the Plan unless the
applicable collective bargaining agreement (and for nonuniform,
nonbargained former employees, the applicable salary and benefits
ordinance) provides that he/she is entitled to employer-provided retiree
medical insurance, compensated absence, or life insurance benefits.
B. Benefits.
(1) The Plan Administrator shall direct the trustee to use Trust funds to
provide retiree medical, vision, dental, prescription, or life
insurance benefits to retirees, their spouses and their eligible
dependents. Benefits must be provided through the purchase of
insurance, self-insurance or other funding approved by the Plan
Administrator.
(2) The Plan Administrator shall direct the trustee to pay lump sum
payments for accrued but unused leave time at termination in
accordance with applicable collective bargaining agreements and
for nonuniform, nonbargain former employees, the applicable
salary and benefits ordinance.
(3) A former union employee shall not have any right to benefits under
the Plan other than retiree medical or life insurance benefits to
which he/she is entitled under the terms of the applicable collective
bargaining agreement. A former non-union employee shall not have
any right to benefits under the Plan other than retiree medical or
life insurance benefits to which he/she is entitled under the terms
of his/her employment arrangement with the Township.
C. Benefits from another source. Notwithstanding Subsection B above, no
person shall have any claim for benefits under the Plan to the extent
that he/she has received or is entitled to receive the same benefits
96.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 62-28 RADNOR CODE § 62-29
C:244
§ 62-30. Administration.
under another plan, insurance policy, settlement or other arrangement
that is sponsored, funded or provided by the Township.
A. Plan Administrator. The Plan Administrator shall have authority and
responsibility to control and manage the operation and administration
of the Plan. The Plan Administrator shall have discretion to interpret
the terms of the Plan.
B. Documents. The Plan Administrator shall keep a copy of the Plan
document and any other disclosure documents relating therein,
including, but not limited to, summary plan descriptions on file at his/
her office where retirees, spouses or dependents may inspect them
during the Township's regular business hours. Upon request, the Plan
Administrator shall provide a retiree, spouse or dependent with copies
of such documents. When the Plan Administrator provides such
documents, the Plan Administrator may charge the requesting party a
reasonable charge for photocopying these materials.
C. Conflicts between documents. Any conflict between the provisions of
this document and any other document purporting to explain the rights,
benefits or obligations of the parties hereunder shall be resolved in
favor of the Plan document. If there is a conflict between the Plan and a
collective bargaining agreement, the Plan shall govern, but this
subsection does not prevent a retiree (or spouse or dependent) from
claiming benefits from the Township under an applicable collective
bargaining agreement or applicable salary and benefits ordinance.
D. Agents and expenses. The Plan Administrator may employ agents to
assist in his/her duties and may rely upon the written certificates of any
agent, counsel, accountant, investment manager, actuary or physician.
The Plan Administrator shall be entitled to reimbursement from the
Trust (unless the Township, at its discretion, makes reimbursement) for
all other proper charges and expenses incurred in carrying out his/her
duties under the Plan, including compensation of agents and payment
of litigation costs. The Plan Administrator may be paid such reasonable
compensation as shall from time to time be agreed upon in writing by
the Township and the Plan Administrator. However, an individual
serving as Plan Administrator who already receives full-time pay from
the Township or who is a member of the governing body of the
Township shall not receive compensation from the Trust except for
reimbursement of expenses properly and actually incurred.
E. Uniformity of discretion. Wherever, under the provisions of the Plan,
the Plan Administrator is granted discretionary powers which shall
affect the rights and benefits of retirees, spouses or dependents, such
discretion shall be exercised uniformly so that all parties similarly
situated shall be similarly treated.
§ 62-29 CHARTER § 62-30
C:245
§ 62-31. Amendment and termination.
§ 62-32. General provisions.
F. Indemnification. The Township shall indemnify the Plan Administrator
and any individual who may be appointed pursuant to this article
against any and all claims losses, damages, expenses and liabilities
arising from their duties and responsibilities pursuant to the provisions
of the Plan, unless the same is determined to be due to gross negligence
or willful misconduct.
A. Amendment.
(1) Any or all of the provisions of the Plan may be amended at any time
and from time to time, in whole or in part, by an instrument in
writing by the Township. No such amendment shall authorize or
permit any part of the Trust (other than such part as is required to
pay taxes and administration expenses) to be used for or diverted
to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of the retirees,
their spouses, or their dependents; no such amendment shall cause
or permit any portion of the Trust to revert to or become the
property of the Township; and no such amendment which affects
the rights or duties of the trustee may be made without the
trustee's written consent.
(2) The Trust is intended to be an integral part trust in accordance
with U.S. Treasury regulation § 301.7701-1(a)(3). To the extent that
any amendment is needed for the Trust to be or remain an integral
part trust, such amendment will be deemed to have been made on a
timely basis.
B. Termination. The Plan may be terminated at any time by the Township
and, upon such termination, the Trust shall be paid out by the trustee as
and when directed by the Plan Administrator or the Township in
accordance with the provisions of the Trust Agreement and the terms of
the Plan. Notwithstanding § 62-31A, upon termination of the Plan and
upon the satisfaction of all liabilities under the Plan to provide benefits
or pay administrative expenses, any assets remaining in the Trust shall
be returned to the Township.
A. Source of funds. The Trust shall constitute the sole source of funds that
may be used to purchase insurance under the Plan and the trustee shall
not be liable in any way or in any manner to purchase insurance beyond
those monies that have been contributed to the Trust.
B. Limited effect of plan and trust. Neither the establishment of the Plan
nor the Trust nor any modification thereof, nor the creation of any fund
or account, nor the payment of any benefits shall be construed as giving
to any person covered under the Plan or other person any legal or
equitable right against the trustee, the Township, or any officer or
employee thereof, except as may otherwise be provided in the Plan or in
§ 62-30 RADNOR CODE § 62-32
C:246
the Trust. Under no circumstances shall the term of employment of any
employee be modified or in any way affected by the Plan or the Trust.
C. Protective clause. Neither the Township nor the trustee shall be
responsible for the validity of any contract of insurance issued in
connection with the Plan or Trust or for the failure on the part of the
insurer to make payments provided by such contract, or for the action
of any person which may delay payment or render a contract null and
void or unenforceable in whole or in part.
D. Construction of plan. The Plan shall be construed and enforced
according to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. If any
provision of the Plan shall be held illegal or invalid for any reason, such
determination shall not affect the remaining provisions of the Plan.
E. Gender and number. Wherever any words are used herein in the
masculine, feminine or neuter, they shall be construed as though they
were also used in another gender in all cases where they would so
apply, and whenever any words are used herein in the singular or plural
form they shall be construed as though they were also used in the other
form in all cases where they would so apply.
F. Headings. The headings and subheadings of the Plan have been
inserted for convenience of reference and are to be ignored in any
construction of the provisions herein.
G. Spendthrift. The interests and benefits under the Plan of any retiree,
spouse or dependent shall not be subject to assignment, alienation,
pledge, attachment, garnishment, sequestration or other legal process,
or to the claims of creditors, except as required by law.
H. Continuing coverage. All persons whose health benefits would
otherwise terminate may have rights to continuation coverage at their
own expense due to a qualifying event described in IRC § 4980B.
§ 62-32 CHARTER § 62-32
C:247
Chapter 67
POLICE DEPARTMENT
CHARTER REFERENCES
Administration generally — See Art. VI.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 5, § 5-7, and
Ch. 62, Art. II.
Police Department — See Ch. 5, § 5-26.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 5, Art. VIII.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 19.
§ 62-32 RADNOR CODE § 62-32
C:248
ARTICLE I
Extra Police Protection
[Adopted 2-25-1974 by Ord. No. 1564 as Ch. 106 of the 1974 Code;
amended in its entirety 10-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-31]
§ 67-1. Authorization.
Where, in the opinion of the Superintendent of Police (the
"Superintendent") of Radnor Township (the "Township"), the conduct of an
event or public assemblage can be expected to require an extraordinary use
of police protection or where the owner, operator, person or organization
which conducts such an event or public assemblage requests the Township
to provide extraordinary police protection, the Superintendent shall hereby
be authorized to assign to duty the number of police he deems necessary to
properly provide for the maintenance of public order and safety at such an
event or public assemblage.
§ 67-2. Reimbursement; compensation of police officers.
§ 67-3. Calculation of expense.
A. Where, in the opinion of the Superintendent, the need for extraordinary
police protection is attributable to a particular event or public
assemblage, the owner, operator, person or organization which
conducts such an event or public assemblage is hereby required to
reimburse the Township for the expense of such extraordinary police
protection.
B. In order to defray expenses, the Township shall charge a fee as set forth
in § 67-3, and the present overtime rate of a senior patrol officer per
hour shall be paid to each police officer as compensation for such
service.
C. The Township shall make proper deductions for social security, federal,
state and local income taxes and such others as may apply to the
officer's fixed and stipulated salary, but such compensation shall not be
included for police pension purposes nor shall mandatory police officer
pension contributions be deducted from such extra duty pays.
A. The expense of such extraordinary police protection shall be calculated
by the Superintendent, in consultation with Finance Department staff,
to be the sum total of the following charges:
(1) The present overtime rate of a senior patrol officer per officer for
each hour of extraordinary police service; plus
(2) A percentage of the total hourly wages paid equivalent to the
Township's cost for applicable benefits provided to and paid on
behalf of police officers (including but not limited to social security
and medicare payroll taxes and workers' compensation premiums)
and any administrative overhead costs incurred by the Township.
§ 67-1 CHARTER § 67-3
C:249
§ 67-4. Collection of costs.
§ 67-5. Assignment of extra duty.
The Superintendent shall keep an accurate record of all regular police
officers who desire to participate in this police service in addition to their
regular duty, and so far as possible, he shall assign this police service, in an
equitable manner, as extra work to those officers who desire the additional
service.
§ 67-6. Nature of duty.
No police officer shall be assigned to any duty under this chapter which
shall not be of a kind or nature pertaining to his or her lawful office or duties
as a police officer of Radnor Township.
§ 67-7. Emergency employment of other forces.
In an emergency, the Superintendent may employ, temporarily, the police of
adjoining or adjacent municipalities.
B. Such charges shall be reviewed by the Superintendent and Finance
Department staff each year and adjusted accordingly on the Township's
Consolidated Fee Schedule during the annual budget process.
A. The Superintendent shall, whenever possible, estimate the number of
police officers and the length of time required to provide the
extraordinary police protection. In such cases, the owner, operator,
person or organization which conducts such an event or public
assemblage shall pay to the Township the sum estimated by the
Superintendent in advance and prior to the time the police service is
required.
B. Should the Superintendent not be able to adequately estimate the
number of police officers or the length of time required to provide the
extraordinary police protection before such event, he shall calculate the
actual cost of the event as soon as practical after the event, and he shall
immediately thereafter deliver an invoice for payment of such cost to
the owner, operator, person or organization conducting the event.
C. In the event that the owner, operator, person or organization
conducting such an event or public assemblage shall fail or refuse to
pay the cost as calculated by the Superintendent by 90 days after the
date on which the Township's invoice to pay such cost is mailed or
otherwise delivered, the Township shall have the right to recover said
sum in an action of assumpsit or to file a lien in the office of the
Prothonotary of Delaware County as provided in other cases for
recovery of expense for municipal services.
§ 67-3 RADNOR CODE § 67-8
C:250
§ 67-8. Service during on-duty hours.
In the event that it shall become necessary for the Superintendent to assign
on-duty police to perform such extraordinary duty, such officer shall receive
no additional compensation, and therefore, no expense for such service
shall be charged to the owner, operator, person or organization conducting
such event or public assemblage.
§ 67-9. Certain protection not subject to reimbursement.
Where extraordinary police protection is not attributable to a particular
owner, operator, person or organization, the Township shall have no right to
reimbursement but, nevertheless, off-duty police officers assigned shall be
compensated as provided herein.97
97.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Reimbursement for Police Department Services, adopted
4-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-09, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
2-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-15.
§ 67-8 CHARTER § 67-9
C:251
Chapter 72
RECORDS RETENTION
CHARTER REFERENCES
Board of Commissioners meeting records and
reports — See §§ 2.10 and 2.11.
Recording, codification and
compilation — See §§ 3.07 and 3.08.
Finances generally — See Art. VII.
Retention of records — See § 9.06.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel records — See Ch. 5, § 5-64.
§ 72-1. Compliance with state schedule.
The Township of Radnor hereby intends to comply with the Retention
and Disposition Schedule for Records of Pennsylvania Municipalities issued
by the Local Government Records Committee on May 17, 1982, and
subsequently amended.
§ 72-2. Notification of disposition.
The Township Manager or his designee shall inform the Board each year
which Township records will be disposed of, according to the statutory
schedule.
Chapter 78
SEWER AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Engineering Department — See Ch. 5, § 5-24. Sewers — See Ch. 235.
§ 78-1. Intent to organize.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Radnor, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, constituting the Municipal Authority of the said Township as
defined in the Act of the Assembly known as the "Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945" (the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and
supplemented),98 hereby signifies its intention to join with the Boards of
Commissioners of the Township of Haverford and the Township of Marple,
98.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 67-9 RADNOR CODE § 78-1
C:252
both of Delaware County, Pennsylvania, to organize an Authority under the
provisions of said Act.
§ 78-2. Name.
The name of the proposed Authority is the "Radnor-Haverford-Marple
Sewer Authority."
§ 78-3. Articles of Incorporation.
In pursuance of said intention, the Articles of Incorporation of said
Authority are hereby approved and adopted in the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
RADNOR-HAVERFORD-MARPLE
SEWER AUTHORITY
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
In compliance with the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (the Act of
May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented),99 the Townships
of Radnor, Haverford and Marple, all of Delaware County, Pennsylvania,
pursuant to ordinances duly enacted by the respective Boards of
Commissioners of said Townships authorizing and directing the formation
of an Authority jointly by said municipalities under said Act, DO HEREBY
CERTIFY:
(a) The name of the Authority shall be "Radnor-Haverford-Marple
Sewer Authority."
(b) The said Authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945. Said Authority shall be organized for all of the purposes set
forth in said Act and shall have all of the powers granted in said Act.
(c) No other Authority has been organized under the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945 or under the Act approved June 28, 1935,
P.L. 463, and is in existence in or for the incorporating
municipalities, except:
Name of Authority Members
(1) The Haverford Township
Authority
Township of Haverford
(2) Marple Township Municipal
Authority
Township of Marple
99.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. ~ 301 et seq.
§ 78-1 CHARTER § 78-3
C:253
Name of Authority Members
(3) Central Delaware County
Authority
Townships of Marple, Ridley,
Springfield and Nether Providence;
and Boroughs of Ridley Park,
Swarthmore, Prospect Park,
Rutledge and Morton
(4) Radnor Township Municipal
Authority
Township of Radnor
(d) The names of the incorporating municipalities are the Township of
Radnor, the Township of Haverford and the Township of Marple, all
of Delaware County, Pennsylvania. The names, titles and addresses
of the municipal authorities (as defined in the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945) of the incorporating municipalities are as
follows.100
(e) The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of
the Board of said Authority, each being a citizen of the respective
incorporating municipality by whom such member was appointed,
and the name of the incorporating municipality appointing the
respective members are as follows:101
The terms of office of the first members of the Board of said Authority shall
commence on the date of appointment and shall be computed from the first
day of January 1968.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Township of Radnor, the Township of
Haverford and the Township of Marple, all of Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, have caused these Articles of
Incorporation to be duly executed on behalf of said municipalities by
the respective proper officers thereunto duly authorized and under their
respective municipal seals this .......... day of ...................., 1967.102
TOWNSHIP OF RADNOR
TOWNSHIP OF HAVERFORD
TOWNSHIP OF MARPLE
§ 78-4. Members; terms of office.
The first members of the Board of Radnor-Haverford-Marple Sewer
Authority named in the aforesaid Articles of Incorporation as having been
appointed by this incorporating municipality are hereby specifically
100. Editor's Note: The names, titles and addresses of the municipal authorities were omitted
by the publisher. A complete copy of former Ch. 26 is on file and available for inspection in
the office of the Township Secretary.
101. Editor's Note: The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Board
were omitted by the publisher. A complete copy of former Ch. 26 is on file and available
for inspection in the office of the Township Secretary.
102. Editor's Note: The space and text reserved for the signing and notarization of the Articles
was omitted by the publisher. A complete copy of former Ch. 26 is on file and available for
inspection in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 78-3 RADNOR CODE § 78-4
C:254
appointed members of said Board for the terms of office set after their
respective names, which terms shall commence on the date of appointment
and shall be computed from the first day of January 1968.
§ 78-5. Compensation.
Each member of the Board of Radnor-Haverford-Marple Sewer Authority
appointed by the Township of Radnor shall receive as compensation $600
per calendar year, or a proportionate amount thereof for any period less
than a full calendar year. For purposes of this section, the pay period shall
be computed from the actual date of appointment to the Board.
§ 78-6. Purpose; powers.
Radnor-Haverford-Marple Sewer Authority shall be organized for all
purposes set forth in the Municipal Authorities Act of 1945 and shall have
all of the powers granted in said Act.
§ 78-7. Initial projects.
The first project to be undertaken by the Radnor-Haverford-Marple Sewer
Authority shall be to acquire, hold, construct, improve, maintain and
operate, own or lease, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, sewers,
sewer systems or parts thereof, sewage treatment works, including works
for treating and disposing of industrial wastes, in and for the incorporating
municipalities and for such other territory as it may be authorized to
serve; and said Authority shall not undertake any other project or projects
unless specifically authorized so to do by ordinances duly enacted by the
incorporating municipalities.
§ 78-8. Execution; authority of officers.
The proper officers of the Township of Radnor are hereby authorized and
directed to join with the proper officers of the Township of Haverford and
the Township of Marple, both of Delaware County, Pennsylvania, to execute
said Articles of Incorporation and to file said Articles of Incorporation,
together with a certified copy of this chapter and required proof of
publication, with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and
to do, execute and perform any and all acts and things necessary or
appropriate to effect and establish said Radnor-Haverford-Marple Sewer
Authority.
§ 78-4 CHARTER § 78-8
C:255
Chapter 83
(R E S E R V E D)
Chapter 90
WARDS
CHARTER REFERENCES
Township boundaries — See § 1.01. Board of Commissioners — See Art. II
§ 90-1. Ward boundaries established.
Ward boundaries for Wards 1 through 7 of Radnor Township are as set forth
on Exhibit A Ward Boundaries, Option 5d, a copy of which map is attached
hereto and incorporated herein.103
§ 90-2. Realignment.
The realigned proposed population for each of the seven wards contains an
overall deviation of 5.00% from the median ward population and consists of
the following:
§ 90-3. Boundary descriptions.
The boundary descriptions for each ward in plain English are set forth on
Exhibit B a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein.104
§ 90-4. Technical legal descriptions.
The technical legal description for ward boundaries are as set forth on
Exhibit C a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein.105
A. Ward 1: 4,532.
B. Ward 2: 4,654.
C. Ward 3: 4,536.
D. Ward 4: 4,395.
E. Ward 5: 4,486.
F. Ward 6: 4,499.
G. Ward 7: 4,429.
103. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
104. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
105. Editor's Note: Exhibit C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 78-8 RADNOR CODE § 90-5
C:256
§ 90-5. Elections.
Pursuant to the Municipal Reapportionment Act, all Commissioners of the
Township presently serving in office shall retain their offices until the end
of their terms. In the primary and general elections of 2015 it is the
intent of the Board of Commissioners that consistent with the current odd/
even election system existing in the Township pursuant to § 2.03 of the
Radnor Township Home Rule Charter that all Commissioners representing
odd-numbered wards shall be elected at the Municipal election held in
2015 and shall be elected thereafter at four-year intervals. Additionally, all
Commissioners representing even-numbered wards shall be reelected at the
Municipal election held in 2017 and shall be elected thereafter for four-year
intervals.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 95
ADVERTISING
§ 90-5 CHARTER § 90-5
C:257

ARTICLE I
Temporary Signs and Aerial Advertising
[Adopted 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
§ 95-1. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all temporary signs not
regulated in Article XXI of the Radnor Township Zoning Ordinance106 and to
aerial advertising in Radnor Township.
§ 95-2. Permits.
Permits for overhead signs and banners shall be issued by the Township
Zoning Officer only in accordance with this chapter and all other applicable
ordinances. Article XXI of the Radnor Township Zoning Ordinance shall not
apply.
§ 95-3. Compliance.
A. Overhead signs and banners shall conform to the following, and permits
for such signs shall include the information necessary to document
compliance with the same:
(1) Location: state route number or Township or county road number.
(2) Vertical clearance above the roadway: minimum of 17 feet and 6
inches.
(3) Size of banner: no more than 48 inches in width.
(4) Banners shall only promote and advertise a community-based
event/function which has received approval from the Radnor
Township Board of Commissioners.
(5) Location. banners shall only be displayed in locations specifically
approved by the Radnor Township Board of Commissioners.
(6) Message. No more than 20% of the message shall relate to naming
or advertising for event sponsors only; provided, however, that only
a business name and/or logo shall be displayed on the banner or
sign.
(7) Duration of display shall not exceed 21 days from the date of
installation until the banner is removed.
(8) The banner will be removed within five days or less from the ending
date of the event for which the banner was displayed.
(9) The banner shall be installed and removed under the supervision
and control of the Township on permanent cables at locations
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 95-1 CHARTER § 95-3
C:259
§ 95-4. Satisfaction of requirements.
The dates of installation, duration, removal, size, message, event and/or
organization may vary, but in all cases the requirements of this chapter will
be satisfied.
§ 95-5. Issuance of permits.
Upon the issuance of any permit for a state road pursuant to this chapter,
the applicant shall promptly forward a copy of the permit to the district
office of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation with a copy of this
transmittal letter to the Township.
§ 95-6. Responsibility of permit applicant.
The permit applicant assumes full responsibility for erecting, maintaining
and removing any such sign or banner, and all liability for damages
occurring to any person or property arising from any act or omission
associated with the sign or banner, and a statement to that effect shall be
included with the application for the permit.
§ 95-7. Permit fees.
Permit fees for signs or banners, pursuant to this chapter, shall be in
accordance with the current fee resolution for other sign permits.
§ 95-8. Aerial advertising prohibited.
approved by, and in accordance with, specifications provided by the
Township.
(10) Traffic control shall be performed in accordance with the most
current Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication
203 for installation and removal of banner.
A. No person shall use or contract for the use of any type of aircraft or
other self-propelled or buoyant airborne object to display in any manner
or for any purpose whatsoever any sign or advertising device. For the
purpose of this section, a "sign or advertising device" includes, but is
not limited to, a poster, banner, writing, picture, painting, light, model,
display, emblem, notice, illustration, insignia, symbol or any other form
of advertising sign or device.
B. Exceptions.
(1) The display of any identifying mark, trade name, trade insignia, or
trademark on the exterior of an aircraft or self-propelled or buoyant
airborne object if the displayed item is under the ownership or
registration of the aircraft's or airborne object's owners.
§ 95-3 RADNOR CODE § 95-8
C:260
§ 95-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
in District Justice Court, pay a fine of $1,000 for each day of violation.
(2) The display of a sign or advertising device placed wholly and visible
only within the interior of an aircraft or self-propelled or buoyant
airborne object.
§ 95-8 CHARTER § 95-9
C:261
Chapter 98
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citizen Council on Environmental
Affairs — See Ch. 34.
§ 98-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Air Pollution Control
Ordinance."
§ 98-2. Declaration of policy.
Whereas pollution of the air is detrimental to the health, comfort, living
conditions, welfare and safety of the citizens of the Township of Radnor, it
is hereby declared to be the policy of the Township of Radnor to safeguard
the citizens of the Township from air pollution.
§ 98-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AIR CONTAMINATION SOURCE — Any source from or by reason of which
there is emitted into the outdoor atmosphere smoke, gases or odors,
regardless of who the person may be who owns or operates the building,
premises or other property in or on which such source is located or the
facility, equipment or other property by which the emission is caused or
from which the emission comes.
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or
more contaminants or combinations thereof in such quantities and of such
duration that they are or may tend to be injurious to human, plant or animal
life or property or that interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property or the conduct of business.
FLUE — Any duct, passage, stack, chimney or conduit permitting air
contaminants to be emitted into the open air.
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Any furnace or other device, excluding
incinerators, in which fuel is burned for the production of steam, hot water
or hot air and from which products of combustion are the sole stack effluent.
GARBAGE — All putrescible animal and vegetable matter, including but not
limited to offal, dead animals and any liquid substance derived therefrom,
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INCINERATOR — Any device specifically designed for the destruction by
burning of refuse or other combustible waste material.
§ 95-9 RADNOR CODE § 98-3
C:262
ODOR — That property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
OPEN BURNING — Any unenclosed fire wherein products of combustion
are emitted to the open air and are not directed thereto through a flue.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company,
firm, trust, corporation or other entity recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties, including any governmental agency.
REFUSE — Garbage, rubbish and trade waste.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — The Ringelmann scale for grading the
density of smoke as defined in Information Circular No. 7718 of the United
States Bureau of Mines.
RUBBISH — Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive,
including but not limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets,
wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, tree leaves, yard trimmings,
furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS — Salvaging or reclaiming of any product or
material, including but not limited to metals, chemicals, shipping containers
or drums.
SMOKE — Particulate matter produced by incomplete combustion of
organic substances, including but not limited to fly ash, cinders, tarry
matter, soot or carbon, and gaseous combustion products or unburned
gases accompanying or free of the aforementioned particulate matter.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business, trade
or industry, including but not limited to plastic products, cartons, paint,
grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and other
forms of solid or liquid waste materials.
§ 98-4. Control officers.
A. The Fire Marshal and such other persons as may be designated by the
Director of the Community Development Department shall serve as Air
Pollution Control Officers. [Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
B. Air Pollution Control Officers shall have the powers and duties to:
(1) Enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Receive and initiate complaints of violations of this chapter.
(3) Enter and inspect any building, property, premises or place
pursuant to lawful process for the purpose of investigating an
actual or suspected source of air pollution or for the purpose of
ascertaining the compliance or noncompliance with any provision
of this chapter.
(4) Render assistance and technical advice as needed to any persons
engaged in operations which may cause air pollution.
§ 98-3 CHARTER § 98-5
C:263
§ 98-5. Regulations.
§ 98-6. Violations and penalties.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke to be emitted into
the outdoor atmosphere from any fuel-burning equipment or
incinerator, the shade or appearance of which is darker than shade No.
1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart or of such opacity as to obscure an
observer's view to a degree greater than does smoke designated as No.
1 on the Ringlemann Smoke Chart, except that smoke emitted during
the cleaning of a firebox or the building of a new fire may not exceed
No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart for a period or periods
aggregating not more than six minutes in any 60 consecutive minutes.
B. No person shall be permitted to install an incinerator after the effective
date of this chapter. Effective January 1, 1992, the use and operation of
all incinerators shall be discontinued, excepting for those located
within nonresidential zoning districts and used for the express purpose
of research and development, and such devices shall be sealed or
dismantled as directed by the Director of Community Development.
[Amended 10-28-1974 by Ord. No. 1587; 10-28-1991 by Ord. No.
91-42]
C. No person shall conduct a salvage operation or destroy refuse by open
burning, and it shall be prima facie evidence that the person who owns
or controls property on which open burning occurs has caused or
permitted said open burning. This restriction shall not apply where the
open burning operations result from:
(1) A fire set by or under the supervision of a public officer to prevent
or abate a hazard.
(2) A fire set for the purpose of instructing persons in fire fighting.
(3) The cooking of food.
(4) Open fires for recreation purposes, such as campfires, and the use
of salamanders or similar devices used for heating by construction
workers.107
D. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of any
noxious or offensive odor from an air contamination source.
E. No person shall in any manner hinder, delay, obstruct, resist, prevent or
in any way interfere with an Air Pollution Control Officer in the
performance of his duty hereunder, or refuse such Officer, after proper
identification, entrance at reasonable hours to any premises, provided
that such Officer has complied with all procedural requirements of law
to establish right of entry.
107. Editor's Note: Former § 38-5C(5), which exempted the burning of tree limbs and brush
from the restriction of Subsection C and immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 6-28-1976 by Ord. No. 1629.
§ 98-5 RADNOR CODE § 98-6
C:264
Chapter 104
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 200.
§ 104-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. Prosecutions under this chapter may be instituted by any Air Pollution
Control Officer and shall be prosecuted in the name of the Township of
Radnor. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof by any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the
county jail for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 11-28-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-32; 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
B. An Air Pollution Control Officer may institute an action in equity for an
injunction to restrain continuous violations of this chapter in the event
that the Air Pollution Control Officer has issued an abatement notice
which is being violated and which is not then the subject of judicial
review.
A. The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the
singular. Words used in the present tense shall also include the future.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless otherwise expressly stated:
ALARM SUPPLIER — The business of any individual, partnership or
corporation of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing,
altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any assembly of equipment, mechanical, electrical
or battery operated, arranged to signal the occurrence of a police,
fire or medical emergency requiring urgent attention and immediate
response by the Police or Fire Department.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A service whereby trained employees, in
attendance at all times, receive prerecorded voice messages from
automatic dialing devices reporting an emergency at a stated location,
where such employees have the duty to relay immediately by live
voice any such message to the Police or Fire Department which must
immediately respond.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bill, horn or siren which is attached
to the interior or exterior of a building, structure or facility and emits
§ 98-6 CHARTER § 104-1
C:265
a warning signal audible outside which is designed to attract attention
and signal a police or fire emergency.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — A device which is interconnected to
a telephone line and is programmed to transmit a signal by voice or
coded message to an answering service to indicate an emergency which
requires an immediate response by the Police or Fire Department.
CENTRAL STATION — A protective system or group of such systems
owned privately for customers by a person, firm or corporation, having
operators and guards in attendance at all times who accept emergency
messages and transmit notification of such emergency to the Police or
Fire Department.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The administrative head of the Police Department
who shall have responsibility for the registration of all alarm systems
within the township and the administration and enforcement of this
chapter.
COMMUNICATION CENTER — A system which shall be maintained by
Radnor Township and which shall monitor on a continuous basis the
reception of emergency messages or signals received from an alarm
system.
EMERGENCY — A police, fire, medical or hazard emergency.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm activated in the absence of an emergency,
whether willfully, by inadvertance or by lack of maintenance to an alarm
system which requires an emergency response by the Police or Fire
Department. This definition shall exclude malfunctions resulting from
the testing of equipment; provided, however, that written notification
has been received by the Police Department advising as to the date and
time of such test. Malfunctions resulting from the repair of telephone or
electrical lines or acts of God, such as windstorms, thunder or lightning,
shall also be excluded from this definition. If doubt exists as to the
cause of a "false alarm," a final determination shall be made by the
Chief of Police.
FIRE DEPARTMENTS — The Radnor, Bryn Mawr and Broomall Fire
Departments.
HAZARD EMERGENCY — An explosion, leak of toxic gas, liquefied or
solid, or a potential leak or explosion.
KEY — To use a telephone line and equipment for transmitting a
message, either directly or indirectly, by an automatic dialing device.
INTERMEDIARY — A central station protective system or an answering
service as herein defined.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Township of Radnor Police Department.
REGISTRATION — Written permission duly received through the Police
Department upon the filing of all necessary information and the
payment of a fee as required by this chapter.
§ 104-1 RADNOR CODE § 104-1
C:266
§ 104-2. Registration.
§ 104-3. Fees. [Amended 3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-06]
A fee in the amount of $100 shall be required for the registration of any
alarm system installed within the township.
§ 104-4. Installation standards.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor.
A. New installation. From the effective date of this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any alarm system to be installed within Radnor Township
without first registering such system with the Police Department and
paying the required fee as prescribed by this chapter.
B. Existing installation. Within 90 days from the effective date of this
chapter, every alarm system located within the township shall be
registered with the Police Department. Registration and payment of the
required fee shall be the responsibility of the owner, user or lessee of
such system.
C. Application. Application forms for the registration of an alarm system
shall be made available by the Police Department and shall require the
following minimum information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of both the alarm user
and property owner.
(2) The address where the alarm system is installed, and telephone
number at that location.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the alarm supplier.
(4) The name, address and telephone number of a person or firm who
is authorized to respond immediately to an emergency or false
alarm and to gain access to the alarm system, and who is available
on a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis, seven days a week, to respond
for servicing and maintenance and to correct malfunctions as they
occur.
(5) The type of system (i.e., holdup, burglary, fire or medical
emergency).
(6) Any other information which shall be required by the Police
Department.
A. Every alarm supplier who sells, leases or furnishes an alarm system or
any individual, firm or corporation who installs his or its own alarm
system shall be required to meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) The system installed shall be listed by Underwriters Laboratories,
Inc., as being electrically safe.
§ 104-1 CHARTER § 104-4
C:267
§ 104-5. Information to be supplied to buyer or lessee.
§ 104-6. Inspections.
§ 104-7. False alarms. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-07;
2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
(2) Such system shall be provided with standby battery power which
shall automatically and immediately take over in the event of a
power failure.
(3) Wiring for each system shall meet all applicable township codes
and be installed using shielded cable to prevent wave interference.
B. Exemptions. A battery-powered (nine volt, 11.2 volt or similar voltage)
audible alarm system or an electrically energized audible alarm system
whose sole purpose is to notify the occupants of that location of an
emergency shall be exempt from the registration requirements of this
chapter if all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The alarm is not connected to any mechanical or electrical device
that automatically notifies a person or agency outside of that
location that the alarm system is activated.
(2) The alarm system is not connected to any external speakers.
C. Alarms without timing mechanisms prohibited. On and after the
effective date of this chapter, owners and users of audible alarms shall
equip such device with a timing mechanism that will disengage the
audible alarm after a maximum time period of 15 minutes. Alarms
without such a mechanism shall constitute a violation of this chapter
and must be disconnected.
A. Each alarm supplier who, after the effective date of this chapter, sells or
leases in the township an alarm system shall furnish operating
instructions and a manual to the buyer or lessee.
B. A copy of this chapter shall also be provided to the buyer, user or lessee
at or prior to the time of contracting by the alarm supplier and at his
own expense.
A. Radnor Township reserves the right to inspect the installation and
operation of every alarm system within the township.
B. Inspection of premises where an alarm system is installed will be
conducted during reasonable hours, except in emergency situations.
A. When a false alarm occurs, the following procedure shall be applied:
(1) The property owner shall receive a false alarm citation letter from
the Police Department. If the false alarm is a second violation in a
given calendar year, the property owner shall have 10 business
days from the date of the property owner's receipt of citation to
§ 104-4 RADNOR CODE § 104-7
C:268
§ 104-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof by a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine or penalty of not
more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 30 days.
either pay the citation or file an appeal of the citation by mailing or
e-mailing a letter of appeal to the Superintendent of Police.
(2) If the citation is not paid in full or an appeal is not timely filed
within 10 business days from the date of the property owner's
receipt of the citation, a second citation letter will be mailed to the
property owner, and a late fee of $50 shall be added to the initial
citation fee. If the citation and late fee are not paid in full within 10
business days from the date of the property owner's receipt of the
second citation letter, a non-traffic citation shall be issued for the
violation and mailed to the appropriate District Court.
(3) If the citation is properly appealed, the Superintendent of Police
shall, in his sole discretion, determine whether to uphold or dismiss
the citation and shall respond to the appeal by providing a final
written determination provided to the property owner within 10
business days of receipt of said appeal. If the citation is upheld, the
property owner shall have an additional 10 days from the date of
the property owner's receipt of the determination to pay the
citation in full.
(4) If the citation is not paid in full within 10 days after the date of the
property owner's receipt of the Superintendent of Police's
determination to uphold the citation, a non-traffic citation shall be
issued for the violation and mailed to the appropriate District
Court.
B. For the purpose of defraying the cost to the Township for responding to
false alarms, the owners and/or users of an alarm system as defined by
this chapter shall be subject to the following schedule of fines pursuant
to the procedure outlined above in § 104-7A:
(1) For the second false alarm per calendar year: $25 for each alarm.
(2) For the third false alarm per calendar year: $75 for each alarm.
(3) For the fourth false alarm and each subsequent false alarm per
calendar year: $125 for each alarm.
§ 104-7 CHARTER § 104-8
C:269
Chapter 109
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 190.
§ 104-8 RADNOR CODE § 104-8
C:270
ARTICLE I
Possession and Consumption
[Adopted 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 109-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Liquor or a malt or brewed beverage.
LIQUOR — Any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented or other alcoholic
beverage or combination of liquors and mixed liquor, a part of which is
spirituous, vinous, fermented or otherwise alcoholic, including all drinks
or drinkable liquids, preparations or mixtures and reused, recovered or
redistilled denatured alcohol, usable or taxable for beverage purposes,
which contain more than 1/2 of 1% of alcohol by volume, except pure ethyl
alcohol and malt or brewed beverages.
MALT OR BREWED BEVERAGE — Any beer, lager beer, ale, porter or
similar fermented malt beverage containing 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by
volume, by whatever name such beverage may be called.
OPEN CONTAINER — Any of the following objects and any objects similar
thereto: a glass, mug or other such drinking utensil; a bottle or jug from
which the cap or cork has been removed or on which the seal has been
broken; a can which has been punctured or from which the cap or snap top
or snap tab has been removed; a keg which has been tapped or a jar, jug or
other immediate container of an alcoholic beverage which did not contain
the alcoholic beverage contained therein when such alcoholic beverage was
last purchased from a person licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board to sell alcoholic beverages. An "open container" shall not include
a bag, box or other similar wrapping or packaging of a container of an
alcoholic beverage.
PARKING AREA — Space provided by an owner or tenant for the parking
of vehicles on any premises described herein, together with the means of
ingress thereto and egress therefrom and roads and driveways of any such
premises.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Property not owned or leased by those persons
engaged in the possession, consumption or transportation of any alcoholic
beverage.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public sidewalk, street, lane, highway, building,
parking area, park or recreation area or other property open for the use of
the public.
PUBLIC STREET — The entire right-of-way of any public street, road or
highway of the Township of Radnor or of the County of Delaware or of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including the cartway, sidewalks and
unpaved portions thereof within the Township of Radnor. The term includes
a roadway open to the use of the public for vehicular travel on grounds of a
college or university or public or private school or public or Township park.
§ 109-1 CHARTER § 109-2
C:271
§ 109-2. Possession or consumption on school property.
It shall be unlawful for any individual to possess, consume or use alcoholic
beverages or malt liquor on public school property without the special and
express permission of the school principal or the Superintendent of Schools.
School property shall include all property owned by or leased by the Radnor
Township School District and/or the Radnor Township School Authority.
§ 109-3. Possession or consumption in public places.
No person shall have, possess, carry or transport any alcoholic beverage
in an open container in or upon any public place or private property or in
any vehicle upon such area within the Township of Radnor. No person shall
consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon any aforesaid public place or
private property within the Township of Radnor.
§ 109-4. Exceptions.
No person shall be guilty of a violation of § 109-3 for possession, carrying,
transporting or consuming alcoholic beverages on the premises he owns or
leases; within the area permitted by the license of an establishment licensed
by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board; on the premises of a privately
owned recreational facility or club in which he or his host holds a valid
membership; or on public or private property with the express permission
of the owner or lessee.
§ 109-5. Discarding of containers.
No person shall discard alcoholic or other beverage containers upon any
public sidewalk, street, lane, highway, parking lot, park or recreation area
of public or private property within the Township of Radnor.
§ 109-6. Violations and penalties.
The violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by
a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 30 days. Each day any violation shall continue shall constitute
a separate violation.
§ 109-2 RADNOR CODE § 109-6
C:272
ARTICLE II
Transfer of Liquor Licenses
[Adopted 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-10]
§ 109-7. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to enact rules and regulations, and a fee
schedule to administer applications filed for the intermunicipal transfer of
liquor licenses into the Township in accordance with Act 141 of 2000,108 of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. It is the further intent of this article
to provide for responsible alcohol management on applications made to the
Township pursuant to state law and to protect the welfare, health, peace
and morals of the Township and its residents.
§ 109-8. Applications.
Applicants seeking to file an application for the intermunicipal transfer of a
liquor license pursuant to this article shall be required to pay the required
fee as set forth in Chapter 162, Fees, of the Township Code, and file 10
copies of the following information with the Township Secretary:
A. Name, home address, and home phone number of applicant.
B. Name and home address of any other individuals who have, or propose
to have, a financial interest or ownership in the business.
C. Name and address of any other liquor license in which the applicant, or
any other individual identified in Subsection B, has an interest or
ownership.
D. Business name, address, and phone number where the license will be
located within the Township.
E. Owner of the property where the license is to be located.
F. Nature of the business and type of license to be transferred.
G. Copy of the completed application required by the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board, including the applicant's criminal history and any liquor
code violations.
H. Plot plan drawn to scale illustrating:
(1) Width, depth and lot area of the property.
(2) Zoning classification of all property within a five-hundred-foot
radius of the property, including a description of the land use of
each district.
(3) Location and use of all buildings and structures on the property.
108. Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 4-401 et seq.
§ 109-7 CHARTER § 109-8
C:273
§ 109-9. Receipt of application.
Upon receipt of the required information and required fee, the Board will fix
a date, time, and location for a public hearing to consider the application.
The Township will provide notice of the hearing as follows:
§ 109-10. Public hearing.
In considering whether the applicant's request for the transfer of a liquor
license into the Township would affect the welfare, health, peace and morals
of the Township or residents, the Board may consider any or all of the
following:
(4) Number and location of off-street parking spaces, including means
of ingress and egress.
I. Name and address of existing liquor licenses within 200 feet.
J. Location of any church, hospital, school, charitable institution, if
known, or public playground within 300 feet.
K. Business plan to include the following information:
(1) Hours and days of operation.
(2) Interior floor plan, including total seating capacity and location of
kitchens and restrooms.
(3) Type of entertainment, if proposed.
(4) Number of employees, including number on the maximum shift of
employment.
(5) Type of menu, including price range.
(6) Method of refuse disposal.
A. By giving public notice as defined in § 280-4B of the Township Code.
B. By mailing a notice thereof to the applicant, Township Manager and
Township Commissioner representing the ward in which the property is
located and to any other person who has made timely request to receive
same.
C. By mailing notice thereof to every resident or association of residents of
the Township who have registered their names and addresses with the
Community Development Department.
D. By posting notice of said hearing in a conspicuous location on the
property at least one week prior to the hearing.
E. By mailing notice to the owner, if his address is known, or to every
occupant of a lot on the same street within a distance of 500 feet of the
property in question.
§ 109-8 RADNOR CODE § 109-10
C:274
§ 109-11. Decisions.
Within 45 days of the Township's receipt of a completed application
requesting an intermunicipal transfer of a liquor license pursuant to § 109-8
herein, the Board of Commissioners shall render a decision by resolution
or ordinance to approve or disapprove the applicant's request. The decision
of the Board shall be issued in a written report setting forth the basis to
approve or disapprove the application, and shall include findings of fact in
support of such decision. In approving an application, the Board reserves
the right to impose conditions, which the applicant shall accept and agree
to by signing an affidavit in a form acceptable to the Township. Any change
or deviation in the applicant's plan inconsistent with the approval granted
shall require a new application and further review and approval by the
Board of Commissioners consistent with the terms of this article.
A. Information contained within the application as required by § 109-8 of
this article.
B. Number and nature of police incident reports over the past 12 months
at the location where the license will be located.
C. Any other business with a liquor license in which the applicant has
ownership or a financial interest.
D. Reports and recommendations from the Township Manager, Solicitor
and staff.
E. The total number of liquor licenses in the Township.
F. The closest location of any existing liquor license.
G. Proximity to any church, hospital, school, charitable organization, if
known, public playground or other institution.
H. Concerns expressed by area residents, businesses and civic groups, or
other interested or affected party regarding the impact upon the
welfare, peace and morals of the Township or residents.
I. Any other issue or fact which may adversely affect the welfare, health,
peace and morals of the Township or residents.
§ 109-10 CHARTER § 109-11
C:275
Chapter 115
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Sanitation — See Ch. 230.
Fences — See Ch. 280, § 280-109.
§ 109-11 RADNOR CODE § 109-11
C:276
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 115-1. Terms defined.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ANIMALS — Dogs, cats and other mammals susceptible to rabies.
ANIMAL WARDEN — The Animal Warden of Radnor Township.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of Radnor Township.
DEPARTMENT — The Community Development Department of Radnor
Township.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Community Development of the Township of
Radnor.
FERAL CAT — A domesticated cat that has returned to the wild, or the
offspring of such a cat.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Radnor Township Health Officer who is
responsible to oversee compliance with all local ordinances pertaining to
health, environmental and sanitation concerns, and to advise both the
Township administration and residents about national and state
requirements for these matters.
LICENSED — The animal is registered with Delaware County as having an
owner, address, and rabies vaccination.
NASPHV — The National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians.
OWNER — Includes any person having a right of property in any animal
and any person who keeps or harbors an animal or has it in his/her care, or
allows it to remain on or about any premises occupied by him/her.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Radnor Township Police Department.
STRAY ANIMALS — Any animal running at large unaccompanied by the
owner or keeper with no visible means of identification.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor.
TRAP-NEUTER-RETURN (TNR) — A nonlethal approach to feral cat
population control where feral cats are humanely trapped, sterilized and
vaccinated, fitted with a collar with the NASPHV-recommended tag
attached thereto or implanted with a microchip or other permanent marking
or tag approved by the Board of Health, and then returned to the location
where they were originally trapped.
VACCINATED — A previously unvaccinated animal which has now been
vaccinated for at least 14 days and the duration of immunity has not
expired; a previously vaccinated animal for which the duration of immunity
has not expired.
§ 115-1 CHARTER § 115-1
C:277
VETERINARIAN — A person qualified and authorized to practice veterinary
medicine, which is the prevention, cure, or alleviation of disease and injury
in animals.
§ 115-1 RADNOR CODE § 115-1
C:278
ARTICLE II
Rabies Control
§ 115-2. Required vaccination of dogs and cats; licensure of dogs.
§ 115-3. Seizure of unlicensed and/or unvaccinated dogs and cats;
redemption.
A. Two months after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful
for any person, firm or corporation to own, possess, maintain, regularly
feed, house or keep any dog or cat over three months of age within the
Township, unless such dog or cat is identified as having a current rabies
vaccination by one of the following means: a collar with the NASPHrecommended
tag attached thereto which is worn at all times;
implantation of a microchip; or some other permanent marking or tag
approved by the Board of Health.
B. Within two months after the effective date of this article, every owner of
a dog or cat in the Township of Radnor which is over three months of
age shall have such dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by or under the
supervision of a veterinarian, unless such dog or cat has a vaccination
whose duration of immunity has not expired.
C. Within 10 days after any dog in the Township of Radnor becomes three
months of age, the owner of any dog shall have such dog licensed by the
appropriate agency of Delaware County and shall have such animal
vaccinated against rabies by or under the supervision of a veterinarian.
D. Within 10 days after any cat in the Township of Radnor becomes three
months of age, the owner of such cat shall have such animal vaccinated
against rabies by or under the supervision of a veterinarian.
E. Within 30 days after the arrival in the Township of any dog or cat over
three months of age, the owner of such dog shall comply with
Subsection C above and the owner of such cat shall comply with
Subsection D above. The vaccination requirements of this Subsection E
shall not apply to any dog or cat which has a vaccination whose
duration of immunity is still in effect.
F. Within the time span recommended by NASPHV, the owner of any
previously vaccinated dog or cat in the Township of Radnor shall have
such dog or cat revaccinated against rabies by or under the supervision
of a veterinarian, except in the case of a local epidemic, at which time
more frequent vaccination may be required by the Township.
G. Licensure requirements for dogs and cats belonging to Radnor
Township residents or dogs and cats present in Radnor Township shall,
at a minimum, be in strict conformity with the licensing requirements of
Delaware County.
A. If a dog which does not have a current license and a dog or cat that does
not have a current vaccination certificate is seized by a police officer or
§ 115-2 CHARTER § 115-3
C:279
§ 115-4. Reports of persons bitten or injured; confinement
procedures.
other authorized official of the Township of Radnor, such dog or cat
shall be detained for a time period not exceeding 10 days. If claimed
by the owner, the owner shall ensure that the dog or cat is vaccinated
against rabies by or under the supervision of a veterinarian, and a
rabies vaccination certificate signed by said veterinarian must be
presented to the Director within 24 hours after such dog or cat is
released to the owner or his representative. If unlicensed, the owner
shall obtain a license from Delaware County prior to release.
B. The owner of a dog or cat detained as aforesaid shall pay all reasonable
expenses incurred by reason of its detention before it is released to the
owner or representative. Any dog or cat not claimed in accordance with
this article shall be disposed of in a humane manner and in accordance
with all applicable statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. It shall be the duty of any person who has firsthand knowledge that a
dog, cat or other animal has bitten or injured any person in the
Township of Radnor to immediately report the facts and the
whereabouts of such dog, cat or other animal to the Department,
Animal Warden, or Police Department, and it shall be the duty of the
owner of any dog, cat or other animal to immediately confine and
isolate it in such a manner as will prevent it from escaping or running at
large. Upon receipt of such information, the Department, Animal
Warden, or Police Department shall advise the owner as to the
procedure to be followed with respect to further confinement and
examination of the dog, cat or other animal.
B. Confinement procedure of a currently vaccinated biting animal.
(1) If the animal is currently vaccinated against rabies and proof of
such vaccination is provided to the Department within 24 hours,
the animal must be confined by the owner for an observational
period of 10 days from the date on which the bite occurred.
Confinement may be at the home of the owner or at some other
location approved by the Director and shall be in such a manner as
will prevent it from running at large.
(2) If at any time during said ten-day observation period the dog, cat or
other animal develops signs indicative of illness, such fact shall be
communicated at once to the Department and the dog, cat or other
animal shall immediately be removed to a veterinary hospital
acceptable to the Department.
(3) If at any time after the dog, cat or other animal is placed in
confinement and it develops signs of rabies, it shall be disposed of
in a manner as the Director shall deem appropriate.
§ 115-3 RADNOR CODE § 115-4
C:280
§ 115-5. Reports of animals bitten or injured.
It shall be the duty of any person who has firsthand knowledge that a dog or
cat or other animal in Radnor Township has been bitten or otherwise injured
by or been exposed to or been in contact with a dog, cat or other animal
infected with or suspected of being infected with rabies to immediately
report the whereabouts of such dog, cat or animal to the Department,
Animal Warden, or Police Department.
(4) At the end of the ten-day observation period, the dog, cat or other
animal shall be examined by a duly licensed veterinarian employed
by the owner and a written result of such examination shall be
submitted by the owner within 24 hours to the Director. If the
report reveals no signs indicative of rabies, the dog, cat or other
animal shall be released from confinement.
C. Confinement procedures for an unvaccinated biting animal.
(1) Animals which are unvaccinated shall be confined for an
observation period of 10 days from the date when the bite occurred
in a veterinary hospital acceptable to the Director. The owner, if
any, shall submit the receipt for such an animal to the Department
or Police Department upon the same day it is placed in the hospital.
(2) If at any time during the ten-day observation period the dog, cat or
other animal develops signs indicative of rabies, such fact shall be
communicated by the owner (or, if no owner, by the head of the
veterinary hospital) at once to the Department and the dog, cat or
other animal shall be tested in a manner the Director deems
appropriate.
(3) At the end of the ten-day observation period the dog, cat, or other
animal will be examined by a duly licensed veterinarian employed
by the owner and a written report of the results of such
examination shall be submitted by the owner (or, if no owner, by the
head of the veterinary hospital) within 24 hours to the Department.
If the report reveals no signs indicative of rabies, the dog, cat or
other animal may be released from confinement to the owner after
having been properly vaccinated. If there is no owner of the dog,
cat or animal, it shall be disposed of in a humane manner and in
accordance with applicable statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
D. All expenses associated with the enforcement of Subsection C shall be
borne by the owner. If there is no owner, they shall be borne by the
Township.
§ 115-4 CHARTER § 115-6
C:281
§ 115-6. Quarantine and examination of animals wounded by highrisk
animals or having a wound of unknown origin.
Any animal bitten or scratched by either a wild mammal or a bat that is not
available for testing or that has sustained a wound of unknown origin should
be regarded as exposed to rabies. It shall be the duty of the owner of such
animal to follow the procedures set forth below:
A. Animals that are currently vaccinated against rabies shall be
revaccinated immediately and shall be kept at the owner's premises or
at a licensed veterinary facility for a period of 90 days from the date the
wound occurred. The observation period shall be carried out in such a
manner as will prevent the animal from escaping or running at large.
B. Unvaccinated animals, other than livestock, shall be euthanized
immediately. If the owner is unwilling to have this done, the
unvaccinated animal shall be vaccinated immediately and placed in
strict isolation for a period of six months. The quarantine will take place
in an approved animal facility or at home after inspection and approval
by the Township Health Officer. The procedures required for approval
of home quarantine are as follows:
(1) The animal must not have any possibility of getting outside of the
designated room in the home which has been chosen for
confinement.
(2) A quarantine sign, furnished by the Department, must be posted on
the door of the room where the animal is confined.
(3) There must be only one designated caretaker for the animal. If at
any time the caretaker becomes unable to care for the animal, the
caretaker shall surrender the animal to a veterinarian until the
caretaker can assume responsibility. The animal must not be able to
have contact with anyone who comes into the home or with any
other animal.
(4) The animal must wear a quarantine collar, or other acceptable
identification, provided by the Department. The owner will be
responsible for a fee to cover the agreed upon cost of identification.
The collar (or other identification) must not be removed or changed
until the quarantine period is over.
(5) The Township Health Officer will make periodic and unannounced
visits to ensure that the quarantine is being done as directed. If it is
discovered that the caretaker is not in compliance, with Subsection
B(1), (2) and (4), the home quarantine will immediately be
suspended and the animal must be brought to a veterinary facility
for the duration of the quarantine or must be euthanized.
(6) At the end of the six-month quarantine period, the owner must have
the animal examined by a veterinarian, and a certification that the
animal is free of rabies and properly vaccinated must be signed by
§ 115-6 RADNOR CODE § 115-6
C:282
the veterinarian and sent to the Director, Department of
Community Development.
(7) It is recommended that the caretaker discuss with his or her
personal physician the advisability of receiving rabies pre-exposure
vaccine.
(8) The notice of quarantine will be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the Township, posted on the Radnor
Township website, and/or included on the Community Bulletin
Board of the Township's televised Government Access Channel.
(9) Costs associated with the quarantine shall be borne by the animal's
owner.
C. Livestock shall be handled in accordance with the current
recommendations of the NASPHV Compendium of Animal Rabies
Control and the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture.
D. If at any time during the observation period an animal becomes ill, such
fact shall be communicated at once to the Director.
E. If at any time during the observation period an animal should die, the
owner shall immediately notify the Director and allow for the head of
the animal to be submitted for testing of rabies.
§ 115-6 CHARTER § 115-6
C:283

ARTICLE III
Control of Dogs and Cats
§ 115-7. Dogs at large.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog, unlicensed or licensed, to
permit such dog to run at large unaccompanied by the owner. The word
"owner," as used in this article, shall include every person having a right
of proprietorship or ownership in a dog and every person who keeps or
harbors or regularly feeds a dog, or has it in his care, and every person
who permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. A
dog shall be deemed "at large" if unaccompanied by the owner and not on a
leash.
§ 115-8. Disposal of excrement.
§ 115-9. Cats at large.
Regular feeding of a feral cat is discouraged unless part of a regular TNR
program.
§ 115-10. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any guide dogs
accompanying any blind person, or to animals used in any Fire or Police
Department activities of the Township, with the exception of licensing and
vaccination requirements.
§ 115-11. Public notification of confirmed rabies cases.
The Director of the Department shall immediately issue a notice informing
the public when a case of rabies has been confirmed in Radnor Township or
any contiguous municipality and emphasizing the prohibition against dogs
from running at large and urging owners of cats to keep them indoors.
The notice informing the public shall include publishing in a newspaper of
general circulation within the Township, posting on the Radnor Township
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat to allow excrement
from such animal to remain on any public or private street, gutter, alley,
tree, lawn, curb or sidewalk within the Township or upon the floors or
stairways of any building or property frequented by the public or used
in common by owners or tenants of such building. It shall be further
unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat to allow excrement from such
animal to remain on any private property or upon the grounds of any
public park or public area.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any animal to immediately
pick up and remove in entirety any excrement from said animal from
any public or private property and to provide for a sanitary means of
disposal.
§ 115-7 CHARTER § 115-11
C:285
website, and/or including on the Community Bulletin Board of the
Township's televised Government Access Channel.
§ 115-12. Injury to humans.
§ 115-13. Seizure and redemption.
It shall be the duty of the Animal Warden or Township Police to seize and
detain any dog, whether licensed or unlicensed, which is found running
at large either upon the streets or highways of the Township or upon the
property of other than an owner of such dog.
§ 115-14. Intent.
It is the intent that this chapter shall be supplemental to any laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania hereinbefore or hereinafter adopted
covering animals within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and specifically
in the Township of Radnor.
§ 115-15. Confinement of female dogs and cats in heat.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or the keeper of any female dog or cat to
permit such female dog or cat to go beyond the premises of her owner or
A. It shall be unlawful for any animal to injure any human being by biting,
jumping, knocking down, or attacking said human being, and the owner
of such an animal shall be guilty of a violation under this chapter.
B. Any unvaccinated animal that bites or injures a person may be
euthanized immediately, and the head shall be submitted for
examination.
A. Right of entry. The Animal Warden and/or Police Department are hereby
authorized and empowered to go upon any premises and enter any
building to seize and detain any dog which has been found running at
large unaccompanied by the owner or keeper, when the Animal Warden
and/or Police Department are in the immediate pursuit of such dog.
B. Notice of seizure. Any dog bearing a proper license tag seized by the
police or Animal Warden shall be detained and properly kept and fed,
and immediate notice, whether personal or by certified mail, shall be
given to the person in whose name the license was procured or his
agent to claim such dog within 10 days.
C. Payment of expenses. The owner of a dog shall pay all reasonable
expenses incurred by reason of its detention before the dog is returned.
D. Disposition of unclaimed dogs and cats. Dogs and cats not claimed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be disposed of in a
humane manner and in accordance with all applicable statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 115-11 RADNOR CODE § 115-15
C:286
keeper at any time she is in heat, unless such female dog or cat is properly
confined or under control.
§ 115-16. Noise.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit said dog to cause
annoyance to the citizens, residents or other persons lawfully in the
Township of Radnor by barking, yelping, howling or causing unseemly
noise.
§ 115-17. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Animal Warden and/
or Police Department. The owner of a dog or cat shall pay all reasonable
expenses incurred by reason of its detention before the dog or cat is
returned.
§ 115-18. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall pay a minimum
fine of $300, up to a maximum of $1,000, to the Township of Radnor,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Township as a result of the enforcement proceeding. Each day during
which any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate
violation and shall be punishable as such.
B. The Board of Commissioners or the Township Health Officer, with the
approval of the Board of Commissioners, may institute in the name of
the Township any appropriate action or proceedings to restrain, correct
or abate continuing violations of this Ordinance, or to prevent any
violations, any illegal act, conduct, or use in violation of this Ordinance.
The rights and remedies provided in this article are cumulative and in
addition to all other remedies provided by law.
§ 115-15 CHARTER § 115-18
C:287
Chapter 120
BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 156.
Food regulations — See Ch. 170.
Littering — See Ch. 190.
Pest control — See Ch. 214.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Sanitation — See Ch. 230.
Sewers — See Ch. 235.
Solid waste — See Ch. 240.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 115-18 RADNOR CODE § 115-18
C:288
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 120-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AIR GAP — The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to
a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
BACKFLOW — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substance
into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or
sources other than the approved source.
CONTAMINATION — Any physical, chemical or biological substance
present in the pool water which may adversely affect the health or safety of
the bather.
CROSS CONNECTION — Any physical arrangement connecting a:
DEPARTMENT — The Community Development Department of Radnor
Township.
D.E.R. — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
DIRECTOR — The Community Development Director or duly authorized
representative.
LIFEGUARD — A person appointed by the owner or manager to maintain
surveillance over the bathers on the deck or in the pool and to supervise
bather safety. The lifeguard shall meet the training requirements of this
chapter.
NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE — The National Electrical Code, published
by the National Fire Protection Association.109
OWNER — Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in a public bathing place and responsible for the continual
operation and maintenance of such facility in accordance with the terms of
this chapter.
PLUMBING CODE — The BOCA National Plumbing Code, published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc.110
Potable water system, directly or indirectly, with anything other than
another potable water system; or
A.
A swimming pool or spa pool to any potable or nonpotable water source
capable of contaminating the pool as a result of backflow.
B.
109. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 156, Electrical Standards.
110. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 218, Plumbing.
§ 120-1 CHARTER § 120-1
C:289
PUBLIC BATHING PLACE — Any outdoor or indoor place used for amateur,
professional or recreational swimming or relaxation, to include a swimming
pool, spa pool or wading pool, whether or not a fee is charged for the
admission or use of such facility. This definition is exclusive of a swimming
pool, spa pool or wading pool at a single- or two-family residence which is
used solely by the owner of the residence, family and personal guests.
REFUSE — All nonputrescible wastes generally regarded and classified as
rubbish, trash or junk or by similar designations which have been rejected
by the owner or possessor thereof as useless or worthless to him.
SEWAGE — Any substance which contains any of the waste products or
excrements or other discharges from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Any community or individual system, whether
publicly or privately owned, for the collection and disposal of sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature, including various devices for the
treatment of such sewage or industrial wastes.
SOURCE — A well, spring, cistern, infiltration gallery, stream, reservoir,
pond or lake from which, by any means, water is taken, either intermittently
or continuously, for use by the public.
SPA POOL — Any whirlpool, hot-tub or similar device, other than a
residential spa or hot tub, which is designed for relaxation or recreational
use, where the user is sitting, reclining or at rest and the pool is not drained,
cleaned or refilled after each use, which shall include but not be limited to
hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold water or mineral baths or air-induction
bubbles, in any combination, and is operated by the owner, regardless of
whether a fee is charged. Public spas and hot tubs may be individual units
or may be integrated into a larger swimming pool or bathing pool. A public
"spa pool" may, depending on its size, accommodate one or more persons.
"Spa pools" used in connection with a licensed medical practice, under the
direct supervision of qualified medical personnel, shall be excluded from the
requirements of this chapter.
SWIMMING POOL — Any structure, basin, chamber or tank containing an
artificial body of water for swimming, diving, relaxation or recreational
bathing and having a depth of two feet or more at any point and including
all associated facilities, but shall not include a spa pool.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
TURNOVER PERIOD — The minimum time necessary to circulate the entire
volume of the pool facility through the treatment system.
WADING POOL — Any artificial pool of water less than two feet deep and
intended for wading purposes.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets,
lakes, dammed water, ponds, springs and all other bodies of surface and
§ 120-1 RADNOR CODE § 120-1
C:290
underground water or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or
on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATER SUPPLY — A source or sources of water, as well as any and all water
treatment, storage, transmission and distribution facilities.
§ 120-1 CHARTER § 120-1
C:291

ARTICLE II
General Regulations
§ 120-2. Management.
The owner of a public bathing place shall be responsible for compliance
with the literal terms of this chapter and for maintaining the facility in
a clean and sanitary condition, so as not to create a threat to the public
health, safety and welfare. Equipment, operation and maintenance at all
public bathing places shall be such as to remove the danger of injury to
persons from drowning, falls, collisions, fires and nuisances of any kind.
§ 120-3. Permit required for construction; approval of plans.
Any owner who constructs or installs or intends to construct or install or
who desires to extend, alter or modify a public bathing place shall submit
plans and specifications for such work to the D.E.R. and the Community
Development Department and secure all required permits before beginning
the work or before permitting the work to be started. Any deviation from
approved plans and specifications, including those changes which affect the
water treatment process, shall first be approved, in writing, by the D.E.R.
and the Community Development Department.
§ 120-4. Hygiene regulations.
The following regulations are hereby established for the preservation of
health and the prevention of disease within public bathing places regulated
by this chapter:
A. Common use of drinking cups, towels, hair brushes or other toilet
articles shall be prohibited.
B. Any employee having a disease in a stage which is communicable or
likely to become so shall not be allowed to work at the public bathing
place until certified by a physician that he may return to work.
C. Persons with signs of illness or disease or with skin rashes or sores or
with bandages shall be excluded from public bathing places except
where certified by a physician not to have a disease in a communicable
stage.
D. Bathing suits and towels furnished to bathers shall be thoroughly
cleaned and dried each time they are used in such a manner as to
preclude the transmission of disease and shall be stored in a clean and
sanitary manner.
E. Bather preparation facilities shall be provided with separate dressing
facilities, showers, lavatories, toilets and appurtenances for each sex.
F. Interior walls and floors shall be surfaced with material which is readily
cleanable, and the floors shall be drained to prevent standing water.
§ 120-2 CHARTER § 120-4
C:293
§ 120-5. Plumbing and electrical standards.
§ 120-6. Garbage and refuse.
The owner of a public bathing place shall provide for the storage and
collection of all garbage and refuse in a sanitary manner and as often as
necessary to prevent a health hazard public nuisance.
§ 120-7. Arthropod and rodent control.
Adequate measures for the control of arthropods and rodents which the
Department deems a public health hazard shall be taken in a manner
satisfactory to the Department.
G. The owner shall provide drinking water facilities at all public bathing
places and ensure that water used for drinking, food preparation,
cleaning or personal hygiene is provided from a supply approved by the
D.E.R.
H. Where food service is provided, the food service facilities and
operations shall comply with the Radnor Township ordinances relating
to food service.111
A. All plumbing connections and modifications to existing plumbing
facilities at or to any public bathing place shall be performed in
conformance with provisions of Chapter 218, Plumbing.
B. Electrical installations and modifications to existing electrical facilities
at or to any public bathing place shall be performed in conformance
with provisions of Chapter 156, Electrical Standards. Electrical
installations at all public bathing places, and any future additions or
modifications to such installations, prior to being placed in service and
every three years thereafter, shall be inspected and approved by an
electrical inspection agency approved by the Township. Evidence of
such approval shall be filed with the Community Development
Department by the owner.
A. Storage. All garbage and refuse containing food wastes shall, prior to
disposal, be kept in leakproof, nonabsorbent, rust- and corrosionresistant
containers of adequate number, which shall be kept covered
with tight-fitting lids. Any other manner of garbage and refuse storage
may be used if approved by the Community Development Department.
All other refuse shall be stored in containers, of sufficient numbers and
size, in a manner so as to prevent arthropod or rodent problems and
other nuisances.
B. Cleaning of area. Adequate cleaning facilities shall be provided, and
each container, room or area shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
emptying or removal of garbage and refuse.
111. Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Food Regulations.
§ 120-4 RADNOR CODE § 120-8
C:294
§ 120-8. Sewage disposal.
All sewage systems serving public bathing places shall be subject to all
applicable Township and D.E.R. regulations. The method for discharge of
filter backwash and other pool waste water into the waters of the
commonwealth shall be approved in the D.E.R. permit or by other applicable
regulations of the D.E.R.
§ 120-9. Reporting death, injury or illness.
The owner shall:
§ 120-10. Maintenance of facilities not in use.
The owners of all public bathing places not in use shall maintain one of the
following conditions:
§ 120-11. Storage of pool chemicals.
Owners shall ensure that chemicals are properly stored in a designed area
to minimize safety risk.
A. Notify the Community Development Department within 24 hours of a
drowning, near drowning, death or serious injury occurring at the
facility.
B. Notify the Department of any incident creating a potential problem of
health or safety significance.
A. Inoperable facilities shall be locked and secured at all times to prevent
uncontrolled access.
B. Facilities which are abandoned shall be filled with material subject to
the approval of the Township.
C. All pools shall have a means of being adequately secure, other than a
"Pool Closed" sign, when supervision is not available.
§ 120-8 CHARTER § 120-11
C:295

ARTICLE III
Swimming Pools
§ 120-12. Water supply and maintenance.
A. Water supply. The water used at all public bathing places for swimming
or recreational bathing shall meet the bacteriological, chemical,
physical and radiological standards of the Department of
Environmental Resources.
B. Circulation. Water shall be introduced to and withdrawn from the pool
so as to provide uniform circulation and uniform disinfectant residual
throughout the entire pool.
C. Recirculation and filtration. All pools shall be provided with a
recirculation and filtration system, except where there is a flow of water
of the quality and quantity through the pool which at all times conforms
to the provisions of this chapter.
D. Turnover period. The turnover period for wading pools and swimming
pools shall be governed by the D.E.R. permit.
E. Clarity of pool. All water in the pool shall be sufficiently clear to permit
a black disc, six inches in diameter on a white field, when placed on the
bottom of the pool at the deepest point to be clearly visible from the
runway or deck around the deep area of the pool.
F. Overflow facilities. Overflow facilities shall be provided and water level
in the pool maintained to effectively remove scum, debris or other
floating matter.
G. Swimming pool contamination. The water in a swimming pool or
wading pool shall be considered contaminated when one of the
following conditions exist:
(1) More than one ten-milliliter portion of any sample shows a positive
test for coliform organisms, when the multitube fermentation
technique is used, or more than one coliform per 50 milliliters,
when the membrane filter test is used.
(2) Two consecutive samples show in a positive test for coliform
organisms in any ten-milliliter portion of any sample, when the
multitube fermentation technique is used, or more than one
coliform per 50 milliliters, when the membrane filter is used.
(3) Two of any 10 consecutive samples show a positive test for coliform
organisms in any of the ten-milliliter portions of any sample, when
the multitube fermentation technique is used, or more than one
coliform per 50 milliliters, when the membrane filter test is used.
(4) When any harmful level of disease-producing organisms, toxic
chemicals or adverse physical conditions are present in the water.
§ 120-12 CHARTER § 120-12
C:297
H. Disinfection of pool water. When chlorine or a hypochlorite compound is
used for disinfection, the free chlorine residual in the water in all parts
of the pool when in use shall be not less than one point zero (1.0) parts
per million and the pH value of the water shall be not less than seven
point two (7.2) and not more than eight point two (8.2). Other
disinfecting materials or methods may be used after approval by the
Department of Environmental Resources.
I. Testing kits and procedure. Testing of pool water shall be performed
and records kept in accordance with the following regulations:
(1) Testing kits shall be provided for making the necessary tests for
disinfectant residuals and pH and must be used according to the
manufacturer's recommendations. Before opening for the day's
activity and when the pool is in use, tests for disinfectant residuals
and pH shall be made as follows: outdoor pools, every hour; and
indoor pools, every two hours. The results of these tests shall be
recorded on forms satisfactory to the Department of Community
Development and shall be readily available at the pool side for
inspection at any time.
(2) The owner shall be responsible for the collection and examination
of samples for the purity of the water used for swimming or bathing
as required by Subsection J of this section. A bacteriological
analysis shall be made at least once each week of a sample
collected during the period of maximum use of the public bathing
place. Additional analyses of additional samples shall be furnished
by the licensee upon notification by the Community Development
Department.
(3) Copies of the reports of analyses shall be maintained by the
licensee for at least two years and made available to the
Community Development Department upon request.
J. Laboratory testing. Laboratory tests of water shall be performed by
competent personnel in accordance with the procedure provided in the
current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health
Association and the American Water Works Association. Conformity to
these standards shall be evidenced by a statement from the laboratory
to such effect. Upon notification by the laboratory that pool water does
not meet the standards for safe and sanitary swimming pool water, the
pools shall be immediately closed to the public until the problem has
been corrected. The Community Development Department shall be
contacted when this occurs. This procedure is to be documented on the
daily records indicating the corrective measures taken.
K. Gas chlorination. Where gas chlorination equipment is installed at
either outdoor or indoor pools, the equipment shall be housed in a
separate room equipped with proper ventilation and all safety devices,
§ 120-12 RADNOR CODE § 120-12
C:298
§ 120-13. Lifeguards. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 93-03;
3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-02]
Except where otherwise indicated in this section, the owner shall be
responsible for providing lifeguards at all swimming pools and wading pools
in accordance with the following regulations:
§ 120-14. Emergency equipment.
The following emergency equipment shall be provided by the owner:
as approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources in its permit.
A. Number. At least one certified lifeguard per 50 bathers shall be on duty
at the waterside at all times when the public bathing place is open to
use by bathers and shall not be assigned other tasks that will divert his
or her attention from the safety of the bathers. When a swimming pool
or wading pool is open to the public, the certified lifeguard shall have
an unobstructed view of the entire swimming pool and wading pool
from a certified lifeguards' assigned station. If the certified lifeguard
does not have an unobstructed view of both the swimming pool and
wading pool, an additional certified lifeguard shall be on duty to guard
only the wading pool.
B. Qualifications. Lifeguards shall be capable swimmers, skilled in
lifesaving methods and in methods of artificial resuscitation as
evidenced by their possession of a currently valid certificate or other
proof of proficiency from the American Red Cross, the Young Men's
Christian Association (YMCA) or other recognized training agency the
Community Development Department determines equivalent. By April
30, 1992, all lifeguards must show current certification of standard first
aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and, by January 1, 1994,
certification of lifeguard training through the American Red Cross or
other training the Community Development Department shall
determine equivalent.
C. Lifeguard stands. Lifeguard stands shall be provided consistent with
the provisions of the D.E.R. permit.
D. Exception. The requirement for providing a lifeguard shall be at the
discretion of the owner where the facility is an indoor swimming pool
with a maximum water depth not in excess of five feet, available for
adult use only, and monitored by a television camera at all times if the
facility is open. Where no lifeguard is provided, such facility shall be
posted at each point of access with signage which clearly indicates no
lifeguard is on duty and that individuals who use the facility swim at
their own risk.
A. A telephone at poolside, with a prominently displayed list of emergency
medical service response telephone numbers.
§ 120-12 CHARTER § 120-14
C:299
B. A supplied first aid kit, standard twenty-four-unit.
C. Blankets for emergency use.
D. A backboard with means to secure victim to board and provide
immobilization of head, neck and back.
E. Devices to aid victims in distress as follows:
(1) For pools with width less than 24 feet, rescue poles one-half (1/2)
the pool width or more.
(2) For pools with width 24 feet or more, rescue poles 12 feet or more
in length.
(3) Any other reaching devices, which may include poles, ropes and
any reasonable means to extend a person's reach.
(4) Flotation devices, which may include ring buoys, life jackets or any
flotation device that can support an adult in water. A rescue tube at
each lifeguard station shall be required.
§ 120-14 RADNOR CODE § 120-14
C:300
ARTICLE IV
Spa Pools
§ 120-15. Operation.
The owner or person responsible for the operation of a spa or hot tub
shall be knowledgeable in the operation of the equipment, procedures
for performing the necessary water quality tests and safety checks and
appropriate emergency procedures. The owner shall make available for
employees a detailed written manual on the operation and normal
maintenance procedures and be responsible for disinfectant and water
treatment operations. Unauthorized persons shall not attempt disinfectant
and water treatment.
§ 120-16. Water supply and maintenance.
A. Water quality. The water used at all spa pools shall meet the
bacteriological, chemical, physical and radiological standards of this
chapter.
B. Circulation. Water shall be introduced to and withdrawn from the pool
so as to provide uniform circulation and uniform disinfectant residual
throughout the entire spa pool.
C. Recirculation and filtration. Spa pools shall be provided with a
recirculation and filtration system, except where there is a flow of water
of the quality and quantity through the spa pool which at all times
conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
D. Clarity of the pool. All water in the spa pool shall be sufficiently clear to
permit a black disc, six inches in diameter on a white field, when placed
on the bottom of the pool at the deepest point, to be clearly visible.
E. Contamination. Water in a spa pool shall be considered contaminated
when one of the following conditions exist:
(1) More than one ten-milliliter portion of any sample shows a positive
test for coliform organisms, when multitube fermentation
technique is used, or more than one coliform per 50 milliliters,
when the membrane filter test is used.
(2) Two consecutive samples show in a positive test for coliform
organisms in any ten-milliliter portion of any sample, when the
multitube fermentation technique is used, or more than one
coliform per 50 milliliters, when the membrane filter is used.
(3) Two of any 10 consecutive samples show a positive test for coliform
organisms in any of the ten-milliliter portions of any sample, when
the multitube fermentation technique is used, or more than one
coliform per 50 milliliters, when the membrane filter test is used.
§ 120-15 CHARTER § 120-16
C:301
§ 120-17. Warning signs.
(4) When any harmful level of disease-producing organisms, toxic
chemicals or adverse physical conditions are present in the water.
F. Laboratory testing. Laboratory tests of water shall be performed by
competent personnel in accordance with the procedure provided in the
current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health
Association and the American Water Works Association. Conformity
with these standards shall be evidenced by a statement from the
laboratory to such effect. Upon notification by the laboratory that water
does not meet standards for safe and sanitary pool water, the spa pool
shall be immediately closed to the public until the problem has been
corrected. Upon receipt of such notification, the owner shall also
provide notification to the Community Development Department. This
procedure shall be documented on the daily records indicating the
corrective action taken.
G. Turnover period. Spa pools and hot tubs must be capable of minimum
turnover rates of 30 minutes.
H. Cleaning and refilling. Spa pools shall be emptied and cleaned as often
as necessary. The time will be directly related to the length of time the
pool is in operation and the number of people using it.
I. Disinfection. When chlorine or a hypochlorite compound is used for
disinfection, the free chlorine residual in the water of the spa pool shall
not be less than two point five (2.5) parts per million. When bromine is
used, the minimum residual shall not be less than three point five (3.5)
parts per million. The maximum residual for the spa pool may be raised
to 10 parts per million or the manufacturer's recommendations
(whichever is less). The pH value of the water shall be maintained
between seven point two (7.2) and eight point zero (8.0), depending on
the amount of free available chlorine or bromine.
J. Temperature. Controls shall be provided to prevent water temperatures
in excess of 104° F. The controls shall be accessible only to the owner or
person responsible for the operation of the spa pool.
K. Testing kits and procedures. Testing of water and keeping of records
shall be consistent with § 120-12I and J of this chapter, with the
exception that pool water shall be tested on an hourly basis.
A. A precaution sign shall be mounted adjacent to the entrance to the spa
pool or hot tub, containing the following warnings:
(1) Prohibition of use by persons under the influence of alcohol or
drugs.
(2) Caution that persons suffering from heart disease, diabetes or high
blood pressure should contact a physician before use.
§ 120-16 RADNOR CODE § 120-17
C:302
§ 120-18. Attendants.
Spa pools and hot tubs shall be located so that they are easily observable by
attendants at the facility. At least one attendant shall be proficient in first
aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation as evidenced by current certification
by the American Red Cross, YMCA or other equivalent training acceptable
to the Department.
(3) Caution for women who are or may be pregnant to seek the advice
of a physician regarding use and to limit the women's time in the
pool.
(4) Persons should limit the stay in the pool to 15 minutes in any one
session.
(5) Prohibition of food or drink in the water.
(6) Location of the nearest telephone or emergency notification
number.
(7) Location of an audible emergency alarm to alert others in the area
of a need to respond.
(8) Not to be operated at water temperatures in excess of 104° F.
B. These requirements shall be conveyed by any combination of words,
pictures or symbols.
§ 120-17 CHARTER § 120-18
C:303

ARTICLE V
License Requirements
§ 120-19. Application.
Every owner shall be required to file an application and secure a license
from the Community Development Department. Such application shall
include the name, address and telephone number of the owner, address of
the public bathing place and any other information which the Community
Development Department may require to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. The application shall also be accompanied by the
required license fee and a copy of a valid permit issued by the D.E.R. for the
operation of the public bathing place.
§ 120-20. Change in ownership; transferability.
Where there is a change in ownership of a public bathing place, the new
owner shall be required to file the appropriate information and secure a
new license from the Community Development Department as required by
§ 120-19. Licenses shall not be transferable.
§ 120-21. License fees. [Amended 11-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-32]
An application shall be filed by the owner and fees paid in accordance with
Chapter 162, Fees, on an annual basis on or before June 1 of each year.
§ 120-22. Posting of license.
The owner shall be required to post the Township and D.E.R. license in the
entryway to the public bathing place or in any other conspicuous location
approved by the Director.
§ 120-23. Revocation of license.
If the owner fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, which failure,
in the opinion of the Township, endangers the life, safety or health of the
users of the public bathing place, the Department may suspend or revoke
the owner's license. Notice of a decision to suspend or revoke any license
shall be provided, in writing, to the owner, by registered mail, citing the
basis for such action and the effective date for suspension or revocation.
The owner may appeal the Township's decision to the Board of Health,
provided that such appeal is filed within 10 calendar days from the effective
date of suspension or revocation. Such appeal shall be in letter form, state
the basis for such appeal and be filed with the Director of Community
Development. The Board of Health shall meet within 30 calendar days for
the purpose of conducting a hearing and rendering a decision.
§ 120-19 CHARTER § 120-23
C:305

ARTICLE VI
Violations and Penalties
§ 120-24. Violations; notification and correction.
Failure by the owner to secure a license as required by this chapter or
operating after suspension or revocation of a license shall constitute a
violation of this chapter. When written notice of a violation of this chapter
has been served upon the owner, such violation shall be corrected as
required by such notice.
§ 120-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall pay a fine to the Township of
Radnor of not more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, be imprisoned in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 30 days. Each day during which any violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such.
§ 120-24 CHARTER § 120-25
C:307
Chapter 125
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of standard codes of technical
regulations — See Charter § 3.06.
Code Appeals Board — See Ch. 15.
Building energy conservation — See Ch. 129.
Existing buildings — See Ch. 132.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 134.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 144A.
Contractors — See Ch. 145.
Design review — See Ch. 150.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 156.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 158.
Fees — See Ch. 162.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
Fuel gas — See Ch. 172.
Grading, excavations and fills — See Ch. 175.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Sewers — See Ch. 235.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 255.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 120-25 RADNOR CODE § 120-25
C:308
ARTICLE I
Building Standards
[Adopted 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-44;112 2-22-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-05]
§ 125-1. Adoption of code by reference.
Certain documents on file in the office of the Secretary of the Township of
Radnor, being marked and designated as the "2009 International Building
Code" as published by the International Code Council, Inc., are hereby
adopted as the Building Code of Radnor Township, Delaware County, in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings and structures
as herein provided; and each and all of the provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of the 2009 International Building Code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this article, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes as set forth in this article.
§ 125-2. Additions, insertions, deletions and changes to code.
The following sections and subsections of the aforementioned 2009
International Building Code, are hereby added, amended, changed and
clarified as set forth below.
A. Chapter 1, Administration.
(1) Section 101, General.
(a) Subsection 101.1, Title. Insert "Township of Radnor" as the
name of the jurisdiction.
(b) Subsection 101.4.3, Plumbing. Delete the last three lines
beginning with the words "The provisions of."
(2) Section 103, Department of Building Safety.
(a) Delete Section 103 entirely.
(3) Section 104, Duties and Powers of Building Official.
(a) Delete Subsection 104.1, General, and substitute with the
following:
104.1 General. It shall be the responsibility of the Director
of Community Development or his duly authorized
representative to enforce the provisions of this code.
(4) Section 105, Permits.
(a) Subsection 105.2, Work exempt from permit. Add the following
to line five: A zoning/use permit shall be required for any of the
112. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Building Standards, adopted
7-15-1996 by Ord. No. 96-18.
§ 125-1 CHARTER § 125-2
C:309
exempt work listed in this article as determined by the Building
Official.
(b) Amend No. 4. Under "Building" to read:
4. Retaining walls that are not over four feet in height
measured from the lowest level of grade to the top of the wall,
unless the wall supports a surcharge or impounding Class I, II
or III-A liquids.
(5) Section 109, Fees.
(a) Delete Subsection 109.2, Schedule of permit fees, and
substitute with the following:
109.2 Fees. No permit to begin work for new construction,
alterations, repair, removal or other building operations shall
be issued until the fees established by the Board of
Commissioners have been paid in accordance with Chapter
162 of the Township Code and a permit issued by the
Department of Community Development, nor shall an
amendment to a permit necessitating an additional fee,
because of an increase in the estimated cost involved, be
approved until the additional fee shall have been paid and a
permit approved and issued by the Department of Community
Development.
(b) Subsection 109.4, Work commencing before permit issuance.
Delete the word "shall" on line four and replace with "may."
(c) Delete Subsection 109.6, Refunds.
(6) Section 111, Certificate of Occupancy.
(a) Delete Subsection 111.2, Certificate issued, and substitute
with the following:
111.2 Certificate issued. After the Building Official inspects
the building or structure and finds no violations of the
provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the
Department, the Building Official shall issue a certificate of
occupancy.
(7) Section 113, Board of Appeals.
(a) Delete the entire Section 113, Board of Appeals, and substitute
with the following:
§ 125-2 RADNOR CODE § 125-2
C:310
SECTION 113
APPEALS
113.1 General. Whenever the owner or builder of any
building about to be or in the course of being erected, altered
or repaired, or any other person takes exception to the
decision of the Code Official in refusing to approve the
manner of construction or the type of materials to be used in
the erection, alteration or repair of any building or structure,
or to his decision as to the occupation or use of any building or
structure, or as to its safety or compliance with the provisions
of this code, such owner or builder or duly authorized agent
may, within 10 days after such decision, take an appeal to
the Code Appeals Board. Such appeal shall be in writing,
state the decision of the Code Official and the reason for
taking exception thereto and shall be filed with the Township
Secretary. The Code Appeals Board shall, within 30 days from
the date of filing, fix a date, time and location to consider the
appeal and to allow the person to be heard if so desired. A
prompt decision shall be heard by the Code Appeals Board
and duly recorded, with such decision being final.
(8) Section 114, Violations.
(a) Delete Subsection 114.3, Prosecution of violation, and
substitute with the following:
114.3 Prosecution of violations. If the notice of violation is
not complied with within the time specified in the notice, the
Code Official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law
or in equity to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, or to
require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy
of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this
code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
(b) Delete Subsection 114.4, Violation penalties, in its entirety and
substitute with the following.
114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate
a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or
repair a building or structure in violation of any approved
plan, application for permit or directive of the Code Official
shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
B. Chapter 2, Definitions.
(1) Section 202, Definitions.
§ 125-2 CHARTER § 125-2
C:311
(a) Amend the definition of "Building Official" to read as follows:
BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Director of Community
Development charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or his duly authorized
representative.
(b) Add the definition of "Department" to read as follows:
DEPARTMENT. The Department of Community Development
of Radnor Township or any authorized agent or employee
thereof.
(c) Change the definition of "Height, building" (see Chapter 5,
Section 502) to read as follows:
HEIGHT, BUILDING. The vertical distance from the average
grade (the average of the grades taken at twenty-foot
intervals around the building perimeter) to the top of the
highest roof beams of a flat roof or to the mean level of
a sloped roof, provided that chimneys and spires shall not
be included in measuring the height. Elevator, stair and
equipment penthouses, tanks and air-conditioning towers
shall not be included. The height shall be measured from
finished grade, but such measurement shall not be made from
a point higher than eight feet above original grade.
(d) Add the definition of "Township" to read as follows:
TOWNSHIP. The Township of Radnor in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
C. Chapter 9, Fire protection systems.
(1) Section 903, Automatic Sprinkler Systems.
(a) Delete Subsections 903.2.1 through 903.2.10 and substitute
the following:
903.2.1 Use Groups A, B, E, M, S and U. In all buildings or
structures exceeding 1,000 square feet in gross floor area.
Exception: S-2 open parking garages.
903.2.2 Use Groups R, F, H, I. In all buildings or structures
or portions thereof.
D. Chapter 16, Structural Design.
(1) Section 1612, Flood Loads.
(a) Subsection 1612.3, Establishment of flood hazard areas. Insert
the following on line seven: "Township of Radnor" as name of
jurisdiction, and "May 2, 1995" as date of issuance.
§ 125-2 RADNOR CODE § 125-2
C:312
E. Chapter 33, Safeguards during construction.
(1) Section 3303, Demolition.
(a) Insert a new Subsection 3303.7 to read as follows:
3303.7 Certificate of extermination. A certificate of
extermination by a recognized exterminating/termite control
company addressing the existence of any wood destroying
insects, rodents, or other harmful insects or pest life shall be
received prior to the issuance of a demolition permit.
(b) Insert a new Subsection 3303.8 to read as follows:
3303.8 Shade Tree Ordinance. Prior to the issuance of
a demolition permit, applicant shall demonstrate compliance
with the demolition provisions of Ordinance No. 2003-21,
Shade Tree Ordinance.113
F. Chapter 34, Existing structures.
(1) (EB) Section 3403, Additions, Alterations, or Repairs.
(a) Insert a new Subsection 3403.5 to read as follows:
3403.5 Fire suppression systems. The requirements of
Section 903, Automatic Sprinkler Systems, as amended by
this article, shall apply to any existing buildings or structures
exceeding 1,000 square feet in gross floor area where
substantial alteration or repair occurs under a valid building
permit.
(2) (EB) Section 3412, Compliance Alternatives.
(a) Subsection 3412.2, Applicability. Insert the following on line
one: "30 days following the adoption of this article."
(b) Subsection 3412.4, Investigation and evaluation. Insert the
words "when required by the Code Official" at the end of the
sentence on line four.
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 263, Trees.
§ 125-2 CHARTER § 125-2
C:313

ARTICLE II
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Standards
[Adopted 2-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-13114]
§ 125-3. Adoption of code by reference.
Certain documents on file in the office of the Secretary of the Township
of Radnor, being marked and designated as the "International Residential
Code, 2009 Edition," are hereby adopted as the One- and Two-Family
Dwelling Code for the Township of Radnor, Delaware County, in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the purpose of establishing minimum
standards to protect occupants of residential buildings covered by this
code, and each and all of the provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of the International Residential Code, 2009 Edition, are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this article, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes as prescribed herein.
§ 125-4. Additions, insertions, deletions and changes to code.
The following sections and subsections of the International Residential
Code, 2009 Edition, are hereby added, deleted, amended and clarified as
set forth below.
A. Chapter 1, Administration.
(1) Section R101, Title, Scope and Purpose.
(a) Subsection R101.1, Title. Insert "Township of Radnor" as the
name of the jurisdiction.
(2) Section R103, Department of Building Safety.
(a) Delete Subsections R103.1 through R103.3 and substitute with
the following:
R103.1 General. The Director of Community Development or
any authorized agent or employee thereof shall be designated
as the Code Official for the purposes of this code.
R103.2 Appointment. The Code Official and employees of
the Department of Community Development than be
appointed in accordance with the personnel procedures and
policies of the Township of Radnor.
(3) Section R104, Duties and powers of the Building Official.
(a) Delete Subsection R104.1, General, and substitute with the
following:
114. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, One- and Two-Family Dwelling
Standards, adopted 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-06.
§ 125-3 CHARTER § 125-4
C:315
R104.1 General. It shall be the responsibility of the Director
of Community Development or his duly authorized
representative to enforce the provisions of this code.
(4) Section R105, Permits.
(a) Amend Subsection R105.2, Work exempt from permits, as
follows:
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Add the following
language to line six: The Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code Act 45 exempts the following from construction/building
permits; however, a zoning/use permit may be required by the
Building Official.
(b) Amend No. 1. under "Building" to read:
1. One story detached structures with a building area less
than 200 square feet if accessory to a detached one-family
dwelling (e.g., private garages, greenhouses, sheds, and
carports).
(c) Amend No. 3. under "Building" to read:
3. Retaining walls that are not over four feet in height
measured from the lowest level of grade to the top of the
wall, unless the wall supports a surcharge.
(d) Add new Nos. 11 through 18.
11. Manufactured or industrialized housing shipped from the
factory under Section 901(a) of the act [35 P.S.
7210.901(a)] as provided in 403.25 (relating to
manufactured and industrialized housing).
12. Replacement of glass in any window or door. The
replacement glass shall comply with the minimum
requirements of this code.
13. Installation and replacement of a window, door, garage
door, storm window and storm door in the same opening
if the dimensions or framing of the original opening are
not altered. The installation of means of egress and
emergency escape windows may be made in the same
opening, without altering the dimensions or framing of the
original opening, if the required height, width, or net clear
opening of the previous window or door assembly is not
reduced.
14. Replacement of existing roof material that does not
exceed 25% of the total roof area performed within any
twelve-month period.
15. Replacement of existing siding.
§ 125-4 RADNOR CODE § 125-4
C:316
16. Repair or replacement of any part of a porch or stoop
which does not structurally support a roof located above
the porch or stoop.
17. Installation of additional roll or batt insulation.
18. Replacement of exterior rain water gutters and leaders.
(5) Section R108, Fees.
(a) Delete Subsection R108.1, Payment of fees, and substitute with
the following:
R108.1 Permit fees. No permit to begin work for new
construction, alterations, repair, removal or other building
operations shall be issued until permit fees have been paid in
accordance with Chapter 162 of the Township Code.
(6) Section R110, Certificate of Occupancy.
(a) Delete Subsection R1103, Certificate issued, and substitute
with the following:
R110.3 Certificate issued. After the Building Official
inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of
the provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by
the Department, the Building Official shall issue a certificate
of occupancy.
(7) Section R112, Board of Appeals.
(a) Delete this section and insert the following new section:
SECTION R112
MEANS OF APPEAL
R112.1 General. Any person aggrieved by a decision or
interpretation by the Building Official made under provisions
of this code may, in person or through his duly authorized
agent or attorney, file an appeal within 10 days after such
decision with the Code Appeals Board. Such appeal shall be
in writing, state the decision of the Building Official and the
reasons for the exception taken thereto and shall be filed with
the Township Secretary. The Code Appeals Board shall, within
30 days from the date of filing, fix a date, time and location
to consider the appeal, and to allow the person to be heard if
he states his desire to do so in the written appeal. A prompt
decision shall be rendered by the Code Appeals Board and
duly recorded, with such decision being final.
(8) Section R113, Violations.
§ 125-4 CHARTER § 125-4
C:317
(a) Delete Subsection R113.4, Violation penalties, and substitute
with the following:
R113.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation
who shall violate any provision of this code shall, upon
conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
B. Chapter 2, Definitions.
(1) Section R202, Definitions.
(a) Amend the definition of "Building Official" to read as follows:
BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Director of Community
Development charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or his duly authorized
representative.
(b) Insert the definition of "Township" to read as follows:
TOWNSHIP. The Township of Radnor, Delaware County, in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Chapter 3, Building Planning.
(1) Section R301, Design Criteria.
(a) Table R301.2 (1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria,
insert the following:
Ground Snow Load: 25.
Wind Speed (mph): 90.
Seismic Design Category: C.
Weathering: severe.
Frost Line Depth: 36 inches.
Termite: moderate to heavy.
Winter Design Temp (F.): 14.
Ice Shield Underlayment Required: yes.
Flood Hazards: FIRM.
Air Freezing Index: 1000.
Mean Annual Temp (F.): 54.
D. Chapter 26, General Plumbing Requirements.
(1) Section P2603, Structural Piping Protection.
(a) P2603.6.1, Sewer depth. Insert the number 24 in line three and
line five.
§ 125-4 RADNOR CODE § 125-4
C:318
E. Chapter 32, Traps.
(1) Section 3201, Fixture Traps.
(a) P3201.4, Building traps. Delete in its entirety and substitute
with the following:
P3201.4 Building traps. Every building connected to the
sanitary sewer system shall have installed a cast from single
vent running trap with a cast iron vent riser pipe. A minimum
size of four inches shall be used. The vents or fresh air intake
riser pipe shall be carried to grade and terminated with an
approved cap.
F. Chapter 41, Swimming Pools.
(1) Section E4101, General.
(a) E4101.1, Scope. Add the following: The provisions for the
design, construction, and barrier requirements for swimming
pools, spas, and hot tubs are contained in Appendix G of this
code and shall be incorporated and adopted as part of this
entire article.
G. Appendices.
(1) The following appendices shall be incorporated and adopted as
part of this entire article:
(a) Appendix A (IFGS), Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping.
(b) Appendix B (IFGS), Sizing of Venting Systems Serving
Appliances Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category 1 Appliances,
and Appliances Listed For Use and Type B Vents.
(c) Appendix C (IFGS), Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and
Direct - Vent Venting Systems.
(d) Appendix E, Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings.
(e) Appendix F, Radon Control Methods.
(f) Appendix G, Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs.
§ 125-4 CHARTER § 125-4
C:319
Chapter 129
BUILDING ENERGY CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
§ 129-1. Administration of standards.
The Township of Radnor hereby elects to administer the provisions of
the act of December 15, 1980 (No. 222), known as the "Building Energy
Conservation Act"115 for Use Group R-3 buildings as defined therein.
§ 129-2. Powers of Township.
The Township of Radnor, in electing to administer the provision of Act 222
under Section 501,116 shall exercise the same powers conferred upon the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Community Affairs by the
Act, including the power to institute proceedings for violations of the Act,
with the exception those specified in Sections 301 and 303 and in Chapter
4.117
§ 129-3. Additional procedures; Board of Variances.
The Township of Radnor, in addition, may exercise such other
administrative and enforcement procedures as it shall deem necessary to
effect the purpose of Act 222,118 but not limited to prior plan approval,
building permit requirements and inspections during the course of
construction. Further, there shall be a Board of Variances established to
make determinations on request for variance from the energy conservation
standards contained in Act 222 or as promulgated by the commonwealth
with the approval of the State Building Energy Conservation Committee,
and said Board is authorized exclusive jurisdiction to grant such variances,
Section 307(a) of Act 222119 notwithstanding.
115. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7201.101 et seq.
116. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7201.501.
117. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. §§ 7201.301, 7201.303 and 7201.401 et seq.
118. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7201.101 et seq.
119. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7201.307(a).
§ 125-4 RADNOR CODE § 129-3
C:320
Chapter 132
BUILDINGS, EXISTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of standard codes of technical
regulations — See Charter § 3.06.
Code Appeals Board — See Ch. 15.
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 134.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 144A.
Contractors — See Ch. 145.
Design review — See Ch. 150.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 156.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 158.
Fees — See Ch. 162.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
Fuel gas — See Ch. 172.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Sewers — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 132-1. Adoption of code by reference.
Certain documents on file in the office of the Secretary of the Township of
Radnor, being marked and designated as the 2009 International Existing
Building Code, are hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of Radnor
Township, Delaware County, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for
the purpose of establishing minimum regulations governing the repair,
alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing
buildings as herein provided; and each and all of the provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the 2009 International Existing Building Code are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set forth
in this chapter with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as
prescribed by this chapter.
§ 132-2. Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes to code.
The following sections and subsections of the 2009 International Existing
Building Code are hereby added, amended, changed, and clarified as set
forth below.
A. Chapter 1, Administration.
(1) Section 101, General.
(a) In Subsection 101.1, Title, insert "Township of Radnor" as the
name of the jurisdiction.
(b) Insert a new Subsection 101.9 to read as follows:
§ 129-3 CHARTER § 132-2
C:321
101.9 Terms. Whenever in the Existing Building Code a
municipality is mentioned and no name is given, said
municipality shall be construed to mean the Township of
Radnor; and when a state is mentioned, the same shall mean
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and when the
Department of Building Safety is mentioned, the same shall
mean the Department of Community Development.
(2) Section 103, Department of Building Safety.
(a) Delete Subsections 103.1 through 103.3 and substitute with
the following:
103.1 General. The Director of Community Development or
any authorized agent or employee thereof shall be designated
as the Code Official for the purposes of this code.
103.2 Appointment. The Code Official and employees of the
Department of Community Development shall be appointed in
accordance with the personnel procedures and policies of the
Township of Radnor.
(3) Section 104, Duties and Powers of Code Official.
(a) Delete Subsection 104.1, General, and substitute with the
following:
104.1 General. It shall be the responsibility of the Director of
Community Development or his authorized representative to
enforce the provisions of this code.
(4) Section 108, Fees.
(a) Delete Subsection 108.1, Payment of fees, and substitute with
the following:
108.1 Permit fees. No permit to begin work for additions,
alterations, repair, removal or other building operations shall
be issued until permit fees have been paid in accordance with
Chapter 162 of the Township Code.
(b) Subsection 108.4, Work commencing before permit issuance.
Delete the word "shall" on line four and replace with the word
"may."
(c) Delete Subsection 108.6, Refunds.
(5) Section 110, Certificate of Occupancy.
(a) Delete Subsection 110.2, Certificate issued, and replace with
the following:
§ 132-2 RADNOR CODE § 132-2
C:322
110.2 Certificate issued. After the Code Official inspects the
building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions
of this code or other laws that are enforced by the
Department, the Code Official shall issue a certificate of
occupancy.
(6) Section 112, Board of Appeals. Delete this entire section and
substitute with the following:
SECTION 112
APPEALS
112.1 General. Whenever the owner or contractor involved in
the installation, repair or alteration of a plumbing system takes
exception to the decision of the Code Official in refusing to issue a
permit, or to approve plans as required by this code, such owner,
contractor or duly authorized agent or attorney may within 10
days after such decision take an appeal therefrom to the Code
Appeals Board. Such appeal shall be in writing, state the decision
of the Code Official and the reasons for the exception taken
thereto and filed with the Township Secretary. The Code Appeals
Board shall within 30 days from receipt of such appeal fix a date,
time and location to consider the appeal and to allow the person
to be heard if he states his desire to do so in the written appeal. A
prompt decision shall be rendered by the Code Appeals Board and
duly recorded with such decision being final.
(7) Section 113, Violations.
(a) Delete Subsection 113.3, Prosecution of violation, and
substitute with the following.
113.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is
not complied with within the time specified in the notice, the
Code Official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law
or in equity to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, or to
require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy
of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this
code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
(b) Delete Subsection 113.4, Violation penalties, and substitute
with the following:
113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate
a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with the
requirements thereof or who shall alter, repair a building or
structure in violation of any approved plan, application for
permit, or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under this code shall, upon conviction, be
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 132-2 CHARTER § 132-2
C:323
(8) Section 117, Demolition.
(a) Insert a new Subsection 117.5 to read as follows:
117.5 Certificate of extermination. A certificate of
extermination by a recognized exterminating/termite control
company addressing the existence of any wood destroying
insects, rodents, or other harmful insects or pest life shall be
received prior to the issuance of a demolition permit.
(b) Insert a new Subsection 117.6 to read as follows:
117.6 Shade Tree Ordinance. Prior to the issuance of a
demolition permit, applicant shall demonstrate compliance
with the provisions of Ordinance No. 2003-21, Shade Tree
Ordinance.120
B. Chapter 2, Definitions.
(1) Section 202, General Definitions.
(a) Add the definition of "Code Official" to read as follows:
CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of Community Development
charged with the administration and enforcement of this code,
or a duly authorized representative.
(b) Add the definition of "Department" to read as follows:
DEPARTMENT. The Department of Community Development
of Radnor Township or any authorized agent or employee
thereof.
(c) Add the definition of "Township" to read as follows:
TOWNSHIP. The Township of Radnor in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
C. Chapter 13, Performance Compliance Methods.
(1) Section 1301,General.
(a) In Subsection 1301.2, Applicability, add 1990 as the date on
line two.
120. Editor's Note: See Ch. 263, Trees.
§ 132-2 RADNOR CODE § 132-2
C:324
Chapter 134
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 255.
§ 134-1. Building numbers required; issuance and display.
[Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
The Community Development Department shall be responsible for assigning
a building number and street designation to every house and building in
the Township. The owner of every such house or building shall be required
to display the same number on his property where the house or building is
located. This assigned number and street designation shall be regarded as
the official address of every such house or building, and any discrepancies
or disputes regarding the number and street for any house or building shall
be resolved by the Community Development Department.
§ 134-2. Owner to obtain building number with building permit.
[Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
The owner of every house and building shall be required, at the time of
applying for a building permit, to obtain from the Community Development
Department a number and street designation for such house or building
and, within 30 days of completion of such house or building, to display the
same number on his property where the same house or building is located.
§ 134-3. Display regulations.
The number for each house or building shall be:
§ 134-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof by a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of up to
A. Clearly visible from the street on which the number is assigned.
B. At least three inches high and of proportional width, except when
mounted on a mailbox located at the curb, in which case it may be one
and one-half (1 1/2) inches in height.
C. Of a color which contrasts with its background.
D. Displayed in such a way as to avoid confusion regarding which house or
building is being identified.
§ 132-2 CHARTER § 134-4
C:325
$600 for each offense, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 140
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
Chapter 142
CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 250.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 134-4 RADNOR CODE § 134-4
C:326
ARTICLE I
Transfer of Property
[Adopted 1-4-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01; amended in its entirety
9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-24]
§ 142-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless otherwise expressly stated.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Development.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Community Development or authorized
designee.
ENGINEER — The Township Engineer or authorized designee.
PROPERTY — Any residential or nonresidential building or condominium
unit for occupancy or use.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor.
§ 142-2. Applicability.
This article shall apply to property within the Township transferred by title,
deed or other legal means.
§ 142-3. Certificate of use and occupancy required.
No existing property as defined by this article shall be occupied or used by
a new owner as a result of a transfer by title, deed or other legal means
until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued by the Director of
Community Development.
§ 142-4. Application for certificate; procedure; fee.
Certificates of use and occupancy for the transfer of property shall be issued
in accordance with the following procedures:
A. Application. Applications for a certificate of use and occupancy shall be
filed with the Director by the seller of the property not later than 30
days prior to settlement. If the settlement is scheduled for less than 30
days after the execution of the agreement of sale between the buyer
and seller, the certificate of use and occupancy application shall be
submitted not less than 14 days prior to settlement. Applications shall
contain such information as the Township may require. A fee in the
amount of $100 shall accompany the application.
B. Inspection.
(1) Upon receipt of completed application, the Director or Engineer
shall, within five business days, conduct an inspection of the
property to determine compliance with the following requirements:
§ 142-1 CHARTER § 142-4
C:327
(a) House or building numbers.
[1] House or building numbers shall be clearly visible from the
street on which the number is assigned.
[2] Shall be at least three inches high and of proportional
width, except when mounted on the mailbox at the curb, in
which case the numbers shall be at least 1 1/2 inches in
height.
[3] Shall be of a color which contrast with the background.
[4] Shall be displayed in such a manner as to avoid confusion
regarding which building or unit is being identified.
(b) Sidewalks.
[1] Maintenance of public sidewalks shall be in accordance
with Article IV of Chapter 250, Streets and Sidewalks, of
the Code of the Township of Radnor. Sidewalks which abut
the property shall be kept in good repair and in a safe
condition for public use. Sidewalks with a horizontal crack
or a difference of elevation of more than 1/2 inch shall be
deemed not in a safe condition and shall be replaced upon
the issuance of a permit by the Township Engineer.
(c) Sanitary sewer connections. An interior and exterior
inspection of the sanitary sewer system shall be required to
identify any unlawful connections to the system. The seller or
agent of the seller shall contact the Sanitary Sewer
Maintenance Division of the Public Works Department of the
Township to arrange for said inspection of the property
immediately following the submittal of the application for the
certificate of occupancy. [Added 9-22-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-11]
(2) If a violation is determined during the inspection, the seller shall be
mailed a notice within three business days of the inspection, which
shall clearly describe the violation and remedial action required for
compliance. [Amended 9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-11]
C. Reinspection. Upon correction of any violation or violations, the
applicant shall notify the Director, in writing, for a reinspection, which
shall be conducted within five business days from receipt of said letter.
[Amended 9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-11]
(1) Where it is determined by the Township that, due to unique
circumstances or weather conditions, sidewalks cannot be replaced
or repaired to comply with Township standards or house numbers
cannot be installed, the Township shall establish a dollar value to
complete the work necessary to comply with the terms of this
§ 142-4 RADNOR CODE § 142-4
C:328
§ 142-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who fails to secure a certificate of use and occupancy as
required by this article shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction
thereof by a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less $300 and
not more than $1,000, plus costs. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
article, which shall be escrowed by the seller with the Township of
Radnor on behalf of the buyer.
D. Certification statement.
(1) Prior to the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy. the
Township shall be in receipt of a statement, signed by the sellers
certifying compliance with, and signed by the purchasers
acknowledging an understanding of, the following provisions of the
Township Code:
(a) Within residential occupancies. smoke detectors are installed
in each sleeping area, outside of each separate sleeping area in
the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms, and on each additional
story of the dwelling, including basements and cellars, but not
including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics.
(b) All sump pump(s) or other devices which discharge drainage
resulting from rainwater, springs, wells or other groundwater
have been disconnected from the sanitary sewer system in
accordance with Chapter 235, Sewers, of the Township Code.
(2) The certification statement shall be on forms provided by the
Township and shall contain such information as the Township may
require.
E. Upon determining that the property complies with the full provisions of
this article, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Director.
Such certificate shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of
issuance.
§ 142-4 CHARTER § 142-5
C:329
Chapter 143
CIGARETTE VENDING; TOBACCO SALES
§ 142-5 RADNOR CODE § 142-5
C:330
ARTICLE I
Cigarette Vending Machines
§ 143-1. Purpose and intent.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Radnor hereby finds that:
§ 143-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINE — Any mechanical, electrical or
electronic self-service device which, through the insertion of money or any
other form of payment, dispenses tobacco or tobacco products.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Development of the
Township of Radnor.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Community Development or duly authorized
agent.
PERSON — Any person, firm, corporation or association.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor.
§ 143-3. Prohibited acts. [Amended 4-26-1999 by Ord. No. 99-09]
A. The Surgeon General of the United States has called for a ban on the
sale of cigarettes by vending machines.
B. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has banned the sale or furnishing
of cigarettes or tobacco in any form to minors under the age of 18.
C. The presence of cigarette vending machines permits indiscriminate
sales of cigarettes to minors, not preventable by any assured means of
enforcement.
D. No penalty has been imposed by the Commonwealth statute upon
minors for the purchase of cigarettes; rather, penalties are imposed
only on the seller.
A. No person shall own, operate, rent or permit the use of a cigarette
vending machine on premises under such entity's control in the
Township of Radnor except as provided herein.
B. No person who owns a cigarette vending machine or who owns a place
of business within which a cigarette vending machine is placed for use
by the public or who has control over a cigarette vending machine
placed for use by the public shall permit, authorize or otherwise allow
such machine:
(1) To be operated by a minor.
(2) To be placed at a location except as permitted by this article.
§ 143-1 CHARTER § 143-3
C:331
(3) To remain unmonitored in violation hereof.
(4) To be operated unless a sign is conspicuously posted thereon
declaring that tobacco products may not be sold to persons under
18 years of age.
C. Cigarette vending machines may be located in establishments which
exclude minors as expected personnel or customers, including, but not
limited to, bars, beer distributors and work areas not generally open to
the public. In these establishments, cigarette vending machines shall
not be located within entranceways.
D. Cigarette vending machines may be located in food-handling
establishments, as defined in Chapter 170 of the Township Code, and in
gasoline service stations if they are located where there is an
unobstructed and uninterrupted view of the machine by the facility
owner, operator or their designee, who shall monitor the machine at all
times. In such establishments cigarette vending machines shall not be
located in public rest rooms or entranceways.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person, including any retail dealer, to sell or
offer for sale any cigarette or other tobacco product which bears a
health warning required by law, other than in the package, box, carton
or other container provided by the manufacturer, importer or packager
which bears a health warning required by federal law.
F. Any person, including any retail dealer, who sells any cigarettes or
other tobacco products shall store or display such products in a locked
case or in a storage case or display accessible only to the seller. No
person selling cigarettes or other tobacco products shall allow anyone
other than the seller or the seller's agent to physically remove any such
product or its package from its storage or display case.
§ 143-3 RADNOR CODE § 143-3
C:332
ARTICLE II
Sale of Tobacco Products
§ 143-4. Purpose.
Reliable studies have shown that the use of cigarettes by minors is a
significant health hazard to them, both as minors and continuing into their
adulthood. State law prohibits the sale of cigarettes to minors, but there is
substantial evidence that this law is frequently violated. It is the intent of
the Board of Commissioners to decrease sales of tobacco products to minors
by notifying sellers and purchasers at the point of retail distribution that the
sale of tobacco products to a person under the age of 18 years is unlawful.
§ 143-5. Posting of signs.
A. At every point in the Township where tobacco products are sold at
retail, a sign must be conspicuously posted declaring that tobacco
products not be sold to persons under 18 years of age.
B. Wording on signs required by this section shall be at least two inches
high, unless otherwise approved by the Director. Such signs shall be
protected from tampering or concealment.
§ 143-4 CHARTER § 143-5
C:333

ARTICLE III
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 143-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Director of Community Development.
§ 143-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. Each day during
which any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
§ 143-6 CHARTER § 143-7
C:335
Chapter 144
CLEARING
§ 144-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Radnor Township
Clearing Ordinance."
§ 144-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
persons, to protect property and to promote the public welfare by
regulating and controlling the clearing of any lot or tract of land within the
Township of Radnor.
§ 144-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLEARING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Engineering Department
for the removal of six trees or more pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.[Amended 9-22-1997 by Ord. No. 97-25]
PERSON — A natural person, but also includes a partnership or
corporation.
SHRUB — Any woody, perennial plant smaller than a tree, usually having
permanent stems branching from or near the ground.
SITE — A lot, tract or parcel of land, or a series of lots, tracts or parcels
of land joined together, where clearing is continuous and performed at the
same time.
TREE — Any tree having reached a diameter at breast height of six inches
or greater on any property, public or private, in the Township of Radnor.
§ 144-4. Scope of provisions.
New clearing shall conform to the provisions of this chapter, except that this
chapter shall not apply to work in a public street or alley or in a Township
park, playground or recreation area or on other public property.
§ 144-5. Permits required; exceptions.
No person shall commence or perform any clearing without first having
obtained a clearing permit from the Township Engineer, and, in the case
of a clearing operation involving 10 acres or more, the written approval of
the Board of Commissioners is required. A separate clearing permit shall be
required for each site.
§ 144-6. Permit applications.
§ 143-7 RADNOR CODE § 144-6
C:336
§ 144-7. Permit fees.
Before issuing a clearing permit, a permit fee shall be collected as follows:
A. Every applicant for a clearing permit shall file a written application
therefor with the Township Engineer. Such application shall:
(1) Describe the land on which the proposed clearing is to be done by
lot, block, tract or street address or similar description which will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed clearing.
(2) Be accompanied by plans and specifications prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor in the State of Pennsylvania.
(a) The plans and specifications shall include:
[1] A contour map showing the present contours of the land.
[2] A plot plan showing the location of the clearing,
boundaries, lot lines, neighboring streets and alleys,
buildings, trees over six inches in diameter two feet above
the ground and sufficient dimensions and other data to
show the location of all work.
[3] Description of the type and classification of the soil.
[4] Details and location of any required silt fence or other
erosion-control techniques.
[5] Other information as the Township Engineer may require
to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
(b) All plans shall be dated and bear the names of persons who
prepared the same, the applicant and the owner of the land.
Plans shall be submitted in triplicate.
(c) The preliminary plan required by Chapter 255, Subdivision of
Land, may be substituted for the contour map and plot plan
required by Subsection A(2)(a)[1] and [2] above.
(3) State the estimated dates for the starting and completion of the
clearing work.
(4) State the purpose for which the clearing application is filed.
B. The Township Engineer may waive the requirement of any or all plans
and specifications listed above if he finds that the information on the
application is sufficient to show that the clearing will conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 144-6 CHARTER § 144-7
C:337
Area of Site To Be Cleared
(square feet) Permit Fee
Not more than 1,000 $20.00
1,001 to 10,000 50.00
Each additional 10,000 or portion
thereof
10.00
§ 144-8. Expiration of permit; extensions.
Every clearing permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void
if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within six
months or is not completed with one year from the date of issue, provided
that the Township Engineer may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory
evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work from being started
or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension
of time, and provided further that the application for the extension of time
is made before the date of expiration of the permit.
§ 144-9. Denial of permit; appeals.
§ 144-10. Inspections; imposition of additional conditions.
A. Where, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, the work as proposed
by the applicant is likely to endanger any property or any street or alley,
he shall deny the clearing permit. In determining whether the proposed
work is likely to endanger property or streets or alleys or create
hazardous conditions, the Township Engineer shall give due
consideration to possible exposure, earth movements, runoff of surface
waters and subsurface conditions such as the stratification and faulting
of rock and the nature and type of the soil or rock.
B. The Board of Commissioners shall consider promptly appeals from the
provisions of this chapter or from the determinations of the Township
Engineer, and the Board shall make determinations of alternate
methods, standards or materials when, in its opinion, strict compliance
with the provisions of this chapter is unnecessary. Any applicant or
permit holder shall have the right to appeal to any court of competent
jurisdiction from any decision or determination of the Board of
Commissioners.
A. The Township Engineer shall, when requested, make inspections
hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work
which has been completed or notify the permit holder wherein the same
fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Where it is found by
inspection that the vegetation or other conditions are not as stated or
shown in the application, the Township Engineer may refuse to approve
further work until approval is obtained for a revised clearing plan
conforming to existing conditions.
§ 144-7 RADNOR CODE § 144-10
C:338
§ 144-11. Maintenance of retaining walls and other protective
devices.
The owner of any property of which clearing has been made shall maintain
in good condition and repair all silt fences and other protective devices.
§ 144-12. General requirements.
§ 144-13. Issuance of clearing certificate; revocation.
§ 144-14. Violations and penalties; remedies.
B. Plans for the clearing work shall be approved by the Township Engineer
and shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the clearing
work and until the work has been approved.
C. The permit holder shall notify the Township Engineer in order to obtain
the following inspections:
(1) Initial inspection: when work on the clearing is about to be
commenced.
(2) Final inspection: when all work, including the installation of all
drainage and other structures, has been completed.
A. The owner of a property shall be responsible to protect and clean up
lower properties of silt and debris washing from his property as a result
of the clearing of his property.
B. In order to prevent the denuding of the landscape, wherever
practicable, large trees and other natural features constituting
important physical, aesthetic and economic assets to existing or
impending suburban development shall be preserved.
A. If upon inspection of any clearing it is found that the work authorized by
the clearing permit has been satisfactorily completed in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter and any other requirements
imposed, a clearing certificate covering such work and stating that the
work is approved shall be issued to the permit holder by the Township
Engineer.
B. The Township Engineer shall have the power to revoke any clearing
certificate whenever he finds that the work covered by the certificate
has been materially extended or altered without a permit so to do or
that any silt fences have not been maintained in good order and repair.
C. Before such revocation, the Township Engineer shall first give written
notice to the permit holder and to the owner of the property involved
specifying the defective condition stating that unless such defective
condition is remedied satisfactorily, the clearing certificate may be
revoked. If the defective condition is remedied, the certificate shall not
be revoked.
§ 144-10 CHARTER § 144-14
C:339
Chapter 144A
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code Appeals Board — See Ch. 15.
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Existing buildings — See Ch. 132.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 156.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 158.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
Fuel gas — See Ch. 172.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
A. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any
clearing or cause the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any
provision of this chapter.
B. When written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter has been served by the Township Engineer on any person, such
violation shall be discontinued immediately.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable,
on conviction thereof, to a penalty not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of
prosecution, for each and every offense and, in default of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 30
days. Whenever such person shall have been notified by the Township
Engineer, by service of summons in a prosecution or in any other way,
that he is committing such violation of this chapter, each day that he
shall continue such violation after such notification shall constitute a
separate offense, punishable by a like fine or penalty. Such fines or
penalties shall be collected as like fines or penalties are now by law
collected.
D. In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the proper officer of the Township, in
addition to other remedies, may institute in the name of the Township
any appropriate action or proceeding, whether by legal process or
otherwise, to prevent such unlawful work and to restrain or abate such
violation.
§ 144-14 RADNOR CODE § 144-14
C:340
Chapter 145
CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 156.
Fees — See Ch. 162.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
Grading, excavations and fills — See Ch. 175.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Sewers — See Ch. 235.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 245.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 250.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 255.
§ 145-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Code Appeals Board as appointed by the Board of
Commissioners.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of Radnor
Township.
CODE OFFICIAL — The Director of Community Development of Radnor
Township or duly authorized representative.
CONTRACTOR —
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Development of Radnor
Township.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor, Delaware County, in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
GENERAL CONTRACTOR — Any person, other than a bona fide
employee of the contractor, who engages in the business of
constructing, altering, repairing or remodeling residential or
nonresidential buildings or structures within the Township of Radnor.
A.
SPECIALTY CONTRACTOR — Any person, other than a bona fide
employee of the contractor, whose work is limited to a specific
discipline as determined by the Director. "Specialty contractors" shall
include but shall not be limited to the following disciplines: sign
installation, masonry work, installation of septic systems, installation of
fire suppression systems, demolition of buildings and structures, tank
removal.
B.
§ 144-14 CHARTER § 145-2
C:341
§ 145-2. Enforcement.
The code official shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 145-3. Licensing requirements.
§ 145-4. Change in place of business.
Immediate notice shall be given by any licensee hereunder to the Township
of any change of his place of business.
§ 145-5. Misrepresentation.
It shall be unlawful for any person who does not have a contractor's license
issued by the Township to engage in or represent himself as engaged in the
business of contracting work within the Township.
§ 145-6. Revocation of license.
A contractor's license may be suspended or revoked by the code official for
violation of any section of this chapter, or for violations of any standards,
conditions or requirements under which a permit is issued by the Township.
Notification and justification for such action shall be provided to the
A. License required. Effective the date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful
for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business as a
contractor within the Township of Radnor without first having obtained
a license from the Department of Community Development.
B. Application. Application shall be made on a form furnished by the
Township and shall include the name of the business, partnership or
corporation and the name of the individual to be licensed, along with
any additional information which the Township may require. One
member of the business, partnership or corporation shall be sufficient
for the issuance of a license. Contractors shall be required to provide
proof of registration as a contractor with another municipality, provide
acceptable job references, or furnish such other information as the code
official determines satisfactory for the issuance of license.
C. Fees. License fees shall be charged as set forth in Chapter 162, Fees, of
the Township Code and shall be valid for a period of one year from the
date issued.
D. Insurance. No contractor shall be issued a permit unless a certificate of
insurance is filed with the Department. The certificate of insurance
shall contain a provision that coverage afforded under the policy will
not be canceled, materially changed or not renewed until at least 30
days' prior written notice has been given to the Township. The
certificate of insurance must evidence policies of insurance maintained
at the expense of the applicant for comprehensive liability, including
products/completed operations/broad contractual and property
damage; each occurrence, $500,000.
§ 145-2 RADNOR CODE § 145-6
C:342
contractor by the code official by both certified and regular mail. The
contractor, or authorized agent or attorney, may, within 10 calendar days
from the date of the notice, appeal the decision to the Code Appeals Board.
The appeal shall be in writing, state the decision of the code official and
reasons for the exception taken thereto and shall be filed with the Township
Secretary. The Code Appeals Board shall, within 30 calendar days from
receipt of the appeal, fix a date, time and location for a hearing to allow
all parties to be heard. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Code Appeals
Board shall render a prompt decision and affirm, modify or reverse the
decision of the code official, with such decision being duly recorded and
final.
§ 145-7. Violation and penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or fails to comply
with the requirements thereof shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a
fine of not more than $1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 150
DESIGN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Design Review Board — See Ch. 5, § 5-42.
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 255.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 150-1. Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to establish standards for design review which
will promote orderly development, increase economic viability, enhance the
appearance of the Township and protect the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare. In addition, the intent of this chapter is to:
A. Promote increased harmony of architectural materials, treatments and
arrangements of buildings.
B. Enhance Radnor Township as a more desirable place in which to live
and work.
C. Enhance the existing shopping districts to serve the needs of the
residents while preserving the residential character of the community.
D. Maintain and improve the economic vitality of commercial areas, by
strengthening through design elements (stone walls, street trees,
landscaping and quality signage) the overall appearance of the
Township.
§ 145-6 CHARTER § 150-1
C:343
§ 150-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless otherwise expressly stated:
APPLICANT — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or
other legal entity which shall be required to make application under the
provisions of this chapter.
BOARD — The Design Review Board of Radnor Township as appointed by
the Board of Commissioners.
BUILDING — Any assemblage of material having enclosing walls and a
roof, including accessory buildings, permanently located on the land, which
requires Township approval and a permit.
COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of
Radnor.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Community Development of Radnor
Township.
FEE — A fee established by the Board of Commissioners for the
administration of this chapter.
MATERIAL CHANGE — Any modification to the architectural style or
general design of the exterior of an existing building or structure, including
but not limited to the type and texture of building materials, building
facades, style of all windows, doors, exterior light fixtures and other
appurtenant features, such as walks, fences, landscaping, awnings, parking
areas, driveways and areas for pedestrian movement. All activities which
affect the exterior of property and require Township approval or a permit
shall be included within this definition.
SIGN — Any sign as defined in Chapter 280, Zoning, of the Code of the
Township of Radnor.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor.
§ 150-3. Authority of Design Review Board.
The Design Review Board, as established by the Commissioners, shall have
authority to review all applications submitted to the Township for the
following:
E. Encourage design for new construction and exterior renovations to be
consistent with the overall image and visual environment of the
Township.
F. Assure that new buildings, exterior structural renovations and signs are
designed and built in a manner compatible with the character of the
Township in terms of scale and visual effect.
A. Architectural plans for new buildings, excepting single-family and twofamily
dwellings.
§ 150-1 RADNOR CODE § 150-3
C:344
§ 150-4. Criteria and standards.
§ 150-5. Fees. [Amended 6-13-1994 by Ord. No. 94-18]
Applications for design review shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth
below.121
B. Material changes to existing buildings as defined by this chapter,
except for single-family and two-family dwellings.
C. Applications for sign permits.
A. Review and approval. When design review is required by provisions of
this chapter, no permit or authorization shall be given to construct any
new building, make any material changes to existing buildings or erect
any new sign until the plan has been reviewed and recommended for
approval by the Design Review Board.
B. Purpose. The purpose of design review is to enable the Design Review
Board to review the proposed improvements to ensure conformity with
provisions of this chapter, including the intent and purpose thereof.
C. Standards for review. In reviewing a proposed plan, the Design Review
Board shall consider the following criteria, where applicable:
(1) General architectural features, including the character, scale and
quality of the design, including building materials and colors, to
ensure compatibility with adjacent buildings and the existing
architectural character of Radnor.
(2) That the plans indicate proper consideration for the relationship
between proposed or existing buildings and buildings which are
located or are proposed within the general area.
(3) That the plan for the proposed building or material change
indicates a manner in which surrounding properties are protected
against noise, vibrations and other factors which may have an
adverse effect on the environment and the manner of screening for
mechanical equipment, trash, storage and loading areas.
(4) That buildings, parking areas, signs and illumination indicates
proper consideration has been given to both the functional aspects
of the development, such as pedestrian and vehicular circulation,
and the visual effect of the development from the view of adjoining
streets.
(5) That landscaping considerations, including location, type, size,
color, texture and coverage of plant materials, including
maintenance and protection, has been considered to ensure visual
relief, which will complement existing and adjoining properties to
provide an attractive environment.
§ 150-3 CHARTER § 150-6
C:345
§ 150-6. Application.
A. All applications before the Design Review Board shall be in writing and
filed with the Department of Community Development upon a form
provided by the Department. Upon receipt of the application, the
Director shall be responsible for reviewing it to certify that all required
information has been submitted. Incomplete applications shall be
rejected and returned to the applicant. The application shall contain the
name and address of the applicant, the owner of the land, a property
description, street address, basis for filing of the application,
description of the work and any other information, where relevant,
which the Director may require in order to process the application.
B. Required information. Any application required by this chapter shall be
accompanied by copies, in quantities as required by the Director, of site
plans, diagrams, photographs and other material for presentation as
may be necessary for a complete review of the proposal. Plans shall be
drawn to scale of a size as required by the Director and shall indicate
the following data where applicable.
(1) Site plan, including:
(a) Property lines.
(b) Existing features on the site, including structures, roads, trees,
plant life, streambeds, rock outcroppings and other significant
natural features.
(c) Proposed buildings and dimensions.
(d) Proposed roads, walks and paths.
(e) A grading plan showing finished grade.
(f) The location and dimensions of existing parking and loading
areas.
(g) Means of pedestrian and vehicular circulation, including the
location of all sidewalks, driveways and curb cuts.
(h) Building setbacks.
(i) Existing rights-of-way.
(j) The location, design and height of all fences and walls.
(k) Existing and proposed open space.
(l) The location of existing landscaping, including species and
caliper.
(2) Building design, including:
121. Editor's Note: The application fees are included in Ch. 162, Fees.
§ 150-6 RADNOR CODE § 150-6
C:346
§ 150-7. Action on application.
(a) The elevation of each building and composite elevations, if
multiple buildings are proposed.
(b) The color renderings.
(c) The type and finish of all materials to be applied to the exterior
surface of the building, walls or addition.
(d) The natural color of materials to be applied, including the
colors of any paint or manufactured product on the exterior
buildings, walls or addition.
(e) Exterior lighting to be used for walkways, drives and parking
lot, including signs and light cast from the buildings interior
which is or will be visible from surrounding properties.
(f) Existing or proposed art work, sculptures, fountains and other
ornamental or decorative features.
(g) Provisions for the design of the following appurtenances if
located on the exterior:
[1] Utility lines meters and boxes.
[2] Refuse, storage and pickup areas.
[3] Stairs and ramps.
[4] Chimneys and exhaust fans.
[5] Awnings and louvers.
[6] Balconies.
[7] Mechanical equipment.
[8] Penthouses.
[9] Loading docks.
(h) Detailed landscaping plans, showing the locations of planting
areas, along with species, size, quantity and provisions for
maintenance.
(3) Signs. Where an application is submitted for the placement of a
sign, information shall be submitted consistent with provisions of
Chapter 280, Zoning, of the Township Code.
A. Upon the filing of an application and payment of the required fee, the
Director of Community Development shall refer the application to the
Design Review Board for review. Applications shall be submitted a
minimum of 21 calendar days prior to any regular meeting of the Board.
Where the Board fails to act on an application within 60 calendar days
§ 150-6 CHARTER § 150-7
C:347
§ 150-8. Appeals.
from the date of submission, such application shall be deemed approved
in terms as presented, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an
extension of time. [Amended 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-19]
B. The Board may approve, approve with conditions or deny any
application. In approving an application, the Board may apply such
conditions as deemed necessary to comply with the standards and
intent of this chapter and as necessary to protect the interests of
surrounding properties.
C. All decisions of the Board and conditions imposed shall be provided, in
writing, to both the applicant and Commissioners within 14 calendar
days from the date of final action on any application. Where an
application is denied, the applicant and Commissioners shall be
notified, in writing, of any criteria which are deemed by the Design
Review Board not to be met. Any noncompliance with any approval or
conditional approval of the Board shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
A. All decisions of the Board shall be subject to review by the Board of
Commissioners. When, in the opinion of the Commissioners, any
approval, conditional approval or denial of an application by the Board
is deemed inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, the
Commissioners shall reserve the right to reverse or modify such
decision. Notice of intent and the basis for initiating such action shall
be provided, in writing, to the applicant and Design Review Board
within 21 calendar days from the date of the final decision by the
Design Review Board. The Commissioners shall, within 45 calendar
days from the date of such notice, render a final written decision on the
application, a copy of which shall be provided to both the applicant and
Design Review Board. All decisions by the Board of Commissioners
shall be final.
B. An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Design Review Board or any
condition imposed by the Board may appeal by filing a written request,
in duplicate, with the Township Secretary and Director of Community
Development. The appeal shall be filed within 21 calendar days from
the date of the decision of the Board, shall set forth any inconsistency or
nonconformity with the criteria or standards of this chapter and be
referred to the Board of Commissioners for further action. The filing of
any appeal shall suspend the issuance of any permit until the
Commissioners have taken action on the appeal. The Board shall take
action within 45 days from the date of receipt of the appeal. In
considering any appeal, the Board may do one of the following:
(1) If the Board of Commissioners determines that the decision of the
Design Review Board is consistent with the criteria and standards
of this chapter, the Commissioners may affirm the decision of the
Design Review Board and dismiss the appeal.
§ 150-7 RADNOR CODE § 150-8
C:348
§ 150-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Any person who fail to comply with any or all of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall
pay a fine to the Township of Radnor of not more than $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be
imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day
during which any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
Chapter 156
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of standard codes of technical
regulations — See Charter § 3.06.
Code Appeals Board — See Ch. 15.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 19.
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Building energy conservation — See Ch. 129.
Existing buildings — See Ch. 132.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 134.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 144A.
Contractors — See Ch. 145.
Design review — See Ch. 150.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 158.
Building construction fees — See Ch. 162.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
Fuel gas — See Ch. 172.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Sewers — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 156-1. Adoption of code by reference.
Radnor Township hereby adopts and incorporates herein by reference the
2008 edition of the National Electrical Code as published by the National
Fire Protection Association as the Electrical Code of Radnor Township.
These rules and regulations are adopted in an attempt to ensure safe
electrical wiring installations, including alterations, repairs, replacements,
(2) The Commissioners may reverse or modify any decision of the
Board.
(3) Based upon any new evidence presented, which may include
substantial changes to the original appeal, the Commissioners may
refer the proposal back to the Design Review Board for further
action.
C. All decisions of the Board of Commissioners shall be final.
§ 150-8 CHARTER § 156-1
C:349
equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto, so as
to safeguard the public's health, safety, and welfare. Each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said National
Electrical Code are hereby adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this chapter; with the additions, deletions, and changes prescribed in
the following sections of this chapter.
§ 156-2. Scope.
The following functions shall be covered:
§ 156-3. Definitions.
A. The inspection of electrical installations.
B. The review of construction plans, drawings, and specifications for
electrical systems.
C. The design, alteration, modification, construction, maintenance, and
testing of electrical systems and equipment.
D. The regulation and control of electrical installations at special events,
including but not limited to exhibits, trade shows, amusement parks,
and other similar special occupancies.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted to have common English usage, to give
effect to the purposes set forth in § 156-4 below, and to provide
reasonable application of this chapter. As used in this chapter, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
APPLICANT — A person who has filed an application for a permit to
engage in electrical work as defined by this chapter.
APPROVED AGENCY — The authorized third-party agency(s) approved
by Radnor Township to handle electrical inspections in the Township.
BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL — The Radnor Township-appointed
construction code official or designee who manages, supervises, and
administers building code enforcement activities under the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code within the Township.
CODE — The Electrical Code of Radnor Township, otherwise known as
the 2008 edition of the National Electrical Code as published by the
National Fire Protection Association.
CODE OFFICIAL — The Township Director of Community Development
or his/her authorized agent.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Development of
Radnor Township and/or any authorized agent or employee thereof.
§ 156-1 RADNOR CODE § 156-3
C:350
§ 156-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules and regulations for
administration and enforcement of the National Electrical Code. From the
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR — An individual or approved agency
designated by Radnor Township to perform electrical inspections within
the Township.
ELECTRICAL WORK — Any installation, construction, alteration, or
assembly of any device, equipment, apparatus, or any other object
which is used or is intended to be used for the transmission of electrical
energy or impulse, except when performed by or on behalf of any
regulated public utility or any regulated radio or television transmission
system. It shall not include the manufacturing of any device, apparatus,
or other object used or intended to be used for the transmission of an
electrical energy or impulse, but shall include electrical wiring systems
connected to swimming pools, air-conditioning equipment, protective
signaling devices (fire and burglar), and signs.
EMERGENCY — Circumstances that the Township knows, or has
reason to believe, exist and that reasonably can constitute immediate
danger to persons or property.
HAZARD — Any condition deemed perilous to life or property that
would constitute an imminent danger to the property owner, occupant,
or general public, and their respective property.
MASTER ELECTRICIAN — Any person who shall have qualified and
registered as a master electrician in accordance with the terms of this
chapter and under the rules and regulations of Radnor Township.
PERMITTEE — Any person to whom an electrical permit is issued.
PERSON — Any individual, family, firm, association, organization,
company, corporation, partnership, trust, joint venture, unincorporated
association, municipal corporation, commonwealth agency, or any other
similar entity, or any combination thereof.
TOWNSHIP — Radnor Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE — The standards set forth in Title
34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 through 405, adopted under and pursuant
to the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999 (35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103), and any codes adopted thereunder,
including, but not limited to, the International Building Code and the
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings.
B. Whenever the Code mentions a municipality and no name is given, said
municipality shall be construed to mean the Township of Radnor; and
when a state is mentioned, the same shall mean the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; and where the Department of Electrical Inspection is
mentioned, same shall mean the Radnor Township Department of
Community Development.
§ 156-3 CHARTER § 156-4
C:351
date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions of the code shall
be controlling the construction of all buildings and other structures within
Radnor Township.
§ 156-5. Application.
§ 156-6. Occupancy of building or structure.
§ 156-7. Authority and administration.
Where used in this section, the term "Township" shall include the
Department and approved agencies. This chapter shall be administered and
enforced by the Township as follows:
A. New installations. This chapter applies to new installations. All
applications for an electrical permit submitted after June 18, 2012,
concerning new structures or installations shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
B. Existing installations. Existing electrical installations that do not
comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be permitted to be
continued in use unless the Township or approved agency determines
that the lack of conformity with this chapter presents a hazard. Where
changes are required for the correction of hazards, a reasonable
amount of time shall be given for compliance, depending on the degree
of the hazard.
C. Additions, alterations, or repairs. Additions, alterations, or repairs to
any building, structure, or premises that require electrical work shall
conform to the regulations of this chapter applicable to a new building,
structure, or installation, without requiring the remaining portions of
the existing building, structure, or installation to comply with all the
requirements of this chapter. Additions, alterations, installations, or
repairs shall not cause an existing building, structure, or installation to
become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the building,
structure, or installation as determined by the Township or approved
agency. Electrical wiring added to an existing service, feeder, or branch
circuit shall not result in an installation that violates the provisions of
the code in force at the time the additions are made.
A. New construction. No newly constructed building or structure shall be
occupied in whole or in part in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Existing buildings or structures. Existing buildings or structures that
are occupied at the time of adoption of this chapter shall be permitted
to remain in use, provided the following conditions apply:
(1) The occupancy classification remains unchanged; and
(2) There exists no hazard in the building or structure as determined
by the Township or approved agency.
§ 156-4 RADNOR CODE § 156-7
C:352
A. The Township has the authority to render interpretations of the Code in
order to provide clarification to its requirements.
B. When the use or installation of any electrical equipment is found to
constitute a hazard, the Township shall be empowered to have the
premises disconnected from its source of electric supply. When such
equipment or installation has been so condemned or disconnected, a
notice shall be placed thereon listing the causes for the condemnation,
the disconnection, or both, and the penalty for the unlawful use thereof.
Written notice of such condemnation or disconnection and the causes
therefor shall be given to the owners and occupants of such building,
structure, or premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove
said notice; to reconnect the electrical equipment to its source of
electrical supply; or to use or permit to be used electric power in any
such electrical equipment until such causes for the condemnation or
disconnection have been remedied to the satisfaction of the Township.
C. The Township has the authority to delegate to other qualified
individuals such powers as necessary for the proper administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
D. Other agencies shall have authority to render necessary assistance in
the enforcement of this chapter when requested to do so by the
Department.
E. The Township shall be authorized to inspect, at all reasonable times,
any building, structure, or premises for hazards as set forth in this
chapter. In cases where the Township believes an emergency exists, the
Township can inspect such structure or premises at any time without
prior notification. The Township can require the owner or occupant of
the premises or structure containing a hazard to remove or remedy
such hazard. Any person(s) failing to comply with such order shall be in
violation of this chapter.
F. To the full extent permitted by law, any Township official, employee, or
agent engaged in inspection work shall be authorized, at all reasonable
times, to enter and examine any building, structure, or premises for the
purpose of making electrical inspections. Before entering a premises,
the Township shall obtain the consent of the occupant thereof or obtain
a warrant authorizing entry for the purpose of inspection except in
those instances where an emergency exists. Such persons authorized to
enter and inspect buildings, structures, and premises as herein set
forth shall be identified by proper credentials issued by the Township or
an approved agency.
G. persons shall not interfere with a Township official, employee, or an
approved agency carrying out any duties or functions prescribed by this
chapter, and persons shall not use a badge, uniform, or other
credentials to impersonate a Township official, employee, or an
approved agency.
§ 156-7 CHARTER § 156-7
C:353
§ 156-8. Permits, licenses, and approvals.
Electrical permits, licenses, and approvals shall conform to the following:
H. The Township has the authority to require plans and specifications be
submitted to it to ensure compliance with this chapter.
I. Whenever any installation subject to inspection prior to use is covered
or concealed without having first been inspected, the Township has the
authority to require that such work be exposed for inspection. The
Township shall be notified when the installation is ready for inspection.
J. The Township has the authority to order the immediate evacuation of
any occupied building deemed unsafe when such building has
hazardous conditions that present imminent danger to building
occupants.
K. The Township has the authority to waive specific requirements in this
chapter or permit alternative methods where it is assured that
equivalent objectives can be achieved by establishing and maintaining
effective safety. Technical documentation shall be submitted to the
Township to demonstrate equivalency and that the system, method, or
device is approved for the intended purpose. Each application for a
waiver of a specific electrical requirement shall be filed with the
Township and shall be accompanied by such evidence, letters,
statements, results of tests, or other supporting information as required
to justify the request. The Township shall keep a record of actions on
such applications, and a signed copy of the Township's decision shall be
provided to the applicant.
A. Permits.
(1) Permit to perform work. No person shall perform electrical work in
Radnor Township unless he or she first obtains an electrical permit
from the Township. An applicant for a permit shall make
application on a form supplied by the Township and shall be
completed as required by the Code Official.
(2) Authorization. Any activity authorized by an electrical permit
issued under this chapter shall be conducted by the permittee or
the permittee's agents or employees in compliance with all the
requirements of this chapter applicable thereto and in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications. No permit issued under
this chapter shall be interpreted to justify a violation of any
provision of this chapter or any other applicable law or regulation.
Any addition or alteration of approved plans or specifications shall
be approved in advance by the Township, as evidenced by the
issuance of a new or amended permit.
(3) Applications for permits. Applications for electrical permits shall
conform to the following:
§ 156-7 RADNOR CODE § 156-8
C:354
(a) Applications for permits shall be made to the Township on
forms provided by the Township and shall include the
applicant's answers in full to inquiries set forth on such forms.
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such data as
required by the Township, such as plans and specifications,
location, etc.
(b) The Township shall review all applications submitted and issue
electrical permits as required. If an application for a permit is
rejected by the Township, the applicant shall be advised of the
reasons for such rejection.
(4) Content. Electrical permits shall be issued by the Township and
shall bear the name and signature of the Township Building Code
Official. In addition, the permit shall indicate the following:
(a) Operation or activities for which the permit is issued.
(b) Address or location where the operation or activity is to be
conducted.
(c) Name of the permittee.
(d) Permit number and date of issuance.
(5) Issuance of permits. The Township shall issue electrical permits,
certificates, notices, and approvals, or orders pertaining to
electrical work or hazards, except that no permit shall be required
to execute any of the classes of electrical work specified in the
following:
(a) Minor repair and maintenance work that includes the
replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable
electrical equipment to approved permanently installed
receptacles.
(b) Electrical equipment used for radio and television
transmissions. The provisions of the Uniform Construction
Code apply to equipment and wiring for power supply and the
installation of towers and antennas.
(c) The installation of a temporary system for the testing or
servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus.
(6) Posting. A copy of the electrical permit shall be posted at each work
site as specified by the Township.
(7) Compliance of existing electrical work.
(a) In order to safeguard persons and property against existing
hazards and perils of existing defective electrical wiring,
apparatus or equipment, the Code Official, or an approved
agency authorized by the Code Official, is hereby given the
§ 156-8 CHARTER § 156-8
C:355
authority and the duty to inspect at reasonable times any
building, structure, or premises in the Township, to determine
whether any completed electrical work is defective or unsafe.
(b) If the Code Official, or an approved agency authorized by the
Code Official, determines that any existing electrical work in
any building, structure, or premises constitutes a hazard and is
not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the
portion of the existing work which is defective or unsafe shall
be discontinued and made to comply with the provisions of this
chapter. The Code Official shall serve notice upon the owner or
occupant thereof, stating the nature of the violation and that
compliance with all requirements shall be achieved within the
period of time specified in the notice. The notice may also
prescribe a course of remedial action.
(c) If, at the expiration of the time allowed for compliance, the
violation has not been corrected, the Code Official shall
institute proceedings, to collect from the owner or occupant
the fines or penalties specified for violations of this chapter.
(8) An electrical permit shall be predicated upon compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and shall constitute written
authorization by the Township to conduct electrical work. Any
permit issued under this chapter shall not take the place of any
other license or permit required by other applicable laws,
ordinances, codes, rules or regulations.
(9) The Township may require an inspection prior to the issuance of an
electrical permit. A permit issued under this chapter shall continue
until revoked. The permit shall be issued to one person only and for
the location or purpose described in the permit. Any change that
affects any of the conditions of the permit shall require a new or
amended permit.
(10) Revocation of permit.
(a) The Code Official may revoke any electrical permit when:
[1] Any violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, code, rule, or regulation
applicable to the project is found.
[2] Any false statements or misrepresentations were
submitted as a part of the application or plans upon which
the permit or approval was based.
[3] Any work for which a permit is granted is done in violation
of the provisions of this chapter, or not in conformance
with any drawings or plans approved by the Township in
conjunction with the permit.
§ 156-8 RADNOR CODE § 156-8
C:356
[4] Any provision or condition of a permit is violated or not
implemented as required.
[5] Any attempt is made to design or install electrical work in
violation of this chapter's requirements; service, maintain,
operate, sell, or represent for sale a premises, building, or
structure that violates the requirements of this chapter,
falsify records, reports, or applications in conjunction with
any of this chapter's requirements; or conduct any other
activity in violation of the requirements prescribed by this
chapter.
[6] The permittee creates or allows the creation of any
condition or the commission of any act which constitutes
or creates a hazard or nuisance.
(b) When the Code Official determines that grounds exist for the
revocation of a permit, he or she shall serve notice upon the
holder of the permit stating the nature of the violation and that
compliance with all requirements shall be achieved within the
time specified on the notice. The notice may also prescribe a
course of remedial action.
(c) If, at the expiration of the time allowed for compliance, the
violation has not been corrected, the Code Official may revoke
the permit. Revocation shall occur when the permittee is duly
notified by the Township of this action.
(d) Any person who engages in any business, operation, or
occupation, or uses any premises, after the electrical permit
issued concerning such business, operation, or occupation, or
premises has been suspended or revoked, and before such
suspended permit has been reinstated or a new permit issued,
shall be in violation of this chapter.
(11) Expiration of permits. Every electrical permit issued by the Code
Official shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the
work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 from
the date issued, or if the work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced
for a period of 180 days.
(12) Extensions of permits. The Code Official may grant an extension of
the permit time period upon presentation by the permittee of a
satisfactory reason for failure to start or complete the work or
activity authorized by the permit.
(13) Annual permits. In lieu of an individual permit for each installation
or alteration, any person regularly employing one or more
employees for the installation, alteration, and maintenance of
electric equipment in or on buildings or premises owned or
occupied by such person may apply for an annual permit. Upon
§ 156-8 CHARTER § 156-8
C:357
application, an electrical contractor as agent for the owner or
tenant shall be issued an annual permit. The applicant shall keep
records of all work done, and such records shall be transmitted
periodically to the Township.
B. Licenses.
(1) General. It shall be unlawful for any individual to engage in the
business of electrical work as a master electrician without first
having obtained a license from the Department. Only individuals
and not entities can obtain a license.
(2) License application. Application shall be made on a form furnished
by the Township and shall include the name and address of the
business, partnership or corporation the applicant is employed by
or associated with; the name of the individual to be licensed as a
master electrician; along with any other information which the
Township may require to appropriately process this application.
(3) Lifespan. Licenses shall be valid for a period of one year from the
date issued.
(4) Revocation of licenses. Any master electrician's license granted
hereunder may be revoked by the Code Official or Code Appeals
Board for violation of any part of this chapter; for refusing to make
the necessary corrections to work not approved by the Code
Official; or for any other sufficient cause.
(5) Misrepresentation. It shall be unlawful for any individual who does
not have a master electrician's license issued by the Township to
engage in or represent himself as engaged in the business of
electrical work within Radnor Township.
(6) Change of place of business. Immediate notice of any change of
place of business shall be given by any licensee to the Township.
(7) License for institutions. An individual certified as competent by the
Code Official may be licensed as a master electrician for the care,
alteration, or addition of the electrical system of a designated
manufacturing or mercantile building, institution, hotel,
apartment, or similar building, where the continuous services of a
master electrician are required, and receive a certificate of license;
but, in such case, the individual so licensed shall not do any
electrical work in any building or buildings other than those for
which he or she is specifically licensed.
(8) Insurance requirements. No license shall be issued to a master
electrician unless the applicant files a certificate of insurance with
the Department at the time of license application. The certificate of
insurance shall contain a provision that coverage afforded under
the policy will not be canceled, materially changed or not renewed
until at least 30 days' prior written notice has been given to Radnor
§ 156-8 RADNOR CODE § 156-8
C:358
Township. The certificate of insurance must evidence policies of
insurance maintained at the expense of the applicant for
comprehensive liability, including products/completed operations/
broad contractual, and property damage. The policy must provide
minimum coverage for each occurrence of $500,000.
C. Inspection and approvals.
(1) Upon the completion of any electrical work which has been made
under a permit other than an annual permit, it shall be the duty of
the person conducting the work to notify the Township or approved
agency, who shall inspect the work within a reasonable time.
(2) When the Township or approved agency funds the completed
electrical work to be in conformity with this chapter and all other
applicable ordinances, rules and regulations, the Township or
approved agency shall issue to the permittee a certificate of
approval. Where the issuer of this certificate is an approved agency,
a duplicate copy shall be provided to the Township. This certificate
shall also authorize the connection to the supply of electricity.
When a certificate of temporary approval is issued authorizing the
connection of an installation, such certificates shall be issued to
expire at a time to be stated therein and shall be revocable by the
Township for cause.
(3) When any portion of electrical work is to be hidden from view by
the permanent placement of parts of the building, structure, or
ground, the person conducting this work shall notify the Township
or approved agency, and such work shall not be concealed until it
has been approved by the Township or approved agency; provided,
that on large installations, where such concealment proceeds
continuously, the person conducting the work shall give the
Township or approved agency due notice in advance, and
inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the
work.
(4) At regular intervals, the Township or approved agency shall visit all
buildings, structures, and premises where electrical work may be
done under annual permits and shall inspect all the work
completed under such permits since the date of the previous
inspection. The Township or approved agency shall issue a
certificate of approval for such work as is found to be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, after payment of all
required fees.
(5) If, upon inspection, any electrical work is found not to be fully in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, or any other
applicable ordinance, rule or regulation, the Township or approved
agency may forward to the person conducting the work a written
notice stating the defects which have been found to exist.
§ 156-8 CHARTER § 156-8
C:359
§ 156-9. Plan review.
Review of plans and specifications shall conform to the following:
(6) Inspections and tests.
(a) Inspections and tests to determine whether the provisions of
this chapter have been complied with shall be made by the
Code Official or an approved inspection agency, or both. Upon
completion of any electrical work, if inspections or tests are
done by an approved inspection agency, a certificate of
inspection and approval issued by such inspection agency shall
be provided to the Code Official.
(b) All decisions as to whether or not electrical work complies with
the provisions of this chapter shall be made by the Code
Official who is hereby authorized to stop any electrical work in
process and order the removal thereof if he or she shall
determine that such work is not being installed in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
(c) The Code Official is hereby authorized to waive inspection of a
portion of or all electrical work for which he shall have
received a duplicate record of approval from an approved
inspection agency certifying that such work complies with the
provisions of this chapter. Notice of such waiver of inspection
shall be given to the applicant so that the approved work can
thereafter be concealed.
(d) The Code Official shall not accept any certificate of inspection
from an inspection agency which has not been approved and
registered by the Township. The Code Official shall establish
regulations for the qualification of electrical inspection
agencies authorized to perform electrical inspections in
Radnor Township which qualification shall include certification
of inspectors by a nationally recognized testing agency.
(e) As a part of the permit application, the applicant shall grant
the Code Official or approved agency the right to enter and
examine the building or premises undergoing electrical work,
at reasonable times, and shall grant the Official or approved
agency free and unhindered access thereto for the purpose of
inspecting the same.
D. Fees. Fees for all electrical permits, applications, approvals,
registrations, and licenses shall be charged in accordance with Chapter
162 of the Township Code.
E. Occupancy permit. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until
the Township certifies that all the work done under the electrical permit
has been completed in full compliance with this chapter and the issued
permit.
§ 156-8 RADNOR CODE § 156-9
C:360
§ 156-10. Violations, penalties and appeals.
A. The Township or approved agency shall review the construction
documents and drawings for all new construction, modification, or
rehabilitation.
(1) Review and approval by the Township or approved agency shall not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility of compliance with this
chapter.
(2) Where field conditions necessitate any substantial change from the
approved plan, the applicant shall be required to submit the
corrected plans to the Township or approved agency for approval.
B. The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that:
(1) The construction documents include all of the requirements set
forth in this chapter and the Uniform Construction Code.
(2) The construction documents and drawings are correct and in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the Uniform
Construction Code.
A. Violations. Any failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter
or failure to conform to the requirements of any permit, license, or
approval issued hereunder constitutes a violation of this chapter. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(1) Whenever the Township determines that there are violations of this
chapter, a written notice shall be issued to the violator to confirm
such findings.
(2) In the event that the Township determines that a violation has
occurred, the Township shall provide written notification of the
violation to the person responsible for the violation (violator) and
the landowner, if applicable. Any violation notice issued pursuant to
this chapter shall be sewed either by personal service upon the
violator or owner or mailed to the last known address of the
violator or owner. In addition, a copy of such notice shall be posted
on the premises containing the violation in a conspicuous place at
or near the entrance to such premises.
(3) The violation notice shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to
comply within the time specified shall subject the violator or other
responsible party to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such
penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the
Township from pursuing any other remedy available to it.
B. Enforcement. The Township is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding
compliance with the approved plan and permit shall be the
§ 156-9 CHARTER § 156-10
C:361
responsibility of the Code Official or other qualified persons designated
by the Township.
(1) A set of the approved plans shall be on file at the premises
throughout the duration of the electrical work. Periodic inspections
may be made by the Township or designee during construction.
(2) Adherence to approved plan. It shall be unlawful for any person to
undertake any electrical work on any property except as provided
for in the approved plan and pursuant to the issued permit and the
requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove
any electrical work or portion thereof required by the approved
plan or to allow the property to remain in a condition which does
not conform to the approved plan or this chapter.
(3) Suspended and revoked permits.
(a) A suspended permit shall be reinstated by the Township when:
[1] The Township or approved agency has inspected and
approved the corrections to the electrical work;
[2] The Township or approved agency has inspected and
approved the work eliminating the hazard, nuisance, and/
or violation:
[3] The Township is satisfied that the violation of the law,
ordinance, code, rule, and/or regulation has been
corrected; and/or
[4] The permittee has come into full compliance with the
suspended permit.
(b) A permit that has been revoked by the Township cannot be
reinstated. The permittee may apply for a new permit under
the procedures outlined in this chapter.
C. Public nuisance. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby
deemed a public nuisance.
D. Penalties.
(1) Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter
or who fails to carry out an order made pursuant to this chapter or
violates any condition attached to a permit, approval, or certificate
shall be subject to the penalties established under this chapter.
(2) Failure to comply with the time limits of an abatement notice or
other corrective notice issued by the Township shall result in each
day that such violation continues being regarded as a new and
separate offense.
(3) Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or shall fail
to comply with the requirements thereof, or who shall install,
§ 156-10 RADNOR CODE § 156-10
C:362
§ 156-11. Connection to electricity supply.
repair, or alter an electrical system in violation of an approved plan
or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit issued under this
chapter, shall upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(4) In addition, the Township may institute injunctive, mandamus or
any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for
the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other
appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
E. Means of appeal.
(1) General. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its
designee may appeal this action to the Code Appeals Board within
30 days of the issuance of that decision. Such appeal shall be in
writing, state the action being appealed, and the reasons for the
appeal. The appeal shall be filed with the Department. The Code
Appeals Board shall, within 30 days from receipt of such appeal, fix
a date, time and location to consider the appeal and to allow the
person to be heard if he states his desire to do so in the written
appeal. A prompt decision shall be rendered by the Code Appeals
Board and duly recorded, with such decision being final.
(2) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Code Appeals Board
may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County
within 30 days of the issuance of that decision.
(3) Appeals fee. The fee for such an appeal shall be charged in
accordance with Chapter 162 of the Township Code.
A. Authorization. Except where work is done under an annual permit and
except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person to make connection to a supply of electricity or to supply
electricity to any electrical equipment installation for which an
electrical permit is required or that has been disconnected or ordered
to be disconnected.
B. Special consideration. By special permission of the Township,
temporary power shall be permitted to be supplied to the premises for
specific needs of the construction project. The Code Official shall
determine what needs are permitted under this provision.
C. Notification. If, within 10 business days after the Department or
approved agency is notified of the completion of the electrical work,
other than a temporary approval installation, the Department or
approved agency has neither authorized connection nor disapproved
§ 156-10 CHARTER § 156-11
C:363
§ 156-12. Inspector's qualifications.
the work, the supplier of the electricity is authorized to make
connections and supply electricity to such work.
D. Disconnection. Where a connection is made to electrical work that has
not been inspected, as outlined in the preceding subsections of this
section, the supplier of electricity shall immediately report such
connection to the Department. If, upon subsequent inspection, it is
found that the work is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, the Department shall notify the person making the installation
to rectify the defects and, if such repairs are not completed within the
specified time, the Code Official shall have the authority to cause the
disconnection of that portion of the work that is not in conformity.
A. Certificate. All electrical inspectors shall be certified by a nationally
recognized inspector certification program accepted by the
Department. The certification program shall specifically qualify the
inspector in electrical inspections. No individual shall be employed as
an Electrical Inspector unless that individual is approved by the
Township, except that any individual who on the date on which this
chapter went into effect was serving as a legally appointed electrical
inspector of the Township shall, upon application and payment of the
prescribed fee and without examination, be issued a special certificate
permitting him or her to continue to serve as an Electrical Inspector for
the Township.
B. Experience. Electrical inspector applications shall demonstrate the
following:
(1) Have a demonstrated knowledge of the standard materials and
methods used in the installation of electric equipment
(2) Be well versed in the approved methods of construction for safety
to persons or property.
(3) Be well versed in the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the ordinances of the Township relating to
electrical work and be well versed with the Code.
(4) Have had at least 10 years' experience as an electrical inspector or
15 years in the installation of electrical equipment. In lieu of such
experience, the applicant shall be a graduate in electrical
engineering or of a similar curriculum of a college or university
considered by the Department as having suitable requirements for
graduation and shall have had two years' practical electrical
experience.
C. Recertification. Electrical inspectors shall be recertified as established
by provisions of the applicable certification program.
§ 156-11 RADNOR CODE § 156-12
C:364
§ 156-13. Liability for damages.
This chapter shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability
of any party owning, designing, operating, controlling, or installing any
electrical equipment for damages to persons or property caused by a defect
therein, nor shall the Township or any of its employees be held as assuming
any such liability by reason of the inspection, reinspection, or other
examination authorized.
Chapter 158
ENERGY CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of standard codes of technical
regulations — See Charter § 3.06.
Code Appeals Board — See Ch. 15.
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 134.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 144A.
Contractors — See Ch. 145.
Design review — See Ch. 150.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 156.
Building construction fees — See Ch. 162,
Art. II.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Sewers — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 158-1. Adoption of code by reference.
Certain documents on file in the office of the Secretary of the Township
of Radnor, being marked and designated as the 2009 International Energy
Conservation Code, are hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of
Radnor Township, Delaware County, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
for the purpose of establishing minimum regulations governing the design,
installation and construction of energy efficient building envelopes and the
installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting, and power systems as
herein provided; and each and all of the provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this
chapter with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in
this chapter.
D. Revocation and suspension of authority. The Department shall have the
authority to revoke an inspector's authority to conduct inspections
within the Township.
§ 156-12 CHARTER § 158-2
C:365
§ 158-2. Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes to code.
The following sections and subsections of the aforementioned 2009
International Energy Conservation Code are hereby added, amended,
changed, and clarified as set forth below.
A. Chapter 1, Administration.
(1) Section 101, General.
(a) Subsection 101.1, Title. The "Township of Radnor" shall be
inserted as the name of the jurisdiction.
(b) Insert a new Subsection 101.6 to read as follows:
101.6 Whenever in said Energy Conservation Code a
municipality is mentioned and no name is given, said
municipality shall be construed to mean the Township of
Radnor, and when a state is mentioned, the same shall mean
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and where the
Department of Inspection is mentioned, the same shall mean
the Department of Community Development.
B. Chapter 2, Definitions.
(1) Section 202, General Definitions.
(a) Amend the definition of "Code Official" to read as follows:
CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of Community Development
charged with the administration and enforcement of this code.
(b) Add the definition of "Department" to read as follows:
DEPARTMENT. The Department of Community Development
of Radnor Township or any authorized agent or employee
thereof.
(c) Add the definition of "Township" to read as follows:
TOWNSHIP. The Township of Radnor in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
§ 158-2 RADNOR CODE § 158-2
C:366
Chapter 162
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 104.
Public bathing places — See Ch. 120.
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 209.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
Sewers — See Ch. 235.
Street excavations — See Ch. 250.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 255.
Taxation — See Ch. 260.
§ 162-1. Establishment of Consolidated Fee Schedule.
The Board of Commissioners hereby establishes the Consolidated Fee
Schedule of the Township of Radnor (the "schedule").
§ 162-2. Intent.
It is the intent of the Board that all applicable sections of the Township
Code, in which various fees for specified service are established and levied,
shall be consolidated into this schedule, and noted thereon, so as to permit
a timely review by staff and the Board of all such fees.
§ 162-3. Effective date.
All fees contained in the schedule shall become effective as of January 1,
1995, at rates listed under the Rate column.
§ 162-4. Annual review of fees by departments.
All departments shall review all fees under their respective jurisdictions
at least once annually, and more often as possible, and shall recommend
adjustments to those fees as part of the annual budget process. The Finance
Director, under the direction of the Township Manager, shall prepare an
updated Consolidated Fee Schedule, with all such departmental
recommendations, for the Board's consideration as part of the Township's
Budget and Tax Levy Ordinance122 each year. Any fees not adjusted in a
subsequent fiscal year shall continue to be levied at their rate in effect
during the previous fiscal year, until otherwise enacted by the Board.
122. Editor's Note: This ordinance is on file at the Township offices.
§ 158-2 CHARTER § 162-5
C:367
§ 162-5. Conflict with other provisions.
Notwithstanding any other provision herein or of the Township Code, the
Board shall be authorized to revise by separate legislation the rate, or any
conditions for the setting thereof, of any fee contained in this schedule or
the Administrative Code.
§ 162-6. Consolidated Fee Schedule. [Last amended 12-10-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-19]
The fees for the year ending December 31, 2019, shall be as follows:
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
Community Development Department
Chapter 120, Bathing Places
License fees
Swimming pool
Outdoor $300 per pool
Indoor $350 per pool
Spa $250 per pool
Wading $200 per pool
Chapter 125, Building Construction
General contractor's license (annual) $50
Residential
New one- and two-family dwelling $20 per $1,000
Additions, alterations, repairs, demolition,
etc.
$20 per $1,000
Commercial, institution, public land use,
recreation, multifamily
New buildings and fire suppression systems $30 per $1,000 up to
$50,000; $20 per $1,000
for each additional
$1,000
Additions, alterations, repairs, demolition, to
existing buildings and fire suppression
systems
$50 per first $1,000, $25
per $1,000 for each
additional $1,000
Permits
Signs, to include window, awning, wall,
marquee, freestanding (new or replacement)
$20 per $1,000
Certificate of occupancy (new)
Residential $50
§ 162-5 RADNOR CODE § 162-6
C:368
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
Nonresidential $100
Zoning permit
Fences, accessory structures less than 200
square feet, agricultural buildings, propane
tanks
$75
Home occupation
Traffic $150
Nontraffic $100
Zoning compliance $100
Chapter 150, Design and Review Board
Permit for temporary banner (maximum 30
days)
$50
DRB application fees
Signs $100
Telecommunications antennas $200
Facade change $100
New building $200
Building additions and accessory structures $200
Outdoor dining application (furnishings and
accessories)
$100
Chapter 156, Electrical
Electrician's license (annual) $50
Electrical inspection agency license $100
Electrical permit $20 per $1,000 or
fraction thereof
Low voltage/voice data/alarm $20 per $1,000 or
fraction thereof
Wind/solar electric $20 per $1,000 or
fraction thereof
Plan review: third-party contract $75 per hour
Chapter 166, Fire Prevention
Permits
Bonfire: for institutional use only (each
permit)
$100
Fireworks $500
Blasting, residential $150
Blasting, nonresidential $150
§ 162-6 CHARTER § 162-6
C:369
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
Fire Marshal report
Residential $50
Nonresidential $100
Storage tanks
Repairs and alterations $50 per tank
Abandonment or removal $200 per tank
Installation $200 per tank
Chapter 170, Food Establishment Fees
Indoor dining
License and inspection
For seats
0 to 30 seats $200
31 to 70 $250
71 to 110 $350
111 to 150 $425
151 to 190 $475
191 to 230 $525
231 to 300 $625
301 and over $725
For floor area (square feet)
0 to 1,500 $150
1,501 to 2,500 $200
2,501 to 5,000 $275
5,001 to 7,500 $350
7,501 to 10,000 $450
10,001 to 15,000 $575
15,000 and over $725
License for selling ice cream from a motor
vehicle
(excludes vendors requiring Department of
Agriculture approval)
$100
Food vendor (mobile and vendors requiring
Department of Agriculture approval)
$200
Temporary food establishment $125
Special event sponsor $250
§ 162-6 RADNOR CODE § 162-6
C:370
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
Plan review
Food establishment $150 per initial review
Resubmitting plans $75
Reinspection for a failed inspection 50% of initial fee
Annual outdoor dining renewal $150
Dining application renewal late fee
Indoor 75% of license fee
Outdoor $70
Chapter 178, Historical and Architectural Review Board (HARB)
Application to HARB $50
Chapter 195, Mechanical
HVAC license, annual (air conditioning, heating
and refrigeration, mchs.)
$50
Residential, one- and two-family
Permit for geothermal/HVAC systems $100
Permit to replace, modify or relocate duct
work
$50
Water well or nonpotable water, irrigation $100
Solar mechanical/plumbing $150
Permit to add, modify or extend radiant/
baseboard or other hydromechanical
systems
$50
Permit for new or replacement central
heating systems
$15 first 10,000 BTUs,
$5 each additional
10,000 BTUs
Permit for new or replacement air
conditioning central systems
$100
Permit for new or replacement heat pump $100
Permit for all well-driven or mechanical
water supply systems for geothermal HVAC
systems
$100
Solar mechanical/plumbing $150
Commercial, institution, public land use,
recreation, multifamily permit fees
Geothermal/HVAC system wells
0 to 10 $200
11 to 30 $350
§ 162-6 CHARTER § 162-6
C:371
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
31 or more $500
New or replacement, including duct work
Central heating system (regardless of fuel
source)
$30 for 10,000 BTUs,
$10 each additional
10,000 BTUs (fee capped
at 1,000,000 BTUs)
Air conditioning systems $30 for 10,000 BTUs,
$10 each additional
10,000 BTUs (fee capped
at 1,000,000 BTUs)
Heat pump $30 for 10,000 BTUs,
$10 each additional
10,000 BTUs
Replace, modify or relocate duct work $20 for each $1,000, or
portion of cost
Refrigeration units (including walk-in boxes,
other units with remote compressors)
$20 first ton or portion
thereof, $10 each
additional ton, or portion
thereof
Solar mechanical/plumbing $175
Water wells or nonpotable water wells $100
Chapter 218, Plumbing
Plumber license (annual) $50
Residential (one- and two-family) permits
New work, alterations, additions, and repairs $75 for more than 5
fixtures, $5 each
additional fixture
Alterations/additions/repairs one fixture
(minimum fee)
$35
Pipe repair $75
Exterior lateral sewer connection or repair $150
Interior main drain alteration or
replacement (which includes stack vent)
$75
Garbage grinders and dishwashers (new
installation or replacement)
$15 each
All gas and electric appliances needing gas
or plumbing piping
$75 for first unit, $15 for
each additional
Water service (new or replacement) $75
§ 162-6 RADNOR CODE § 162-6
C:372
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
Domestic hot water heater (new or
replacement)
$20
Sewer ejection pump (new or replacement,
not including connection)
$50, pump capacity 21
gallons per minute; $150,
pump capacity greater
than 21 gallons per
minute
Permit fee for sewer grinder pumps and pit (EOne
System)
$300
Commercial, institution, public land use,
recreation, multifamily
New work, alterations, additions not
exceeding 5 fixtures
$75, $5 each additional
fixture
External lateral sewer connection or repair
main drain or sewer connection (new)
$150
Pipe repair $100
Garbage grinders and dishwashers (new
installation or replacement)
$30 each
Main interior drain replacement, alteration
or repair (including stack vent)
$75
Sewer ejection pump (new or replacement) $50, pump capacity less
than or equal to 21
gallons per minute; $300,
pump capacity greater
than 21 gallons per
minute
All gas and electrical appliances requiring
plumbing or mechanical installation (new or
replacement, including gas piping)
$75 for first unit, $15 for
each additional
Water service (new or replacement) $100
Each hot water heater (new or replacement) $75
Interceptors and separators (new or
replacement)
$75
Sewer grinder pumps (new or replacement) $500
Chapter 226, Rental Housing
Rental housing permits $60 each unit (1 to 10),
$40 each additional unit
Rental Housing Appeals Board $2,500 plus $500 for
each subsequent hearing
Reinspection after a 2nd failed inspection $100
§ 162-6 CHARTER § 162-6
C:373
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
Application late fee
July 1 to July 31 $100
On or after August 1 $150
Chapter 280, Zoning Hearing Board
Applications
Zoning Hearing Board, application fees
One- and two-family dwellings, rooming
house, multifamily
$550, plus $275 for each
additional hearing
Nonresidential uses (including community,
planned, institutional and public land use)
$900, plus $450 for each
additional hearing
Challenge to the validity of map or
ordinance
$7,500, plus $450 for
each additional hearing
Board of Commissioners
Application to amend zoning map/
ordinance
$1,500, plus $750 for
each additional hearing
Application for conditional use $1,500, plus $750 for
each additional hearing
Curative amendment $7,500, plus $750 for
each additional hearing
Appeals from Zoning Officer or Township
Engineer
Residential $550, plus $275 for each
additional hearing
Nonresidential $900, plus $450 for each
additional hearing
Fee for postponement of a public hearing when
requested following publication of the required
legal notice
$200
Zoning books $30
Other Community Development
Code appeals application fee: building,
electrical, fire prevention, mechanical,
plumbing, property maintenance
$750
Intermunicipal transfer of liquor license $1,500, plus $750 for
each additional hearing
Pennsylvania state assessed training fee,
building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical
$4.50 per permit
Administration of Pennsylvania state assessed
training fee
$2 per permit
§ 162-6 RADNOR CODE § 162-6
C:374
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
Zoning maps $15
Plan review (Payment is due when the permit is
issued)
$95
Code Official overtime rate $100 per hour
Administrative refund fee 10% or $30, whichever is
greater
Dormitory inspection fee $24 per room
Appeal of health enforcement notice to Board of
Health
Single-family residential $550
Multifamily residential and nonresidential $900
Change in contractor
Residential new one- and two-family
dwelling
10% of existing permit
fee or $20, whichever is
greater
Commercial, institution, public land use,
recreation, multifamily buildings and fire
supression systems
10% of existing permit
fee or $50 minimum,
whichever is greater
Fee for work without permits $200 construction cost
up to $10,000
$330 construction cost
$10,000 to $25,000
$650 construction cost
$25,000 to $50,000
$1,250 construction cost
over $50,000
Engineering Department
Grading Permit Fees
Shed permit fee $120
Grading permit application, minor (less than
500 square feet new impervious or
disturbance)
$510
§ 162-6 CHARTER § 162-6
C:375
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
This permit is for smaller projects where
construction is less than 500 square feet of
new impervious surface or site disturbance.
The cost includes a $500 permit fee, plan
review, and inspection. Should the cost of
reviews and/or inspections exceed $460, the
applicant will be required to pay the overage
before the project is approved. A certificate
of occupancy will not be issued unless all
improvements are installed, inspected, and
approved by the Township.
Grading permit application (New impervious
surface greater than 500 square feet but less
than 1,500 square feet)
$1,500 (combined
application fee and
professional services
account)
This application is to be used when new
impervious is greater than 500 square
feet, but less than 1,500 square feet. A
groundwater recharge system is required
to mitigate this amount of new impervious.
This cost includes the $50 permit fee,
reviews, and inspections. No escrow is
required for the improvements; a
certificate of occupancy will not be issued
unless all improvements are installed,
inspected, and approved by the Township
The applicant is required
to pay all cost overages;
i.e., if the balance of the
account, after deducting
current review fees is
less than $500, the
applicant will be
required to deposit
additional funds to keep
the balance at $1,500. All
unused funds will be
returned to the applicant
upon inspection and
approval of the project.
A signed deposit slip is required at the
time of application submission.
Stormwater management permit application
(for projects with more than 1,500 new
impervious or disturbance)
$3,050 (combined
application fee and
professional services
account)
§ 162-6 RADNOR CODE § 162-6
C:376
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
The fee includes the application fee of
$50, with the balance funding the
professional services account. A
professional services (PSA) account will be
funded by the applicant with a balance of
$3,000. The review process, inspections,
SWM agreement, and other
communications will be billed per the
attached fee schedule, and reimbursed by
the applicant funded PSA. For single lot
construction, an escrow for nondedicated
improvements is not required; a certificate
of occupancy will not be issued unless all
improvements are installed, inspected,
and approved by the Township. An escrow
account will be required for improvements
dedicated to the Township.
Professional services
account required. The
applicant is required to
pay all cost overages;
upon the balance of the
PSA reaching $1,000,
applicant will be
required to deposit
appropriate funds to
keep balance at $3,000.
All unused funds will be
returned to the applicant
upon completion of
project.
A signed deposit slip is required at the time
of application submission.
Subdivision/Land Development ("SALDO")
Sketch plan, reverse subdivision, lot line
change, lot consolidation.
$4,400 combined
application fee and PSA
These require a $4,000 professional services
account. Upon the balance of the PSA
reaching $1,000, applicant will be required
to deposit appropriate funds to keep balance
at $4,000. All unused funds will be returned
to the applicant upon completion of project.
A signed deposit slip is required at the time
of application submission.
All Land Development (minor, major,
multifamily, etc.). All land development
applications will include a combined permit fee
and PSA. The combined fee is $17,000. All
reviews and legal are billed against the PSA;
when the balance of the PSA falls to $5,000, the
applicant is required to deposit funds to achieve
a balance of $10,000 in the PSA account. A
signed deposit slip is required at the time of
application submission.
$17,000 combined
application fee and PSA
Inspections of improvements Inspection by staff
inspector, $85 per hour.
All others, see rates in
Appendix A1
§ 162-6 CHARTER § 162-6
C:377
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
Review of development plans, including
legal, SWM agreements, developers
agreements, escrow review, financial
security agreements, by staff, consultants,
and/or solicitor
See rates in Appendix A1
Transfer of real estate fee $150 per property
Transfer of real estate fee, expedited in 13
days or less
$300 per property
Notes: All professional service account funds are required to be deposited
with the Township at the time of the initial plan application pursuant to
the Township's professional services agreement. The Township-incurred
professional fees shall be billed in accordance with the professional
service fees in Appendix A.123
Sewage Enforcement
Sewage Enforcement Officer permits $750 per application
(includes inspection)
Additional perc test $350
Repairs to existing system $350
Other Engineering
Sidewalk replacement permit fee
1 to 10 blocks $50
11 to 20 blocks $100
21+ blocks $125
Clearing permits (If inspections are required,
they will be charged in accordance with
Appendix A124)
$250 per acre
Plotter Services
8.5 inches by 11 inches or 9 inches by 12
inches
$1.50 (black and white),
$5 (color)
11 inches by 14 inches $3 (black and white), $9
(color)
11 inches by 17 inches or 12 inches by 18
inches
$10 (black and white),
$12 (color)
17 inches by 22 inches or 18 inches by 24
inches
$15 (black and white),
$18 (color)
22 inches by 34 inches or 24 inches by 36
inches
$20 (black and white),
$22 (color)
123. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
124. Editor’s Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 162-6 RADNOR CODE § 162-6
C:378
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
34 inches by 44 inches or 36 inches by 48
inches
$22 (black and white),
$35 (color)
Finance and Administration
Stormwater and Sanitary Sewer Fees
Sanitary sewer rent (per 1,000 gallons of water
used)
$7.14
Sanitary sewer rent delinquent charges 1% monthly beginning
June 1 through March 1
applied on the full
outstanding balance from
the previous month
Stormwater fee $29 per unit
Stormwater fee delinquent charges 0.5% monthly beginning
March 1 through
December 1 applied on
the full outstanding
balance from the
previous month
Stormwater or sanitary certification fee $7.50
Expedited stormwater or sanitary certification
fee surcharge (if request submitted within 48
hours of desired date/time)
$20
Sanitary sewer connection fees, new
Residential $850
Commercial $1,250
Multifamily
0 to 10 units $500 per unit
11 or more units $400 per unit
Minimum sewer service charge $65
Filing of lien (to include, but not limited to,
stormwater fee, sanitary sewer rent, or
property maintenance costs)
$125 attorney
$18.50 filing
Delinquent accounts
Writ of scire facias $100 attorney
$22.50 filing
Entering of judgment $150 attorney
$13.50 filing
Sheriff sale Actual cost
§ 162-6 CHARTER § 162-6
C:379
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
Other, Finance Department
Business privilege and mercantile license fee $10
Postage: nonresident Actual cost
Returned check $50
Refund fee 10% per refund, with a
minimum of $10
Right-to-know requests
Public document copy charges $0.25 per one-sided page
Public document CD creation charges $5 each
Certification of record $1
Information Technology
Room Rentals
General: The Township offers three conference rooms for rental. Rates
double on Saturday, Sunday, and Township holidays. Contact Township for
conference room and equipment rental policy and room availability. Please
see the Information Technology Policy for Rental and Use of Township
Conference Rooms and Equipment for fee waiver opportunities.
Friends Meeting Room (ground floor); capacity
40
$50 per hour
Radnorshire Room (first floor); capacity 125 $100 per hour
Radnorshire Room (first floor); capacity 125 —
tenant rental
$250 per hour
Powys Room (first floor); capacity 15 $35 per hour
Hourly Equipment and Staffing Fees
General: Conference rooms offer additional equipment features such as a
podium, microphones, special seating configurations, additional tables, A/
V equipment, TV/DVD/VCR and wireless Internet. A/V equipment rentals
require staffing, a minimum of two-hour charge, and rates double after
four hours. Contact Township for conference room and equipment rental
policy and staffing availability.
IT staff member (as needed) $50 per hour
Room setup and breakdown (for equipment,
configuration, etc.)
$50 per hour
Room cleanup (trash, nonrequested setup, etc.) $100 per hour
Podium (Radnorshire room only; no
microphone)
$0
Microphones: 21 conference room and 1
podium microphones
$50 per hour
§ 162-6 RADNOR CODE § 162-6
C:380
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
Wireless microphones: 2 hand-held and 2
lavaliere (combination of any 2)
$30 per hour
Projectors: 2 HD DLP projectors $70 per hour (each)
Monitors: 13 LCD monitors for viewing
projections/DVD/VCR
$20 per hour
Document camera: view hard documents on
large screens
$60 per hour
DVD/VCR $15 per hour
Laptop use $40 per hour
DVD copy; recording event on DVD (limit 1) $15 per hour
Digital format; recording event in other digital
format (limit 1)
$15 per hour
Portable projector $50 per hour
50-inch plasma TV usage $70 per hour
Graphics: character-generated graphics
inserted on screen
$10 per hour
Package Fees
General: Conference rooms, A/V equipment, and staffing rentals are
available as a package rental. Package rentals require staffing, a minimum
of two-hour charge and rates double after four hours. Contact Township
for conference room and equipment rental policy and staffing availability.
Powys Room only: 50-inch plasma and laptop $100 per hour
Radnorshire Room (no recording);
microphones, laptop, projector, setup and
breakdown
$250 per hour
Radnorshire Room (recording): microphones,
laptop, projector, DVD recording, setup and
breakdown
$350 per hour
Film and Video Production Fees
General: The film and video production permit is designed to provide
effective coordination of events, including the filming and videotaping of
television, film, commercial, nonprofit, and feature productions.
Film and video production permit $250 per production
Parks and Recreation
General Programming and Events
§ 162-6 CHARTER § 162-6
C:381
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
Programming and event fees are determined and allocated on an ongoing
basis as they are planned. Specific programming and event identification
remains under continual development, generally on a seasonal basis and
once applicable direct costs are determined. Fees for those specific
programs and events are set to cover the direct costs along with
attempting to recover the associated overhead for the corresponding
program or event. In the majority of circumstances, the direct costs of
programming and events are not incurred unless the proceeds collected
cover those costs. The Recreation Department determines the fees for
programming and events on an ongoing basis throughout the
developmental process.
Administrative Fees
Refund fee 10% of total fee paid;
minimum $10 charge
Nonresident program or event participation fee $30 per person per
registration
Parks, Picnic Areas, Fields, and Facilities
Fenimore Woods/Clem Macrone Park pavilion
rental
$75 resident
$150 nonresident/
companies
Picnic/court/park area rental $55 resident
$100 nonresident/
companies
Photo permit for Township park grounds $75 per hour residents
$100 per hour
nonresidents/companies
Field permitting fee (to cover the permitting
costs for athletic fields)
$60 per field (3-hour
usage), residents
$100 per field (3-hour
usage), nonresidents/
companies
Adult league team field permit (softball, soccer,
baseball, etc.) (The above fee applies to
programs that utilize both Township fields and
school district fields.)
$100 per season (not to
exceed 10-week period)
§ 162-6 RADNOR CODE § 162-6
C:382
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
Field permitting fee: for-profit/restricted
groups, private educational institutions,
organizations or programs (These fees do not
apply to Radnor community youth sports
organizations that include Radnor Soccer Club,
Radnor Wayne Little League and Radnor Girls/
Boys Lacrosse. Exceptions for this fee will
consist of Radnor Township restricted groups,
private educational institutions, organizations
or programs that provide the Township with the
equivalent usage of its facility. These
occurrences will be documented and provided
to the Parks Board and BOC as they are
recommended.)
$15 per person per
season (not to exceed
10-week period)
Radnor Memorial Park turf field permit fee (Fee
was originally developed and structured within
the Radnor Memorial Turf/Agnes Irwin School
lease agreement)
Radnor residents/Radnor nonprofit
organizations or programs
$75 per 3-hour usage
Radnor private educational institutions,
organizations or programs
$75 per hour
Non-Radnor residents/non-Radnor nonprofit
organizations, educational institutions or
programs
$125 per hour
For-profit businesses or nonresident groups $175 per hour
(The above fees do not apply to Radnor
Community youth sports organizations that
include Radnor Soccer Club, Radnor Wayne
Little League and Radnor Girls/Boys
Lacrosse.)
Radnor Memorial Park turf field lights fee $18 per hour
Advertising Fees (not applicable to Township newsletter)
Business card advertising in brochure $200 per advertisement
Single edition publication, advertising in
Township/Department publication for
commercial business
Business card $225 per advertisement
1/4 page $450 per advertisement
1/2 page $650 per advertisement
§ 162-6 CHARTER § 162-6
C:383
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
Full page (does not include inside front or
back cover)
$950 per advertisement
Township Website advertising $600 for 3 months;
$2,200 for 1 year
License fee advertising banner for Encke fields $2,000 per field
Radnor Activity Center (RAC) at Sulpizio Gym Permit Usage Fees
Full gymnasium rentals
Radnor residents/Radnor nonprofit
organizations or programs (The above fees
do not apply to Radnor community youth
sports organizations that include the Radnor
Youth Basketball League, Radnor Soccer
Club, Radnor Wayne Little League and
Radnor Girls/Boys Lacrosse)
$60 per hour
Radnor Township community youth sports
organizations operating as nonprofit entities
only
$15 per hour
Radnor Township community youth sports
organizations; for-profit contracted vendors
operating on behalf of the nonprofit
community youth sports organizations
$35 per hour
Non-Radnor residents/Non-Radnor nonprofit
organizations or groups
$110 per hour
Radnor Township businesses, educational
institutions, organizations or programs
$110 per hour
Non-Radnor businesses, educational
institutions, organizations or programs
$200 per hour
Birthday party/gymnasium: 2-hour party with
event leader and party room
$300 Residents
$350 Nonresidents
Room add-on fee to gym rental $25 flat fee
Police Department
Alarm registration $100
Accident report $15
Fingerprinting $30 first card, $20 for
additional card
Picture $30 each
Incident report As allowed under
Pennsylvania Right to
Know Law
§ 162-6 RADNOR CODE § 162-6
C:384
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
Parking permit, residential permits $25 residents
$75 nonresidents
$10 senior citizens
$5 temporary parking,
per day
Parking permit fee, Louella Park and Walk $190 Half year
$375 Full year
Meter bag fee/parking space reservation $10 per day per parking
space
Peddling and soliciting $110
Extra-duty fee/detail rate 1.7 times patrolman
overtime rate
Police vehicle at location (owner request) $25 per hour per vehicle
Videotape/DVD $75 per copy
Records check $30 written, $15 verbal
Police service (notarized document) $45 per service
Expungement letter $100
K9 services (Note: This only applies to
nonemergency calls for service.)
During shift: $100 per
hour, 2- or 4-hour
minimum at P.D.
discretion
Nonshift: Paid at detail
rate (above), 2- or 4-hour
minimum at P.D.
discretion
Fines
False alarms $70 2nd occurrence
$140 3rd or more
occurrences
Parking $20 plus $25 for late
payments
Public Works Department
Road opening permit $150 per 100 feet cut
(permit fee only)
§ 162-6 CHARTER § 162-6
C:385
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description Amount of Fee
The applicant will be required to set up a
professional services account with the
Township to cover the cost of inspections, legal,
compaction testing and items, as required.
Opening balance of the PSA is $15,000.
Bulk trash collection $50 less than 5 items or
150 pounds total weight
+$25 each additional 5
items
+$25 each item over 150
pounds
+$10 each item with
Freon
+$5 each item with
propane
Recycling can replacement $30 per can
Rear yard trash collection
Single and multifamily units with less than 9
attached units
$500 per house or unit
per year
Multifamily units with greater than 9
attached units
$275 per unit per year
§ 162-7. Penalty for nonpayment. [Added 12-15-1997 by Ord. No.
97-41]
Except as otherwise provided by any other ordinance relating to a specific
fee, all fees charged for services in fiscal year 1998 and thereafter shall be
subject to a penalty of 10% and interest levied at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per
month on any payment or any unpaid portion thereof not received by the
Township within 30 days after an invoice for said services shall have been
initially sent to the recipient for whom said services were rendered.
Chapter 164
FIRE CONTROL MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 19. Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
§ 162-6 RADNOR CODE § 164-1
C:386
§ 164-1. Scope.
The following provisions are general provisions for the purpose of
establishing basic fire control measures and regulations governing
conditions which could impede or interfere with fire suppression forces.
§ 164-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE OFFICIAL — The Director of Community Development or duly
authorized representative.
FIRE COMPANY — Any organized fire company which has responded in
Radnor Township for the purpose of extinguishment of a fire or other
emergency involving protection of life and/or property or when its
assistance has been requested by the officer-in-charge of the incident.
OFFICER-IN-CHARGE — The Chief of the fire company or designee in
whose district the emergency occurs or, in his absence, the next ranking
officer following the chain of command established by the rules of the fire
company in whose district the emergency occurs.
§ 164-3. Authority of officer-in-charge.
The officer-in-charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the
protection of life and/or property is empowered to:
A. Control and direct the activities at such scene.
B. Prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and
may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle
or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire
company.
C. Remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from
hazardous areas for the purpose of protecting such person, vehicle or
object. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so
immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized by the
officer-in-charge.
D. Blockade any public highway, street or private right-of-way temporarily
while at the scene.
E. Trespass at any time of the day or night without liability while at such
scene.
F. Enter any building, including private dwellings, or any premises where
a fire is in progress for the purpose of extinguishing the fire.
G. Enter any building, including private dwellings, or premises near the
scene of the fire for the purpose of protecting the building or premises
§ 164-1 CHARTER § 164-3
C:387
§ 164-4. Interference with fire suppression forces.
or for the purpose of extinguishing the fire which is in progress in
another building or premises.
H. Direct without liability the removal or destroying of any fence, house,
motor vehicle or other thing which he may judge necessary to be pulled
down or destroyed to prevent the further spread of fire.
I. Request and be supplied with additional materials, such as sand,
treatments, chemicals, etc., and special equipment, when it is deemed a
necessity, to prevent the further spread of the fire or hazardous
condition, the cost of which is to be borne by such property owner.
J. Order disengagement of any convoy, caravan, train of vehicles, craft or
railway cars if deemed a necessity in the interest of safety of persons or
property.
K. Take command of all industrial management, fire brigades or Fire
Chiefs whenever his fire company is called to respond to such if, in his
opinion, such action is in the interest of public safety.
A. Interference with fire company operations. It shall be unlawful to
interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with,
obstruct or restrict the mobility of or block the path of travel of any fire
company emergency vehicle in any way or to interfere with, attempt to
interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire
company operation.
B. Compliance with orders. A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of the officer-in-charge or
designee to interfere with the compliance attempts of another
individual.
C. Vehicles crossing fire hose. A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled
over any unprotected fire hose of a fire company when laid down on any
street, alleyway, private drive or any other vehicular roadway without
the consent of the officer-in-charge or designee of said operation.
D. Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire company emergency
equipment. A person shall not, without proper authorization from the
officer-in-charge or designee of said fire company emergency
equipment, cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or
swing upon any fire company emergency vehicle, whether the same is
in motion or at rest, sound the siren, horn, bell or other soundproducing
device thereon or manipulate or tamper with or attempt to
manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting device,
brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective clothing on or a part of
any fire company emergency vehicle.
E. Damage; injury to fire company equipment; personnel. It shall be
unlawful for any person to damage or deface or attempt or conspire to
§ 164-3 RADNOR CODE § 164-4
C:388
§ 164-5. Fire hydrants.
§ 164-6. Maintenance of equipment.
A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb
any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained
under the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code125 except for the purpose
of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes recharging or making
necessary repairs or when permitted by the code official. Whenever a fire
appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled
as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished.
Defective and non-approved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced
or repaired as directed by the code official.
damage or deface any fire company emergency vehicle at any time or to
injure or attempt to injure or conspire to injure fire company personnel
while performing fire company duties.
A. General. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface,
obstruct or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any Fire
Department connection for the pressurization of fire suppression
systems, including fire hydrants and Fire Department connections that
are located on public or private streets and access lanes or on private
property. If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of
violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the code
official shall proceed to remove the same. Costs incurred in the
performance of necessary work shall be paid from Township funds on
certificate of the code official and with the approval of the chief
administrative official; and the legal authority of the municipality shall
institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs.
B. Hydrant use approval. A person shall not use or operate any fire
hydrant intended for use of the fire company for fire suppression
purposes unless such person first secures a permit for such use from
the code official and the water company having jurisdiction. This
section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a person employed
by, and authorized to make such use by, the water company having
jurisdiction or to the use by fire companies for the purpose of training.
C. Public water supply. The code official shall recommend to the chief
administrative official of the municipality the location or relocation of
new or existing fire hydrants and the placement or replacement of
inadequate water mains located upon public property and deemed
necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and distribution pattern. A
fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from service until
approved by the code official.
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 166, Fire Prevention.
§ 164-4 CHARTER § 164-7
C:389
§ 164-7. Street obstructions.
A person or persons shall not erect, construct, place or maintain any fences,
gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type of
obstruction in or on any street within the boundaries of the municipality.
The word "street" as used in this code shall mean any roadway accessible to
the public for vehicular traffic, including but not limited to private streets
or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the
boundaries of the municipality.
§ 164-8. Radnor Township fire districts.
Fire companies will provide protection against fire within the following
described areas unless prevented from doing so by commitment as a result
of a prior call:
§ 164-9. Assistance; mutual aid.
A. Broomall Fire Company: bounded on the north by Goshen Road and
Roberts Road, on the east by Sproul Road and Darby-Paoli Road, on the
south by Marple Township line and on the west by the Newtown
Township line.
B. Bryn Mawr Fire Company: bounded on the north by North Spring Mill
Road and Sproul Road, on the east by County Line Road, on the south
by Landover Road and Haverford Township line and on the west by
Sproul Road.
C. Radnor Fire Company: bounded on the north by the Tredyffrin and
Upper Merion Township lines, on the east by County Line Road and
Sproul Road, on the south by Sproul Road, North Spring Mill Road,
Bryn Mawr Avenue and Goshen Road and on the west by Newtown
Township line.
A. If Broomall or Bryn Mawr Fire Companies require assistance in fighting
a fire in their districts of Radnor Township, the second company to be
called shall be the Radnor Fire Company.
B. On a fire call for any of the boundary line roads, the fire company
receiving the call shall respond.
C. The officer-in-charge of the fire company in whose district the
emergency occurs retains command of the emergency.
D. If Broomall or Bryn Mawr Fire Companies are not available to respond
to an emergency in Radnor Township, Radnor Fire Company shall be
called and shall respond.
E. Mutual aid will be extended by all fire companies, depending on
availability, as required by the officer-in-charge.
§ 164-7 RADNOR CODE § 164-10
C:390
§ 164-10. Compensation.
The annual compensation for service to be performed as described above
shall be determined by the Radnor Township Board of Commissioners, said
compensation to continue from year to year until termination by either party
at the end of any calendar year.
§ 164-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate a provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 165
FIRE LOSS REIMBURSEMENT CLAIMS AND PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire control management — See Ch. 164. Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
§ 165-1. Use of fire insurance proceeds.
A. No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter "insurer")
doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim
of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within Radnor
Township where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the
structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insurer is
furnished by the Township with a certificate pursuant to Subsection
508(b) of the Insurance Company Law of 1921, as amended by Act 98 of
1992 and Act 93 of 1994 (40 P.S. § 638) (the "Act") and unless there is
compliance with the procedures set forth in Subsections 508(c) and (d)
of the Act, as amended.
B. Municipal claims and expenses.
(1) Where there are delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against the property ("municipal claims"), or there are
expenses which Radnor Township has incurred as a cost for the
removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the
property (collectively "municipal expenses"), the Township shall
immediately render a bill for such work, if it has not already done
so. Upon written request of the named insured specifying the tax
description of the property, the name and address of the insurer
and the date of receipt by the insurer of a loss report of the claim,
the Township shall furnish a certificate within 14 working days
after the request, to the insurer, a certificate (or at the Township's
discretion, an oral notice confirmed in writing) either:
§ 164-10 CHARTER § 165-1
C:391
(a) Stating that there are no unpaid municipal claims or municipal
expenses against the property; or
(b) Specifying the nature and amount of such claims or expenses,
accompanied by a bill for such amounts.
(2) Taxes, assessments, penalties, and user charges shall be deemed
delinquent for this purpose if a lien could have been filed for such
claims under applicable law.
C. Upon receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to Subsection B above,
the insurer shall transfer to the Township an amount from the insurance
proceeds sufficient to pay such sums prior to making payment to the
named insured, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
D. When all municipal claims and municipal expenses have been paid
pursuant to Subsection C above, or where the Township has issued a
certificate described in Subsection B(1) above indicating that there are
no municipal claims or municipal expenses against the property, the
insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided, however,
that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured and the insurer
equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire
policies covering the building or structure, the following procedures
must be followed:
(1) The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Secretary of the Township, in the aggregate, $2,000 for each
$15,000 of such claim or fraction thereof.
(2) If at the time a loss report is submitted by the insured, such insured
has submitted to the insurer, with a copy to Radnor Township, a
contractor's signed estimate of the cost of removing, repairing, or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the
insurer shall transfer to the Secretary of the Township from the
insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
(3) If there is more than one insurer, the transfer of proceeds shall be
on a pro rata basis by all insurers insuring the building or other
structure.
(4) Upon receipt of the above-described portion of the insurance
proceeds, the Secretary of the Township shall do the following:
(a) Place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as
security against the total municipal expenses anticipated by
Radnor Township to be required in removing, repairing, or
securing the building or structure as required by this chapter.
Such costs shall include, without limitation, any engineering,
legal, or administrative costs incurred by Radnor Township in
connection with such removal, repair, or securing or any
proceedings related thereto.
§ 165-1 RADNOR CODE § 165-1
C:392
§ 165-2. Limits of liability.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to make an insurance company,
association, or exchange liable for any amount in excess of proceeds
payable under its insurance policy or for any other act performed pursuant
to this chapter or to make Radnor Township or any public Radnor Township
official an insured under a policy of insurance or to create an obligation to
pay delinquent property taxes or unpaid removal liens or expenses other
than as provided in this chapter.
§ 165-3. Insurance company rights reserved.
An insurance company, association, or exchange making payment of policy
proceeds under this chapter for delinquent taxes or structure removal liens
(b) Mail to the named insured, at the address received from the
insurer, a notice that the proceeds have been received by
Radnor Township and that the procedures under this chapter
shall be followed.
(c) After the transfer, the named insured may submit to Radnor
Township a contractor's signed estimate of the cost of
removing, repairing, or securing the building or other
structure, in which event the Secretary of the Township shall, if
such estimate is deemed by the Secretary of the Township to
be reasonable, return to the insured the amount of the funds
transferred to Radnor Township in excess of that required to
pay the municipal expenses; provided, the Township has not
commenced to remove, repair, or secure the building or other
structure, in which case the Township will complete the work.
(d) Pay to the Township, for reimbursement to the Radnor
Township general fund, the amount of the municipal expenses
paid by the Township.
(e) Pay the remaining balance in the fund (without interest) to the
named insured upon receipt of a certificate issued by the
Secretary of the Township that the repair, removal, or securing
of the building or other structure has been completed in
accordance with all applicable codes and regulations of Radnor
Township.
(f) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the ability of
Radnor Township to recover any deficiency in the amount of
municipal claims or municipal expenses recovered pursuant to
this chapter, or to insurance proceeds, by an action at law or in
equity to enforce the codes of Radnor Township or to enter into
an agreement with the named insured with regard to such
other disposition of the proceeds as the Township may deem
responsible.
§ 165-1 CHARTER § 165-3
C:393
or removal expenses incurred by Radnor Township shall have a full benefit
of such payment, including all rights of subrogation and of assignment.
§ 165-4. Construction.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to deter
the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage the
abandonment of property, and to prevent urban blight and deterioration.
§ 165-5. Notification of Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development.
The Secretary of the Township shall transmit a certified copy of this chapter
promptly to the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development.
§ 165-6. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, named insured, or insurer who violates the
provisions of this chapter or who shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements hereof shall be sentenced, upon conviction thereof, to a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs. Each day for which an offense shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 166
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of standard codes of technical
regulations — See Charter § 3.06.
Code Appeals Board — See Ch. 15.
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 134.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 144A.
Contractors — See Ch. 145.
Design review — See Ch. 150.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 156.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 158.
Fees — See Ch. 162.
Fuel gas — See Ch. 172.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 166-1. Adoption of code by reference.
Certain documents on file in the office of the Secretary of the Township
of Radnor, being marked and designated as the "2009 International Fire
Code," as published by the International Code Council, Inc., are hereby
adopted as the Fire Code of Radnor Township, Delaware County, in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings and structures
§ 165-3 RADNOR CODE § 166-1
C:394
as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of said 2009 International Fire Code are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter,
with additions, deletions, insertions and changes as herein prescribed.
§ 166-2. Additions, insertions, deletions and changes to code.
The following sections and subsections of the aforementioned 2009
International Fire Code, are hereby added, amended, changed, deleted and
clarified as set forth below.
A. Chapter 1, Administration.
(1) Section 101, General.
(a) In Subsection 101.1, Title, the "Township of Radnor" shall be
inserted as the name of the jurisdiction.
(b) Add Subsection 101.6, Terms, to read as follows:
101.6 Terms. Whenever in said Fire Code a municipality or
jurisdiction is mentioned and no name is given therefor, said
municipality or jurisdiction shall be construed to mean the
Township of Radnor, or where a state is mentioned, the same
shall mean the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Section 103, Department of Fire Prevention.
(a) Delete Subsections 103.1 through 103.3 and substitute with
the following:
103.1 General. The Director of Community Development or
any authorized agent or employee thereof shall be designated
as the Fire Code Official for the purposes of this code.
103.2 Appointment. The Fire Code Official and employees
of the Department of Community Development shall be
appointed in accordance with the personnel procedures and
policies of the Township of Radnor.
(3) Section 105, Permits.
(a) Add to Subsection 105.1.1, Permits required: Permits shall be
issued upon payment of fees as required under Chapter 162,
Fees, of the Township Code.
(b) Add to Subsection 105.1.2, Types of permits:
3. The Fire Code Official shall determine when an operational
permit or a construction permit is required.
(c) Subsection 105.3.1, Expiration. Delete all language following
the word "obtained" on line nine.
§ 166-1 CHARTER § 166-2
C:395
(d) Subsection 105.6.30, Open burning. Delete "exception:
recreational fires."
(4) Section 108, Board of Appeals.
(a) Delete this entire section and substitute the following:
SECTION 108
MEANS OF APPEAL
108.1 Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision or
interpretation by the Code Official made under provisions of
this code may, in person or through his duly authorized agent
or attorney, file an appeal within 10 days after such decision
with the Code Appeals Board. Such appeal shall be in writing,
state the decision of the Code Official and the reasons for the
exception taken thereto and shall be filed with the Township
Secretary. The Code Appeals Board shall, within 30 days from
the date of filing, fix a date, time and location to consider the
appeal, and to allow the person to be heard if he states his
desire to do so in the written appeal. A prompt decision shall
be rendered by the Code Appeals Board and duly recorded,
with such decision being final.
(5) Section 109, Violations.
(a) Subsection 109.2.3, Prosecution of violations. Delete the words
on the third line "to request the legal counsel of the
jurisdiction."
(b) Subsection 109.3 Violation penalties. Delete this subsection
and substitute with the following:
109.3 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate
a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with the
requirements or directives of the Fire Code Official or of
a permit issued under this code shall, upon conviction, be
punishable by a fine of not more than 1,000. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(6) Section 111, Stop Work Order.
(a) Subsection 111.4, Failure to comply. Insert in the first blank
"25" and in the second blank insert "1,000."
B. Chapter 2, Definitions.
(1) Section 202, General Definitions.
(a) Amend the definition of "Fire Code Official" to read as follows:
§ 166-2 RADNOR CODE § 166-2
C:396
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of Community
Development charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or his duly authorized
representative.
(b) Add the definition of "Department" to read as follows:
DEPARTMENT. The Department of Community Development
of Radnor Township or any authorized agent or employee
thereof.
(c) Add the definition of "Township" to read as follows:
TOWNSHIP. The Township of Radnor in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
C. Chapter 3, General Precautions Against Fire.
(1) Section 307, Open Burning and Recreational Fires.
(a) Delete Subsections 307.1 through 307.5 and substitute with
the following:
307.1 Outdoor fires. Outdoor fires shall be subject to the
following regulations, and no person shall kindle or maintain
any outdoor fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or
maintained unless the following conditions are met:
1. The location of the fire is not less than 60 feet from any
building or structure and not less than 60 feet from any
property line or street line.
2. Burning of dry tree limbs and brush and leaves shall be
prohibited by this code.
3. No burning may occur before 8:00 a.m., and the fire must
be completely extinguished, including smoldering, before
4:00 p.m.
4. The fire must be attended constantly by the property
owner or by a designee competent to comply with these
regulations. A charged water hose attached to an operable
water faucet, capable of extending 15 feet beyond the site
of the fire, shall be maintained at all times.
5. Burning shall not take place during periods of high winds
or drought or in periods of weather inversion or any other
situation deemed hazardous by the Code Official.
6. Burning shall be permitted only during the months of
November through April. Burning shall be prohibited
during all other months of the year.
§ 166-2 CHARTER § 166-2
C:397
307.2 Public bonfires. Public bonfires are prohibited unless
a permit is first obtained from the Code Official. Permit fees
shall be charged as set forth in Chapter 162, Fees, of the
Township Code. Permits will be issued only to schools,
churches or public service organizations. Permits will be
issued only if the following conditions are met:
1. The location is approved by the Code Official and is not
less than 150 feet from any structure.
2. Fire apparatus or equipment of the proper type and size
shall be made available at the site of the bonfire.
3. Adequate provisions are made to keep spectators at a safe
distance from the bonfire.
4. Fuel for bonfires shall consist of seasoned dry wood only
and shall be ignited with a small quantity of paper.
Bonfires shall not contain any rubbish, garbage, trash or
any material made or coated with rubber, plastic, leather
or petroleum-based materials and shall not contain any
flammable or combustible liquids. The allowable quantity
of wood to be burned shall be determined by the code
official and shall be based upon the fire requirements of
the situation and the desirable duration of burn.
307.3 Burning prohibited. The outdoor burning of any
rubbish, garbage or trash shall be strictly prohibited by this
code.
D. Chapter 4, Emergency Planning and Preparedness.
(1) Section 401, General.
(a) Subsection 401.2, Approval. Add the words "and the Fire Code
Official " after the word "code" on line one.
E. Chapter 5, Fire Service Features.
(1) Section 501, General.
(a) Subsection 501.3, Construction documents. Delete the word
"department" on line four, and substitute with "Code Official."
(2) Section 503, Fire Apparatus Access Roads.
(a) Subsection 503.6, Security gates. Delete the word "chief" on
line two, and substitute with the words "Code Official."
F. Chapter 9, Fire Protection Systems.
(1) Section 903, Automatic Sprinkler Systems.
(a) Subsection 903.2, Where required. Amend as follows:
§ 166-2 RADNOR CODE § 166-2
C:398
[1] Delete Subsections 903.2.1 through 903.2.9.1 and
substitute with the following:
903.2.1 Use Groups A, B, E, M, S, and U. In all
buildings or structures exceeding 1,000 square feet in
gross floor area.
Exception: S-2 open parking garages.
903.2.2 Use Groups R, F, H, I. In all buildings or
structures or portions thereof.
G. Chapter 24, Tents, Canopies and Other Membrane Structures.
(1) Section 2403, Temporary Tents, Canopies and Membrane
Structures.
(a) Delete Subsection 2403.2, Approval required, and substitute
with the following:
2403.2 Approval required. Tents or air-supported
structures shall not be erected, operated or maintained for
any purpose without first obtaining a permit and approval
from the Fire Code Official. Approval shall not be required for
tents utilized exclusively for recreational camping purposes.
(b) Delete Subsection 2403.6, Construction documents, and
substitute with the following:
2403.6 Construction documents. A detailed site plan and
tent or air-supported structure floor plan shall be provided
with each application for approval when required by the Fire
Code Official. When required, the tent or air-supported
structure floor plan shall indicate details of the means of
egress facilities, seating capacity, arrangement of the crating
and location and type of heating and electrical equipment.
H. Chapter 33, Explosives and Fireworks.
(1) Section 3301, General.
(a) Subsection 3301.2.4, Financial responsibility. Replace
$100,000 on line four with $1,000,000.
(b) Delete Subsection 3301.2.4.1, Blasting, and replace with the
following:
3301.2.4.1 Blasting. Before any permit to do blasting is
issued, the applicant or said permit civil file a bond in such
form, amount and coverage as determined by the legal
counsel of the jurisdiction against any damages arising from
the permitted blasting. In no case, however, shall the bond be
less than $1,000,000.
§ 166-2 CHARTER § 166-2
C:399
Chapter 170
FOOD REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 109.
Fees — See Ch. 162.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
Sanitation — See Ch. 230.
§ 170-1. State act and regulations adopted by reference,
Certain documents on file in the office of the Secretary of the Township of
Radnor, being marked and designated as the "Department of Agriculture
Food Code" (7 Pa. Code §§ 46.1 through 46.1201) ("PA Food Code") and
(c) Delete Subsection 3301.2.4.2, Fireworks display, and replace
with the following:
3301.2.4.2 Fireworks display. Before a permit to display or
discharge fireworks is issued, the applicant for said permit
shall file a bond in the form, amount and coverage as
determined by the legal counsel for the jurisdiction against
any damages arising from the permitted fireworks. In no case,
however, shall the bond be for an amount not less than
$1,000,000.
(2) Section 3307, Blasting.
(a) Delete Subsection 3307.4, Restricted hours, and replace with
the following:
3307.4 Restricted time. Blasting operations shall be
conducted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday. No blasting shall be permitted on
Saturday, Sunday, Christmas Day, Thanksgiving Day, Yom
Kippur or the first day of Passover.
I. Chapter 38, Liquefied Petroleum Gases.
(1) Section 3801, General.
(a) Add new Subsection 3801.4, PA Uniform Construction Code
exclusion.
3801.4 PA Uniform Construction Code exclusion. The
Uniform Construction Code of PA does not regulate the
following: installation of tubing, piping, propane gas burning
appliances, equipment or fixtures related to liquefied
petroleum gas under the Propane and Liquefied Petroleum
Gas Act (35 P.S. § 1329.1 –1329.19).
§ 166-2 RADNOR CODE § 170-1
C:400
the "Retail Food Facility Safety Act of 2010" (3 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 5701 through
5714) ("PA Food Safety Act") (under which statutory provisions the Code
regulations were issued) are hereby adopted as the Food Code of Radnor
Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, for the control and regulation of food facilities as herein
provided; and all the provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the
Department of Agriculture Food Code and the Retail Food Facility Safety Act
of 2010 are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set forth in this chapter, with certain additions, deletions and amendments
as set forth in this chapter.
§ 170-2. Modifications
A. The following sections and subsections of the PA Food Code are hereby
added, deleted, or amended as set forth below:
(1) 7 Pa. Code § 46.3. Definitions.
(a) Department: Delete the reference to "Department of
Agriculture" and insert the "Department of Community
Development of Radnor Township" in its place, so that the
definition of "Department" reads as follows:
Department — The Department of Community Development of
Radnor Township. The term is synonymous with the term
"regulatory authority" in Subpart 1-201 of the Model Food
Code, regarding applicability and terms defined.
(b) Insert the term, and definition, of "Director" to read as follows:
Director — The Director of Community Development charged
with the administration and enforcement of this code, or his
duly authorized representative.
(c) License: Delete the current definition and insert new language
to read as follows:
License — An annual license issued by the Department of
Community Development to operate a public eating and
drinking place, a food establishment, a retail food
establishment, food facility or a mobile food facility. License
fees shall be charged in accordance with Chapter 162 (Fees) of
the Township Code.
(d) Licensor: Delete the current definition and insert new
language to read as follows:
Licensor — The Department of Community Development of
Radnor Township.
(e) Delete the term, and definition, of "Secretary."
(f) Retail food facility: Revise the definition to read as follows:
§ 170-1 CHARTER § 170-2
C:401
Retail food facility — A public eating or drinking place or a
retail food establishment located within the Township of
Radnor. The term is synonymous with the term "food
establishment" in Subpart 1-201 of the Model Food Code.
(g) Insert the term, and definition, of "Township" to read as
follows:
Township — The Township of Radnor, Delaware County, in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Subchapter H of the PA Food Code, ADMINISTRATIVE
PROCEDURES (7 Pa. Code § 46.1101 through 46.1144).
(a) Delete the reference to, and address of, the "Department of
Agriculture" in § 46.1102(b) and insert the term, and address,
of the "Department of Community Development of Radnor
Township" in its place, so that Section 46.1102(b) reads as
follows:
(b) Written request. A person seeking an approval from the
Department or a licensor under this chapter shall submit a
written request for approval to the entity from which approval
is sought. If approval is sought from the Department, the
written request shall be mailed or delivered to the following
address:
Department of Community Development of Radnor Township
301 Iven Avenue
Wayne, PA 19087
(b) Add the following sentence to § 46.1141(a): "Such license shall
be conspicuously displayed on the premises as specified in
§ 46.1144(1)." Section 46.1141(a) should read as follows:
(a) General requirement. A person may not operate a
retail food facility without a valid license issued by the
Department or licensor, unless otherwise provided in
Subsection (b). Such license shall be conspicuously
displayed on the premises as specified in § 46.1144(1).
(c) Revise, delete, and renumber the current contents of
§ 46.1141(c), License interval, so that § 46.1141(c) reads as
follows:
§ 170-2 RADNOR CODE § 170-2
C:402
(c) License interval.
(1) Except as set forth in Subsection (c)(2), a license
certificate issued by the Department shall be granted
for a period of one year, on a calendar-year basis.
Licenses issued during the year will expire at the end
of the calendar year, at which time a new license fee
shall be paid. Fees charged shall be in accordance with
Chapter 162 (Fees) of the Code of the Township of
Radnor.
(2) Six-month license interval.
(i) The license interval is six months with respect to a
retail food facility that serves a highly susceptible
population or that conducts specialized processes
such as smoking, curing or reduced oxygen
packaging to extend shelf life.
(ii) Examples of the type of retail food facility that
would typically be subject to the six-month license
interval in Subsection (c)(2)(i) are preschools,
hospitals, nursing homes and establishments
conducting processing at retail.
(iii) The license interval for a retail food facility is six
months if the retail food facility is newly licensed
or has not yet demonstrated to the Department,
through historical documentation, that it has
achieved and documented active managerial
control of the foodborne illness risk factors in
Subsection (c)(1). Active managerial control is
achieved and documented when the conditions in
Subsection (d) are achieved by the licensee.
(d) The following language should be added to both
§§ 46.1143(a)(4) and 46.1143(b): "Fees charged shall be in
accordance with Chapter 162 (Fees) of the Code of the
Township of Radnor."
[1] § 46.1143(a)(4) should read as follows:
(4) The required fee is submitted. Fees charged shall be
in accordance with Chapter 162 (Fees) of the Code of
Radnor Township.
[2] § 46.1143(b) should read as follows:
§ 170-2 CHARTER § 170-2
C:403
(b) License renewal. The retail food facility operator of an
existing retail food facility shall submit an application,
the required fee and be in compliance with this
chapter prior to issuance of a renewed license by the
Department or a licensor. Fees charged shall be in
accordance with Chapter 162 (Fees) of the Code of
Radnor Township.
(e) Insert a new § 46.1145, entitled "Violations and Penalties," to
the Food Code to read as follows:
§ 46.1145. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm, or
corporation who shall violate any provision of this code shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
B. The following sections and subsections of the PA Food Safety Act (3
Pa.C.S.A. §§ 5701 through 5714) are hereby added, deleted, or amended
as set forth below:
(1) § 5702. Definitions.
(a) Department: Insert the term, and definition of "Department" to
read as follows:
The Department of Community Development of Radnor
Township. The term is synonymous with the term "regulatory
authority" in Subpart 1-201 of the Model Food Code, regarding
applicability and terms defined.
(b) Licensor: Delete the current definition and insert new
language to read as follows:
"Licensor." The Department of Community Development of
Radnor Township.
(c) Retail food facility: Revise the definition to read as follows:
"Retail food facility." A public eating or drinking place or
a retail food establishment located within the Township of
Radnor. The term is synonymous with the term "food
establishment" in Subpart 1-201 of the Model Food Code.
(2) § 5703. License required.
(a) § 5703(b). Exempt retail food facilities: The provision
contained therein which reads: "If the licensor is the
Department, the exemption shall be accomplished by order of
the secretary and published in the Pennsylvania Bulletin. If the
licensor is an entity other than the Department, the exemption
shall be accomplished by order of the local government unit or
units having jurisdiction over the licensor. A retail food facility
§ 170-2 RADNOR CODE § 170-2
C:404
that is exempted from the license requirements under this
section shall remain subject to inspection and all other
provisions of this subchapter" shall be revised to read as
follows:
If the licensor is the Department, the exemption shall be
accomplished by order of the local government unit or units
having jurisdiction over the licensor. A retail food facility that
is exempted from the license requirements under this section
shall remain subject to inspection and all other provisions of
this subchapter.
(b) § 5703(d): Revise to read as follows:
(d) Application requirement. -- Any person owning or
operating or desiring to operate a retail food facility
within this Township shall make application for a license
to the Department on forms furnished by the licensor.
The forms shall, at a minimum, set forth such information
as the Department may require. Application forms shall
include the name and address of the applicant, together
with all the other information deemed necessary to
identify the applicant, provide contact information for the
applicant, identify the location of the retail food facility
that is the subject to the application and facilitate the
department's processing of the application.
(c) Section 5703(e)(2): Delete in its entirety.
(d) Section 5703(f): Delete in its entirety.
(e) Section 5703(i)(2)(i): Revise to read as follows:
(2)(i) If a retail food facility licensed by the Department is
in violation of a provision of this subchapter, or of a
regulation promulgated under authority of this
subchapter, or of any other act related to public health
and being applicable to retail food facilities, the
Department may suspend or revoke the license. The
suspension of a license shall be terminated when the
violation for which it was imposed has been found,
upon inspection by the licensor, to have been corrected.
Whenever a license is suspended or revoked, no part of
the fee paid therefor shall be returned to the proprietor.
(f) Section 5703(j): Delete the current contents and insert new
language to read as follows:
(g) (j) Fees. -- Fees charged shall be in accordance with Chapter
162 (Fees) of the Code of the Township of Radnor.
(3) § 5707. Powers of department.
§ 170-2 CHARTER § 170-2
C:405
(a) Revise § 5707(b) and 5707 (c) to read as follows:
(b)Food service at schools and organized camps. --
(1) The Department shall provide for the inspection of a
food service at a school and shall require that school
food service personnel receive the necessary training
in accordance with the standards applied to retail food
facilities for schools located in areas in which the
Department itself is the licensor.
(2) The Department shall provide for the inspection of a
food service at organized camps and shall require that
food service personnel at organized camps receive the
necessary training in accordance with the standards
applied to retail food facilities for organized camps
located in areas in which the Township department is
itself the licensor.
(c)Inspection. -- If a licensor fails to inspect a retail food
facility as required under section 5703(e)(relating to
license required), the Department of Agriculture of the
commonwealth shall have the authority to license and
inspect all retail food facilities under that licensor's
jurisdiction, and the licensor that failed to comply with the
inspection requirement shall not charge or collect any fee
for licensing subject retail food facilities. If the
Department of Agriculture of the commonwealth conducts
an inspection, it shall, within 30 days, provide the licensor
a copy of the inspection report.
(4) § 5711. Toilets, sinks and drains.
(a) The following language should be added to § 5711: "A
plumbing system shall be designed, constructed and installed
in accordance with Chapter 218 (Plumbing Standards) of the
Code of the Township of Radnor. All plumbing systems and
hoses conveying water shall be constructed and repaired with
approved materials in accordance with Chapter 218 (Plumbing
Standards) of the Code of the Township of Radnor. At least one
toilet and not fewer than the toilets (and urinals, if used), shall
be provided in accordance with Chapter 218 (Plumbing
Standards) of the Code of the Township of Radnor."
(b) § 5711 should read as follows:
All toilets, hand-wash sinks, tubs, sinks and drains used in or
in connection with any retail food facility shall at all times
be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. A plumbing system
shall be designed, constructed and installed in accordance
with Chapter 218 (Plumbing Standards) of the Code of the
Township of Radnor. All plumbing systems and hoses
conveying water shall be constructed and repaired with
§ 170-2 RADNOR CODE § 170-2
C:406
Chapter 172
FUEL GAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of standard codes of technical
regulations — See Charter § 3.06.
Code Appeals Board — See Ch. 15.
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 144A.
Contractors — See Ch. 145.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 156.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 158.
Fees — See Ch. 162.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Sewers — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 172-1. Adoption of code by reference.
Certain documents on file in the office of the Secretary of the Township
of Radnor, being marked and designated as the 2009 International Fuel
Gas Code, are hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of Radnor Township,
Delaware County, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the purpose
of establishing minimum regulations governing the design, installation and
construction of fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as herein
provided; and each and all of the provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of the 2009 International Fuel Gas Code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this chapter with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in this chapter.
approved materials in accordance with Chapter 218 (Plumbing
Standards) of the Code of the Township of Radnor. At least
one toilet and not fewer than the toilets (and urinals, if used),
shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 218 (Plumbing
Standards) of the Code of the Township of Radnor.
(5) 3 Pa.C.S.A. § 5714. Penalties.
(a) Delete the current contents and insert new language to read as
follows: Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this act shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to a fine of not more than $1,000. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 170-2 CHARTER § 172-2
C:407
§ 172-2. Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes to code.
The following sections and subsections of the aforementioned 2009
International Fuel Gas Code are hereby added, amended, changed, and
clarified as set forth below.
A. Chapter 1, Administration.
(1) Section 101 (IFGC), General.
(a) Subsection 101.1, Title. The "Township of Radnor" shall be
inserted as the name of the municipality.
(b) Insert a new Subsection 101.6 to read as follows:
101.6 Whenever in said Fuel Gas Code a municipality is
mentioned and no name is given, said municipality shall be
construed to mean the Township of Radnor; and when a state
is mentioned, the same shall mean the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; and where the Department of Inspection is
mentioned, the same shall mean the Department of
Community Development.
(2) Section 103 (IFGC), Department of Inspection.
(a) Delete Subsections 103.1 through 103.3 and substitute the
following:
103.1 General. The Director of Community Development or
any authorized agent or employee thereof shall be designated
as the Code Official for the purposes of this code.
103.2 Appointment. The Code Official and employees of the
Department of Community Development shall be appointed in
accordance with the personnel procedures and policies of the
Township of Radnor.
103.3 Liability. (New subsection number.)
(3) Section 106 (IFGC), Permits.
(a) Subsection 106.5.4, Extensions. Delete the last three lines and
insert the following sentence: "The Code Official shall have the
authority to extend the time for action by a permittee for a
determined period of time based upon reasonable cause."
(b) Subsection 106.6.1, Work commencing before permit issuance.
Delete this section in its entirety.
(c) Subsection 106.6.2, Fee schedule. Delete this section and
substitute the following:
106.6.2 Fees for all fuel gas work shall be charged as set forth
in Chapter 162 of the Township Code.
§ 172-2 RADNOR CODE § 172-2
C:408
(d) Subsection 106.6.3, Fee refunds. Delete this section in its
entirety.
(4) Section 108 (IFGC), Violations.
(a) Subsection 108.3, Prosecution of violation. Delete the words of
the second line, "request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction
to."
(b) Subsection 108.4, Violation penalties. Delete this subsection
and substitute the following:
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate
a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with the
requirements thereof or who shall install, repair or alter a fuel
gas system in violation of an approved plan or directive of
the Code Official or of a permit issued under this code shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(c) Subsection 108.5, Stop work orders. Insert in the first blank
"$25" and in the second blank "$1,000."
(5) Section 109 (IFGC), Means of Appeal.
(a) Delete this entire section and substitute the following new
section:
SECTION 109
(IFGC) APPEALS
109.1 General. Whenever the owner or contractor involved
in the installation, repair or alteration of a fuel gas system
takes exception to the decision of the Code Official in refusing
to approve a permit or submitted plans as required by this
code, such owner, contractor or duly authorized agent or
attorney may within 10 days after such decision take an
appeal therefrom to the Code Appeals Board. Such appeal
shall be in writing, state the decision of the Code Official and
the reasons for the exceptions taken thereto and be filed with
the Township Secretary. The Code Appeals Board shall within
30 days from the date of filing fix a date, time and location
to consider the appeal and to allow the person to be heard if
he states his desire to do so in the written appeal. A prompt
decision shall be rendered by the Code Appeals Board and
duly recorded, with such decision being final.
(6) Insert a new Section 111 to read as follows:
§ 172-2 CHARTER § 172-2
C:409
SECTION 111 (IFGC)
LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
111.1 General. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage
in the installation of fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances
without first having obtained a license from the Department of
Community Development. Application shall be made on a form
furnished by the Township and shall include the name and address
of the business, partnership or corporation; name of the individual
to be licensed along with any other information that the Township
may require. License fees shall be charged as set forth in Chapter
162 of the Township Code and shall be valid for a period of one
year from the date issued.
111.2 Revocation of license. Any fuel gas license granted
hereunder may be revoked by the Code Appeals Board for
violation of any part of this code, for refusing to make the
necessary corrections to work not approved by the Code Official
or for any other sufficient cause after a hearing before the Code
Appeals Board at the time and place of which five days' notice
shall be given to the licensee. The Board may after a hearing upon
reasonable cause revoke the license or suspend the same for a
specified period of time.
111.3 Misrepresentation. It shall be unlawful for any person
who does not have a fuel gas license issued by the Township to
engage in or represent himself as engaged in the business of fuel
gas work within the Township.
111.4 Change in place of business. Immediate notice shall be
given by any licensee hereunder to the Township of any change of
place of business.
111.5 Insurance. No license shall be issued to a fuel gas
contractor unless the applicant files a certificate of insurance with
the Department of Community Development at the time of license
application. The certificate of insurance shall contain a provision
that coverage afforded under the policy will not be canceled,
materially changed or not renewed until at least 30 days' written
notice has been given to Radnor Township. The certificate of
insurance must evidence policies of insurance maintained at the
expense of the applicant for comprehensive liability, including
products/completed operations/broad contractual and property
damage: each occurrence, $500,000.
B. Chapter 2, Definitions.
(1) Section 202, General Definitions.
(a) Amend the definition of "Code Official" to read as follows:
§ 172-2 RADNOR CODE § 172-2
C:410
Chapter 175
GRADING, EXCAVATIONS AND FILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Sewers — See Ch. 235.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 245.
Street excavations — See Ch. 250, Art. VI.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 255.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 175-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Radnor Township
Grading Ordinance."
§ 175-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
persons, to protect property and to promote the public welfare by
regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials,
use, location and maintenance of grading, excavations and fills.
§ 175-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of Community Development
charged with the administration and enforcement of this code.
(b) Add the definition of "Department" to read as follows:
DEPARTMENT. The Department of Community Development
of Radnor Township or any authorized agent or employee
thereof.
(c) Add the definition of "fuel gas contractor" to read as follows:
FUEL GAS CONTRACTOR. Any person who shall have
qualified and registered as a fuel gas contractor or Master
Plumber doing business as an heating and air-conditioned
contractor in accordance with the terms of this chapter and
under the rules and regulations of Radnor Township.
(d) Add the definition of "Township" to read as follows:
TOWNSHIP. The Township of Radnor in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
§ 172-2 CHARTER § 175-3
C:411
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Building Inspector pursuant
to the provisions of Chapter 125, Building Construction, for the
construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed, and includes the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location, and includes the conditions resulting therefrom.
GRADE — The elevation of the existing ground surface at the location of any
proposed excavation or fill.
GRADING — Excavation or fill or any combination thereof, and includes the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GRADING PERMIT — Any permit required under § 175-5 hereof.
PERSON — A natural person, but also includes a partnership or
corporation.
SITE — A lot, tract or parcel of land, or a series of lots, tracts or parcels of
land joined together, where grading work is continuous and performed at
the same time.
§ 175-4. Scope of provisions.
New grading, excavations and fills or changes, additions, repairs or
alterations made to existing excavations and fills shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter, except that this chapter shall not apply to work
in a public street or alley126 or in a Township park, playground or recreation
area or on other public property.
§ 175-5. Permits required; exceptions. [Amended 5-28-1974 by Ord.
No. 1572]
No person shall commence or perform any grading, excavation or fill
without first having obtained a grading permit from the Township Engineer,
and in the case of an excavation or fill involving 10,000 cubic yards or more,
except where a subdivision is involved as defined in § 255-6 of the Code of
the Township of Radnor, the written approval of the Board of Commissioners
is required. A separate grading permit shall be required for each site. One
permit may cover both an excavation and any fill made on the same site.
A grading permit will not be required, however, in the following situations,
but in all other respects the provisions of this chapter shall apply:
A. An excavation which does not exceed three feet in vertical depth at its
deepest point measured from the natural ground surface nor cover an
area of more than 1,000 square feet. This exception shall not affect the
126. Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. V.
§ 175-3 RADNOR CODE § 175-5
C:412
§ 175-6. Permit application.
applicability of this chapter nor the requirement of a grading permit for
any fill made with the material from such excavation.
B. A fill which does not exceed 10 cubic yards of material on any one site
or a fill which does not exceed three feet in vertical depth at its deepest
point measured from the natural ground surface nor cover an area of
more than 1,000 square feet, provided that the surfaces of such fills do
not have a slope at any point steeper than five horizontal to one vertical.
C. An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a
building or an underground structure authorized by a building permit.
Also, an excavation for a driveway between a building site and the
street, if placed on grade, provided its surface area is less than 1,500
square feet. This exception shall not affect the applicability of this
chapter nor the requirement of a grading permit for any fill made with
the material from such excavation. A grading permit shall not be
required for the temporary stockpiling on the same site of the material
from such excavation. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-19]127
A. Every applicant for a grading permit shall file a written application
therefor with the Township Engineer. Such application shall:
(1) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot,
block, tract or street address or similar description which will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed work.
(2) Be accompanied by plans and specifications prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. [Amended 3-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-08]
(a) The plans and specifications shall include:
[1] A contour map showing the present contours of the land
and the proposed contours of the land after completion of
the proposed grading.
[2] A plot plan showing the location of the grading,
boundaries, lot lines, neighboring streets and alleys,
buildings, trees over six inches in diameter two feet above
the ground and sufficient dimensions and other data to
show the location of all work. The plan shall also indicate
the proposed location of tree protection, including a detail
of such, which shall be installed and inspected by the
Township Engineer or Township Arborist prior to issuance
of the grading permit. [Amended 8-19-1996 by Ord. No.
96-24]
127. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding single-family house sites, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-19.
§ 175-5 CHARTER § 175-6
C:413
[3] Description of the type and classification of the soil.
[4] Details and location of any proposed drainage structures
and pipes, walls and cribbing.
[5] The nature of fill material and trees to be removed as a
result of the proposed construction and such other
information as the Township Engineer may require to
carry out the purposes of this chapter.
[6] The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, and other improvements, including the location
of any existing or proposed subdivision and land
development. [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
[7] The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed
building based upon North American Vertical Datum of
1988. [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
[8] The elevation of the one-hundred-year flood. [Added
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
(b) All plans shall be dated and bear the names of the persons who
prepared the same, the applicant and the owner of the land.
Plans shall be submitted in triplicate.
(c) The preliminary plan required by Chapter 255, Subdivision of
Land, may be substituted for the contour map and plot plan
required by Subsection A(2)(a)[1] and [2] above.
(3) State the estimated dates for the starting and completion of the
grading work.
(4) State the purpose for which the grading application is filed.
B. The Township Engineer may waive the requirement of any or all plans
and specifications listed above if he finds that the information on the
application is sufficient to show that the work will conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
C. The Township Engineer may require that escrow funds be posted with
the Township in the amount of 110% of the estimated cost of the project
when public improvements or private improvements which effect
Township facilities are proposed by the grading permit application.
[Added 3-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-08]
D. When the Township Engineer requires inspection fees pursuant to the
Shade Tree Ordinance (Chapter 263), the cost of these inspections shall
be passed on to the applicant. [Added 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 96-31]
§ 175-6 RADNOR CODE § 175-7
C:414
§ 175-7. Permit fees. [Amended 2-27-1984 by Ord. No. 84-02;
3-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-08; 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-43]
Before issuing a grading permit, a permit fee shall be collected as follows:
Volume of Material
(cubic yards) Permit Fee
Not more than 50 $100
51 to 1,000 $200
Each additional 1,000 or portion thereof $200
§ 175-8. Expiration of permit; extensions.
Every grading permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void
if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within six
months or is not completed within one year from the date of issue, provided
that the Township Engineer may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory
evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work from being started
or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension
of time, and provided further that the application for the extension of time
is made before the date of expiration of the permit.
§ 175-9. Denial of permit; appeals.
§ 175-10. Inspections; imposition of additional conditions.
A. Where, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, the work as proposed
by the applicant is likely to endanger any property or any street or alley,
he shall deny the grading permit. In determining whether the proposed
work is likely to endanger property or streets or alleys or create
hazardous conditions, the Township Engineer shall give due
consideration to possible saturation by rains, earth movements, runoff
of surface waters and subsurface conditions such as the stratification
and faulting of rock and the nature and type of the soil or rock.
B. The Board of Commissioners shall consider promptly appeals from the
provisions of this chapter or from the determinations of the Township
Engineer, and the Board shall make determinations of alternate
methods, standards or materials when, in its opinion, strict compliance
with the provisions of this chapter is unnecessary. Any applicant or
permit holder shall have the right to appeal to any court of competent
jurisdiction from any decision or determination of the Board of
Commissioners.
A. The Township Engineer shall, when requested, make inspections
hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work
which has been completed or notify the permit holder wherein the same
fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Where it is found by
inspection that the soil or other conditions are not as stated or shown in
§ 175-7 CHARTER § 175-10
C:415
§ 175-11. Standards for excavations.
the application, the Township Engineer may refuse to approve further
work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan conforming
to existing conditions.
B. Plans for the grading work shall be approved by the Township Engineer
and shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the grading
work and until the work has been approved.
C. The permit holder shall notify the Township Engineer in order to obtain
inspections, in accordance with the following schedule, at least 24
hours before the inspection is to be made:
(1) Initial inspection. When work on the excavation or fill is about to be
commenced.
(2) Rough grading. When all rough grading has been completed.
(3) Drainage facilities. When drainage facilities are to be installed and
before such facilities are backfilled.
(4) Special structures. When excavations are complete for retaining
and crib walls, and when reinforcing steel is in place and before
concrete is poured.
(5) Final inspection. When all work, including the installation of all
drainage and other structures, has been completed.
D. If at any state of the work the Township Engineer shall determine by
inspection that the nature of the grading is not in accordance with the
approved plans or is not functioning as designed and/or is likely to
endanger property or streets or alleys or create hazardous conditions,
the Township Engineer may require, as a condition to allowing the work
to be done, that such reasonable safety precautions be taken as the
Township Engineer considers advisable to avoid such likelihood of
danger. Safety precautions may include but shall not be limited
specifying a flatter exposed slope, construction or additional drainage
facilities, berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing. [Amended
4-29-1989 by Ord. No. 89-19]
A. No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than one
horizontal to one vertical, except under one or more of the following
conditions:
(1) The excavation is located so that a line having a slope of one
horizontal to one vertical and passing through any portion of the
cut face will be entirely inside the property lines of the property on
which the excavation is made.
(2) The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently stable
to sustain a slope of steeper than one horizontal to one vertical, and
a written statement of a civil engineer, licensed by the
§ 175-10 RADNOR CODE § 175-11
C:416
§ 175-12. Standards for fills.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, to that effect is submitted to the Township Engineer and
approved by him. The statement shall state that the site has been
inspected and that deviation from the slope specified above will not
result in injury to persons or damage to property.
(3) A retaining wall or other approved support is provided to support
the face of the excavation.
B. The Township Engineer may require an excavation to be made with a
cut face flatter in slope than one horizontal to one vertical if he finds the
material in which the excavation is to be made unusually subject to
erosion or if other conditions exist which make such flatter cut slope
necessary for stability and safety.
C. Excavations shall not extend below the angle of repose or natural slope
of the soil under the nearest point of any footing or foundation of any
building or structure unless such footing or foundation is first properly
underpinned or protected against settlement.
D. Before commencing any excavation which will in any way affect an
adjoining property or structures thereon, the person making the
excavation or causing the excavation to be made shall notify, in writing,
the owners of adjoining buildings, not less than 30 days before such
excavation is to be made, that the excavation is to be made. Adjoining
properties and structures shall be protected.
A. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope
than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical, except under one or more of the
following conditions:
(1) The fill, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, is located so that
settlement, sliding or erosion of the fill material will not result in
property damage or be a hazard to adjoining property, streets,
alleys or buildings.
(2) A written statement from a civil engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, certifying that he has inspected the site and that the
proposed deviation from the slope specified above will not
endanger any property or result in property damage, is submitted
to and approved by the Township Engineer.
B. The Township Engineer may require that the fill be constructed with an
exposed surface flatter than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical if he finds
that under the particular conditions such flatter surface is necessary for
stability and safety.
§ 175-11 CHARTER § 175-12
C:417
§ 175-13. Drainage.
Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent any surface waters from
damaging the cut face of and excavation of the sloping surface of a fill.
Slopes of more than 10 feet in vertical height shall be separated by level
berms of at least four feet in width. Berm ditches shall be constructed when
necessary to prevent erosion. All drainage provisions shall be of such design
as to carry surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain or
natural watercourse approved by the Township Engineer as safe for the
deposit and receipt of such waters. The Township Engineer may require
such drainage structures or pipes to be constructed or installed as, in his
C. Whenever a fill is to be made of materials other than clean soil or earth,
the grading permit shall be subject to the following additional
limitations and requirements:
(1) The fill shall be completed within a reasonable length of time, said
time limit to be determined by the Township Engineer and to be
specified on the grading permit.
(2) Clean soil or earth shall be placed over the top and exposed
surfaces of the fill to a depth sufficient to effectively conceal all
materials, other than clean soil or earth, within the fill. Where the
nature of the fill requires, the Township Engineer may require
clean soil or earth to be placed over the top and exposed surfaces of
the fill to a depth sufficient to conceal all materials at the end of
each day's operations.
(3) No grading permit shall be issued for the filling of materials other
than clean soil or earth until a faithful performance bond in the
amount of at least 10% more than the Township Engineer's
estimated cost of adequately covering such fill with clean soil or
earth has been furnished to the Township. Such bond shall be
executed by a corporate surety, as well as by the principal, and
shall be subject to the approval of the Township Solicitor as to form.
The bond shall inure to the benefit of the Township and be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the work required
under the terms and conditions of the grading permit to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer. In lieu of said bond, a cash
deposit in said amount may be made with a bank or trust company,
approved by the Township Solicitor, which shall act as escrow
agent.
D. All fills shall be compacted to provide stability of material and to
prevent undesirable settlement. The fill shall be spread in a series of
layers, each not exceeding 12 inches in thickness, and shall be
compacted by a sheepsfoot roller or other approved method after each
layer is spread. The Township Engineer may require tests or other
investigation if, in his opinion, the conditions or materials are such that
additional information is necessary.
§ 175-12 RADNOR CODE § 175-13
C:418
opinion, are necessary to prevent erosion damage and satisfactorily carry
off surface waters.
§ 175-14. Maintenance of retaining walls and other protective
devices.
The owner of any property on which an excavation or fill has been made
shall maintain in good condition and repair all retaining walls, cribbing,
drainage structures, fences and other protective devices.
§ 175-15. General requirements.
§ 175-16. Issuance of grading certificate; revocation.
A. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be at least three feet from
property or right-of-way lines of streets in order to permit the normal
rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting property. At
property lines where walls or slopes are steeper than 1:1 and six feet or
more in height, they shall be protected by a substantial fence three feet
or more in height. Before a grading permit is issued, a bond may be
required to guarantee the protection of steep slopes.
B. The owner of a property shall be responsible to protect and clean up
lower properties of silt and debris washing from his property as a result
of the regrading of his property.
C. In order to prevent the denuding of the landscape, wherever
practicable, large trees and other natural features constituting
important physical, aesthetic and economic assets to existing or
impending suburban development shall be preserved.
A. If upon final inspection of any excavation or fill it is found that the work
authorized by the grading permit has been satisfactorily completed in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and any other
requirements imposed, a grading certificate covering such work and
stating that the work is approved shall be issued to the permit holder by
the Township Engineer.
B. The Township Engineer shall have the power to revoke any grading
certificate whenever he finds that the work covered by the certificate
has been materially extended or altered without a permit so to do or
that any retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures, fence or other
protective devices shown on the approved plans and specifications
submitted with the application for a permit have not been maintained in
good order and repair.
C. Before such revocation, the Township Engineer shall first give written
notice to the permit holder and to the owner of the property involved,
specifying the defective condition and stating that unless such defective
condition is remedied satisfactorily, the grading certificate may be
§ 175-13 CHARTER § 175-16
C:419
§ 175-17. Violations and penalties; remedies.
Chapter 178
HISTORIC DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Existing buildings — See Ch. 132.
Design review — See Ch. 150.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 178-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Historic Districts Ordinance"
of the Township of Radnor, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
revoked. If the defective condition is remedied, the certificate shall not
be revoked.
A. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any
grading, excavation or fill or cause the same to be done, contrary to or
in violation of any provision of this chapter.
B. When written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter has been served by the Township Engineer on any person, such
violation shall be discontinued immediately.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable,
on conviction thereof, to a penalty not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of
prosecution, for each and every offense, and in default of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 30
days. Whenever such person shall have been notified by the Township
Engineer, by service of summons in a prosecution or in any other way,
that he is committing such violation of this chapter, each day that he
shall continue such violation after such notification shall constitute a
separate offense, punishable by a like fine or penalty. Such fines or
penalties shall be collected as like fines or penalties are now by law
collected. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
D. In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the proper officer of the Township, in
addition to other remedies, may institute in the name of the Township
any appropriate action or proceeding, whether by legal process or
otherwise, to prevent such unlawful work and to restrain or abate such
violation.
§ 175-16 RADNOR CODE § 178-2
C:420
§ 178-2. Authority.
This chapter is established pursuant to authority contained in the
Pennsylvania Act of June 13, 1961, No. 167, as amended.
§ 178-3. Intent.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of protecting historic areas located
within Radnor Township, identified as the "Radnor Historic Districts." This
chapter is intended to protect and enhance the North Wayne Historic
District, the Louella Court Historic District, and the South Wayne Historic
District for the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of
the public through preservation, protection, and regulation of buildings of
historic interest or importance within the Districts. It is the further intent of
this chapter to safeguard elements of architectural history throughout the
Districts which have been determined to be of historic significance.
§ 178-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless otherwise expressly stated. Applicable regulations in
conjunction with these definitions shall be complied with.
ADDITION — An extension or increase in the footprint, floor area, or height
of the principal building or an accessory building.
APPLICANT — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or
other legal entity which shall be required to make application under this
chapter.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Radnor.
BUILDING — Any combination of approved materials to form construction
for occupancy and/or use.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building that is not a principal building on
a lot and which is used for purposes that are entirely incidental and
subordinate to those of the principal building. For purposes of this
definition, garden sheds, bathhouses, and similar types of buildings shall
not be included under the terms of this definition.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — The main building on a lot or any building that
is not an accessory building. Every single-dwelling, two-family, multifamily
or nonresidential building shall be construed as a principal building for the
purposes of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The approval by the Township
that certifies to the historical appropriateness of a particular request for the
erection, addition or demolition of all or part of a building within an historic
district and authorizes the application for required permits.
DEMOLITION — The dismantling or tearing down of all or part of any
building.
§ 178-2 CHARTER § 178-4
C:421
DEPARTMENT — The Community Development Department or other
department designated by the Township Manager.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Community Development of the Township or
other employee designated by the Township Manager.
DISTRICTS — The North Wayne Historic District, the Louella Court Historic
District, and the South Wayne Historic District, as set forth under the
provisions of this chapter.
ERECTION — The construction of a principal building, addition or accessory
building under the provisions of this chapter.
HARB — The Board of Historical and Architectural Review as appointed by
the Board of Commissioners.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
§ 178-5. Applicability; certificate of appropriateness required.
§ 178-6. Board of Historical Architectural Review.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to property within the
North Wayne Historic District, the Louella Court Historic District, and
the South Wayne Historic District, as certified by the Pennsylvania
Historical and Museum Commission in accordance with the Act of June
13, 1961, P.L. 282, as amended, 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq. "An Act
authorizing counties, cities, boroughs, incorporated towns and
townships to create historic districts within their geographic
boundaries; providing for the appointment of Boards of Architectural
Review; empowering governing bodies of political subdivisions to
protect distinctive historical character of these districts and to regulate
the erection, restoration, demolition or razing of buildings within
historic districts."
B. The boundaries of the North Wayne Historic District, the Louella Court
Historic District, and the South Wayne Historic District shall be
designated on the Historic Resources Map that shall be available for
public inspection at the Township Municipal Building and is attached as
Exhibit A to this ordinance.
C. No principal building or accessory building shall be erected, altered by
addition, or demolished, in whole or part, without full compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and other applicable regulations of the
Township.
D. No person shall commence any work for the erection, addition or
demolition of any principal building, addition or accessory building in
whole or in part without obtaining a certificate of appropriateness as
provided hereinafter.
§ 178-4 RADNOR CODE § 178-6
C:422
§ 178-7. Design guidelines.
In reviewing applications for the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness, the HARB shall consider only those matters that are
pertinent to the preservation of the historical aspects of each of the districts
certified to have historical significance, including the following:
A. Establishment. The Board of Commissioners hereby establishes a Board
of Historical Architectural Review (HARB) for the purposes of
administering the provisions of this chapter.
B. Membership. The HARB shall be residents of the Township and consist
of five members who shall, at the discretion of the Board, preferably
include the following: one registered architect; one licensed real estate
broker; and one person with technical knowledge in the field of building
codes and inspections in the construction industry. The remaining two
members shall have knowledge and interest in the preservation of
historic districts.
C. Terms of office. The term of office shall be for a period of five years. As
first established, the Board of Commissioners shall appoint one member
to serve for a period of three years, two members to serve for a period
of four years, and two members to serve for periods of five years.
Vacancies on the HARB shall be filled by the Board of Commissioners.
D. Rules. The HARB shall elect from its membership a Chair and adopt
rules and regulations to conduct business. Three members shall
constitute a quorum. Approval, conditional approval, or denial of an
application shall be by majority vote. A tie vote shall constitute a denial
of an application.
E. Meetings. The HARB shall schedule public meetings on a regular basis,
or meetings shall be at the call of the Chair.
F. Records. Records of all business transacted shall be filed in the
Department. An annual report shall be filed following December 31, or
at the request of the Board of Commissioners.
G. Responsibilities. The HARB shall serve as an advisory body to the Board
of Commissioners regarding the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Historical values representing the cultural, political, economic or social
history of the Township.
B. Relationship of the building to historic personages or events.
C. Character-defining development patterns:
(1) The Louella Court District's overall development pattern is a
prominent, focal, large estate building in the center of a ring of
smaller homes, sharing a particular range of scale, with a central
§ 178-6 CHARTER § 178-7
C:423
boulevard circulation pattern leading up to the middle of the front
facade of the focal building.
(2) The North Wayne District's overall development pattern is a
multiple block grid street pattern of street-facing homes of varying
scales that mainly share a common range of front setbacks.
(3) The South Wayne District's overall development pattern is a
multiple block grid and curvilinear street pattern of street-facing
homes of varying scales that mainly share a range of common front
setbacks.
D. Significant architectural features of a certain historical period and type
of construction:
(1) The Louella Court District includes mainly mid to late 19th Century
and 1900s through 1930s design styles and features.
(2) The North Wayne District includes mainly 1870s to 1910s design
styles and features.
(3) The South Wayne District includes mainly 1870s to 1910s design
styles and features.
E. Architectural additions and features proposed by the applicant.
F. Design of the building as it relates to the historic character of the
district. Consideration may be given to the following in evaluating
applications:
(1) Preserving the overall relationship between the width of the front
of the building and the height of the front of the building.
(2) Preserving the overall relationship amongst the buildings within
each district's development pattern.
(3) Preserving the overall relationship of width to height of windows
and doors.
(4) Preserving the existing entrances or projections where possible or,
if altering them, maintaining a pedestrian scale.
(5) Preserving the architectural details of the building, including but
not limited to cornices, roof pediments, lintels, arches, balustrades
and chimneys.
(6) Preserving roof shapes, such as gable, mansard, hip, flat, and/or
other roof shapes.
(7) Preserving compatibility with surrounding buildings in each
district.
(8) Making every attempt, if making horizontal or vertical additions, to
retain architectural details.
§ 178-7 RADNOR CODE § 178-8
C:424
§ 178-8. Application review procedure.
A. Applications. Prior to the filing of an application, Township staff may
meet with applicants and refer them to design standards and guidelines
adopted by the Township. Upon the filing of an application, the Director
shall review the application to determine if it is subject to review by the
HARB under the provisions of this chapter. Applications shall be filed
with the Director 15 calendar days prior to the meeting of the HARB, on
forms provided by the Department. The Director shall review the
application to certify all required information has been submitted and
refer same to the HARB for consideration at its next meeting.
Incomplete applications shall be rejected and returned to the applicant.
Where the HARB fails to take action on an application within 45
calendar days from the date of submission, such application shall be
deemed approved unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an
extension of time.
B. If the application of a commercially-zoned property which is located
within a district is under review by the Design Review Board, then one
or more members of the HARB shall be permitted to participate in that
portion of the Design Review Board meeting at which said application is
being reviewed and to make whatever recommendations consistent
with this chapter for the Design Review Board's consideration of that
application.
C. Required information. Applications shall contain the name and address
of the owner, name of the applicant if different than the owner, address
of the property, description of the work, and any other information,
where relevant, which the Director may require in order to process the
application. Applications shall also be accompanied by the following
information, required to review the application:
(1) Site plans drawn to scale prepared by an engineer or surveyor
registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Architectural plans prepared by a registered architect or engineer,
including building elevations where necessary, of the proposed
construction drawn to scale, and such other information which the
HARB may require to review the application consistent with the
terms of this chapter.
(3) The HARB shall retain the right to waive the requirements of
professionally prepared construction documents described in
Subsection C(1) and (2) above where, in the HARB's judgment, the
scope of the project does not warrant such documentation.
D. Review of applications. In determining whether to recommend approval
of an application, the HARB shall consider the design guidelines set
forth in § 178-7 of this chapter and such other guidelines developed by
the HARB pursuant to the objectives of this chapter. Applicant will allow
access to the subject property by HARB members for inspection of the
§ 178-8 CHARTER § 178-8
C:425
§ 178-9. Enforcement.
The Director shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter and shall review the progress of the building and report to the
Board of Commissioners and to the HARB as may be necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
project at such reasonable times and upon reasonable notice and
confirmation of said notice by the applicant.
E. Time frame for HARB decisions. Within 10 calendar days following the
final review of an application by the HARB, a written communication
shall be forwarded to the applicant recommending the following:
(1) Approval of the application as submitted.
(2) Approval of the application subject to changes and conditions not
included in the application as submitted. Failure by the applicant to
accept conditions of approval shall be deemed a denial of the
application.
(3) Denial of an application, setting forth the reasons for such denial
based upon the provisions of this chapter.
(4) The date on which such application will be considered by the Board
of Commissioners.
F. Report to the Board of Commissioners. Within 30 days following
HARB's final review of an application, a report of HARB's
recommendations shall be provided to the Board of Commissioners.
Such report shall include the name of the applicant, the address of the
property, the nature of improvements, and any other information the
Board may require.
G. The Board of Commissioners shall either:
(1) Approve or deny the certificate of appropriateness consistent with
action taken by the HARB in connection with building and/or
demolition. [Amended 10-13-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-13]
(2) Approve the application and authorize a certificate of
appropriateness with modifications to the HARB recommendation.
[Amended 10-13-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-13]
(3) Reverse the recommendation of the HARB.
H. Where an application is modified or denied by the Board, the applicant
shall be notified in writing of the reasons for such action and advised of
its right of appeal under provisions of this chapter.
§ 178-8 RADNOR CODE § 178-10
C:426
§ 178-10. Inapplicability.
This chapter shall not apply to any development or land disturbance
occurring after its effective date to a development or land disturbance that:
§ 178-11. Violations and penalties.
Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other legal
entity which shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 178-12. Fees.
Fees for the administration of this chapter shall be charged in accordance
with the fee schedule set forth in Chapter 162, Fees, of the Township Code.
§ 178-13. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and if any section, sentence,
clause, part or provision thereof shall be held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections, sentences, clauses,
parts or provisions of this section. It is hereby declared to be the intent
of the Board of Commissioners that this section would have been adopted
if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or
provision had not been included.
Chapter 180
HUNTING AND WEAPONS
A. Is covered by a valid, unexpired plat in accordance with development
regulations.
B. Is covered by a current, executed public works agreement.
C. Is covered by a valid, unexpired Zoning Hearing Board approval or
building permit.
§ 178-10 CHARTER § 178-13
C:427

ARTICLE I
Hunting
§ 180-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GAME — All wild birds and wild animals, whether protected or unprotected
under the game laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, found in a wild
state.
WRITTEN PERMISSION — A writing, signed and dated by the owner or
tenant in possession of land, which shall state the full name of the grantee
of the permit. Such "written permission" shall be clearly legible, shall have
no alterations or additions, shall be carried by the grantee of the permit
and shall be exhibited by said grantee to all law enforcement officials and
owners and occupiers of adjacent land upon demand. Only persons named
as grantees of permission in such writing shall be authorized, and if more
than one person is named, each such person shall carry a copy of the permit.
The signature of the owner or tenant in possession of land shall first be
confirmed by the Chief of Police of the Township of Radnor or his designee,
and upon authentication, said "written permission" shall be countersigned
by the Chief of Police of the Township of Radnor or his designee.[Amended
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 180-2. Written permission required.
From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person
to hunt for, catch, take, wound or kill game of any kind through the use of a
gun, pistol, rifle, revolver or bow and arrow within the Township of Radnor
without first obtaining written permission therefor from the owner of the
land, as hereinabove provided.
§ 180-3. Responsibility for ascertaining boundaries.
Each grantee of permission shall be responsible for ascertainment of
boundaries before entering upon land.
§ 180-4. Exceptions.
This article shall not prohibit the owner or tenant or members of their
immediate families or their invitees, when accompanied by the owner or
tenant, from gunning on their land.
§ 180-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Any person violating any of the terms of this article shall, upon conviction
before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 180-1 CHARTER § 180-5
C:429

ARTICLE II
Pellet Guns
§ 180-6. Retail sale or possession prohibited. [Amended 8-19-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-22]
§ 180-7. Authority to seize and destroy. [Amended 8-19-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-22]
The Chief of Police of the Township of Radnor is hereby authorized to seize,
remove and destroy any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, blank gun, paint-ball
gun, dart gun, replica gun or any implement not a firearm which impels with
force, or has been modified to impel with force, a pellet or projectile of any
kind, which shall be used or discharged within the Township of Radnor or
which shall be held and possessed in violation of this article.
§ 180-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Any person or persons, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 30 days.
A. It shall be unlawful and it is hereby prohibited for any person, persons,
firms or corporations to store, sell, offer or expose for sale at retail or
have in their possession with intent to sell at retail or with intent to use
within the limits of the Township of Radnor any air gun, air pistol,
spring gun, blank gun, paint-ball gun, dart gun or any implement not a
firearm which impels with force, or has been modified to impel with
force, a pellet or projectile of any kind. A starter-pistol used in
conjunction with a legitimate, sanctioned sporting event is permissible
under this section. "At retail" shall mean any sale of less than one dozen
such articles or any sale to anyone not a bona fide dealer therein.
B. It shall also be unlawful for any person or persons to use or display
within the limits of the Township of Radnor any replica gun, or to alter
any replica gun, in any manner which could create the belief that such a
replica gun is an actual firearm.
§ 180-6 CHARTER § 180-8
C:431
Chapter 186
LAUNDROMATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 186-1. Permit required. [Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate a laundromat in the
Township of Radnor without first obtaining a permit from the Community
Development Department of Radnor Township.
§ 186-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LAUNDROMAT — The premises wherein one or more coin-operated laundry
machines or dryers are installed and used by the general public.[Amended
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 186-3. Application; investigation. [Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-18]
A. Any person desiring to operate a laundromat shall make application, in
writing, to the Community Development Department. Such application
shall include the following information:
(1) The applicant's full name, residence, telephone number and post
office address, and whether the applicant is an individual, firm or
corporation; if a partnership, the names and addresses of all the
partners shall be included; if a corporation, the names and
addresses of all officers shall be included.
(2) The proposed location of the establishment, a floor plan showing
the building outline and location of the equipment.
(3) The manufacturer of the machine, the trade name and the
manufacturer's agent.
(4) The name or names of all maintenance personnel and their
telephone numbers.
(5) The signature of the applicant or his duly authorized officer.
B. Upon receipt of such application, the Community Development
Department shall make such investigation as may be necessary of the
maintenance and storage facilities, as well as the machines and their
§ 180-8 RADNOR CODE § 186-3
C:432
§ 186-4. Permit; fee; expiration.
§ 186-5. Construction, equipment and management standards.
[Amended 8-8-1988 by Ord. No. 88-12]
§ 186-6. Violations and penalties.
locations in the premises, to determine compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the operation of an
establishment where one or more laundry machines or dryers are
offered for public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or
by other means, provide self-service laundry facilities, without first
having applied to and procured a permit from the Community
Development Department. [Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
B. The fee for a permit as required hereunder shall be $50 per year. All
permits shall expire on the 31st day of December. [Amended
2-26-1979 by Ord. No. 79-06]
A. All rooms used in connection with the laundromat shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition and shall be provided with adequate light
and ventilation.
B. The floors shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned, shall be
smooth and kept clean and in good repair.
C. The walls and ceilings shall be smooth, in good repair and shall be
painted in a light color.
D. All plumbing installed in laundromats shall meet the requirements of
Chapter 218, Plumbing, of the Code of the Township of Radnor.
E. The owner of each laundromat shall be required to have a fire detection
system installed which shall be consistent with Township standards and
subject to approval by the Fire Marshal. In the alternative, during all
hours of operation, the owner of each laundromat shall be required to
have an individual at the business location who is familiar with the
operation of the equipment and who shall be responsible for
maintaining the premises in a clean and sanitary condition.
A. Failure to secure a permit when required or operating after suspension
or revocation of a permit by the Community Development Department
shall constitute a violation of this chapter. When written notice of a
violation of any provisions of this chapter has been served upon any
person, such violation shall be discontinued immediately. [Amended
6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
B. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be liable, on conviction thereof, to a fine or penalty of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
§ 186-3 CHARTER § 186-6
C:433
Chapter 190
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 240.
§ 190-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, leaflet,
pamphlet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced literature which
advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing or which
directs attention to any business or mercantile establishment or which
directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance or an
event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged.
LITTER — Any putrescible animal and vegetable waste, commonly known as
garbage; any putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, including rubbish
and refuse, such as ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles and solid market and industrial waste, paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery, trash and similar materials.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, circular,
leaflet, pamphlet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definition of
a commercial handbill.
§ 190-2. Prohibited acts.
No person, association, firm or corporation shall do or permit to be done
any of the following acts:
fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 30 days. [Amended 11-28-1988 by Ord. No. 88-32;
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
A. Throw, place, leave or deposit any materials, items, garbage, rubbish,
tin cans, dead animals, decaying vegetable matter, organic waste
substance, plastic of any kind or other debris at the recycling center
located at the Township Building, except as follows: [Amended
11-23-1987 by Ord. No. 87-39]
(1) Only recyclable glass (clear and colored, no mirrors) shall be
placed in the igloo or container marked "glass."
§ 186-6 RADNOR CODE § 190-2
C:434
(2) Only aluminum cans (no tin cans or aluminum foil) shall be placed
in the container or igloo marked "aluminum."
(3) Only recyclable paper, as defined in Chapter 240, Solid Waste,
Article III, General Provisions; Recycling, (no plastic) shall be
placed in the container or dumpster marked "paper." [Amended
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
B. Sweep or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the
Township any accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any
public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property, including residences and places of business, shall keep the
sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
C. Throw or deposit, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, litter upon
any street or other public place within the Township or upon private
property.
D. Drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Township unless
such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents
or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other
public place.
E. Deposit dirt on any public street from the wheels of vehicles leaving
construction sites, unless such dirt is removed by 5:00 p.m. of the day
on which the dirt was deposited.
F. Throw or deposit commercial or noncommercial handbills in or upon
any sidewalk, street or other public place, or hand out, distribute or sell
any commercial handbills or place the same in or upon any vehicle in
any public place, provided that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk,
street or other public place to distribute, without charge, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
G. Throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill
in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or
transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other
person then present in or upon such private premises.
H. Post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to
attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or
tree or upon any public structure or building, except as may be
authorized or required by law.
I. Throw, deposit or permit the accumulation of litter on private premises,
both business and residential, within the Township, whether owned by
such person or not. The owner or person in control of the private
premises may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in
such a manner that litter would be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon any private property. The owners of shopping centers are
hereby required to install and maintain trash receptacles on the
§ 190-2 CHARTER § 190-2
C:435
§ 190-3. Clearing of litter; notice; failure to comply.
§ 190-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-28-1988 by Ord. No.
88-32; 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
Any person, firm, association or corporation who violates any provision
of this chapter or fails to correct within the time hereinabove set forth
the conditions for which complaint is made by the Township shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 30 days, and each
day's failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate
violation. It shall not be necessary for the Township to give notice pursuant
to the provisions of § 190-3 above in order to obtain a conviction for any of
the prohibited acts in § 190-2 above.
Chapter 195
pedestrian walkways within said shopping center. These receptacles
shall be placed at a maximum of 30 feet apart, unless the Director of
the Community Development Department determines this distance is
not practicable. The receptacles shall be clearly designated as trash
receptacles and the Director of the Community Development
Department shall have the authority to determine the adequacy of such
receptacles in terms of their type and number. [Amended 6-29-1977
as Ord. No. 77-18]
J. Throw or deposit litter upon any open or vacant private premises or any
inhabited premises, whether owned by such person or not.
A. The Director of the Community Development Department is hereby
authorized and empowered to notify the owner and/or occupant of any
open or vacant private premises or any occupied or unoccupied private
or business premises within the Township, or the agent of such owner
or occupant, to properly dispose of litter located on such property. Such
notice shall be by certified mail, addressed to said owner and/or
occupant at his last known address, or served personally by the
Director of the Community Development Department or his nominee
upon such owner or occupant. [Amended 6-29-1977 as Ord. No.
77-18]
B. Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to
properly dispose of litter within three days after receipt of the written
notice provided for in Subsection A above, or three days after the date
of such notice in the event that the same is returned unserved, the said
Director of Licenses and Inspections is hereby authorized and
empowered to order the correction of such violation, using Township
funds or Township personnel to accomplish such correction, and may
charge the costs thereof to the violator. Collection of such costs by the
Township may be made by lien or otherwise as authorized by law.
§ 190-2 RADNOR CODE § 190-4
C:436
MECHANICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of standard codes of technical
regulations — See Charter § 3.06.
Code Appeals Board — See Ch. 15.
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 144A.
Contractors — See Ch. 145.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 156.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 158.
Fees — See Ch. 162.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
§ 195-1. Repealer.
Chapter 195, Mechanical Standards, of the Code of the Township of Radnor
is hereby repealed, and a new Chapter 195 updating standards to the 2009
International Mechanical Code is hereby enacted.
§ 195-2. Adoption of code by reference.
Certain documents on file in the office of the Secretary of the Township of
Radnor, being marked and designated as the 2009 International Mechanical
Code, are hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of Radnor Township,
Delaware County, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the purpose
of establishing minimum regulations governing the design, installation and
construction of mechanical systems as herein provided; and each and all
of the provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the 2009 International
Mechanical Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as
if fully set forth in this chapter with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes prescribed in this chapter.
§ 195-3. Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes to code.
The following sections and subsection of the aforementioned 2009
International Mechanical Code are hereby added, amended, changed, and
clarified as set forth below.
A. Chapter 1, Administration.
(1) Section 101, General.
(a) Subsection 101.1, Title. The "Township of Radnor" shall be
inserted as the name of the municipality.
(b) Insert a new Subsection 101.5 to read as follows:
§ 190-4 CHARTER § 195-3
C:437
101.5 Whenever in said Mechanical Code a municipality is
mentioned and no name is given, said municipality shall be
construed to mean the Township of Radnor, and when a state
is mentioned, the same shall mean the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; and where the Department of Mechanical
Inspection is mentioned, the same shall mean the Department
of Community Development.
(2) Section 103, Department of Mechanical Inspection.
(a) Delete Subsections 103.1 through 103.4 and substitute the
following:
103.1 General. The Director of Community Development or
any authorized agent or employee thereof shall be designated
as the Code Official for the purposes of this code.
103.2 Appointment. The Code Official and employees of the
Department of Community Development shall be appointed in
accordance with the personnel procedures and policies of the
Township of Radnor.
(3) Section 106, Permits.
(a) Subsection 106.4.3, Expiration. Add a period after the word
"obtained" on line eight, and delete the remaining text on lines
eight through 13.
(b) Subsection 106.4.4, Extensions. Delete the last three lines and
insert the following sentence: "The Code Official shall have the
authority to extend the time for action by a permittee for a
determined period of time based upon reasonable cause."
(c) Subsection 106.5.1, Work commencing before permit issuance.
Delete this section in its entirety.
(d) Subsection 106.5.2, Fee schedule. Delete this section and
substitute the following:
106.5.2 Fees for all mechanical work shall be charged as set
forth in Chapter 162 of the Township Code.
(e) Subsection 106.5.3, Fee refunds. Delete this section in its
entirety.
(4) Section 108, Violations.
(a) Subsection 108.3, Prosecution of violation. Delete the words of
the second line: "request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction
to."
(b) Subsection 108.4, Violation penalties. Delete this subsection
and substitute the following:
§ 195-3 RADNOR CODE § 195-3
C:438
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate
a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with the
requirements thereof or who shall install, repair or alter a
mechanical system in violation of an approved plan or
directive of the Code Official or of a permit issued under this
code shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(c) Subsection 108.5, Stop work orders. Insert in the first blank
"$25" and in the second blank, "1,000."
(5) Section 109, Means of Appeal.
(a) Delete this entire section and substitute the following new
section:
SECTION 109
APPEALS
109.1 General. Whenever the owner or contractor involved
in the installation, repair or alteration of a mechanical system
takes exception to the decision of the Code Official in refusing
to approve a permit or submitted plans as required by this
code, such owner, contractor or duly authorized agent or
attorney may within 10 days after such decision take an
appeal therefrom to the Code Appeals Board. Such appeal
shall be in writing, state the decision of the Code Official and
the reasons for the exceptions taken thereto and be filed with
the Township Secretary. The Code Appeals Board shall within
30 days from the date of filing fix a date, time and location
to consider the appeal and to allow the person to be heard if
he states his desire to do so in the written appeal. A prompt
decision shall be rendered by the Code Appeals Board and
duly recorded, with such decision being final.
(6) Insert a new Section 111 to read as follows:
§ 195-3 CHARTER § 195-3
C:439
SECTION 111
LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
111.1 General. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage
in the business of heating, ventilation, air conditioning and/or
refrigeration (hereinafter HVAC) without first having obtained a
license from the Department of Community Development.
Application shall be made on a form furnished by the Township
and shall include the name and address of the business,
partnership or corporation; name of the individual to be licensed
along with any other information that the Township may require.
License fees shall be charged as set forth in Chapter 162 of the
Township Code and shall be valid for a period of one year from the
date issued.
111.2 Revocation of license. Any HVAC license granted
hereunder may be revoked by the Code Appeals Board for
violation of any part of this code, for refusing to make the
necessary corrections to work not approved by the Code Official
or for any other sufficient cause after a hearing before the Code
Appeals Board at the time and place of which five days' notice
shall be given to the licensee. The Board may after a hearing upon
reasonable cause revoke the license or suspend the same for a
specified period of time.
111.3 Misrepresentation. It shall be unlawful for any person
who does not have an HVAC license issued by the Township to
engage in or represent himself as engaged in the business of
HVAC work within the Township.
111.4 Change in place of business. Immediate notice shall be
given by any licensee hereunder to the Township of any change of
place of business.
111.5 Insurance. No license shall be issued to an HVAC
contractor unless the applicant files a certificate of insurance with
the Department of Community Development at the time of license
application. The certificate of insurance shall contain a provision
that coverage afforded under the policy will not be canceled,
materially changed or not renewed until at least 30 days' written
notice has been given to Radnor Township. The certificate of
insurance must evidence policies of insurance maintained at the
expense of the applicant for comprehensive liability, including
products/completed operations/broad contractual and property
damage: each occurrence, $500,000.
B. Chapter 2, Definitions.
(1) Section 202, General Definitions.
(a) Amend the definition of "Code Official" to read as follows:
§ 195-3 RADNOR CODE § 195-3
C:440
Chapter 200
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 98. Animals — See Ch. 115.
§ 200-1. Unnecessary noise prohibited.
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to make or cause or suffer or permit to be made
or caused, upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or it
or upon any public street, alley or thoroughfare in the Township of Radnor,
any unnecessary noises or sounds by means of the human voice or by any
other means or methods which are physically annoying to the comfort of
any person or which are so harsh or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual
in their use, time and place as to occasion physical discomfort or which are
injurious to the lives, health, peace and comfort of the inhabitants of said
Township or any number thereof.
§ 200-2. Musical instruments, stereos and other sound-producing
devices.
No person, persons, firm or corporation shall play, use or operate or
knowingly permit to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, sound amplifier, loudspeaker or other
machine or device for the reproduction of sound upon property (real or
CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of Community Development
charged with the administration and enforcement of this code.
(b) Add the definition of "Department" to read as follows:
DEPARTMENT. The Department of Community Development
of Radnor Township or any authorized agent or employee
thereof.
(c) Add the definition of "HVAC contractor" to read as follows:
HVAC CONTRACTOR. Any person who shall have qualified
and registered as an HVAC contactor in accordance with the
terms of this chapter and under the rules and regulations of
Radnor Township.
(d) Add the definition of "Township" to read as follows:
TOWNSHIP. The Township of Radnor in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
§ 195-3 CHARTER § 200-2
C:441
personal) or premises owned, occupied or used by him, them or it, which
is not measured and regulated by decibels, so that the sound coming from
such machine can be audibly heard at a distance greater than 100 feet
from the property or premises wherein such machine or device is located.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the playing of a
band or orchestra in any concert hall, auditorium, clubroom or public park.
§ 200-3. Sound trucks and loudspeakers.
A. No person shall operate a sound truck or loudspeaker on the streets or
public places of the Township of Radnor without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the Community Development Department. Such permit
shall be for a period of one day only. Such permit shall not be
transferable from person to person or from sound truck to sound truck
and may not be extended as to the date it shall be used nor shall any
permit for the operation of such sound truck be issued for use earlier
than 8:00 a.m. or later than 9:00 p.m. of the prevailing local time. Every
application for a permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $25.
[Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
B. The application for such permit shall be filed in duplicate with the
Township Secretary, and the permit issued shall be limited in
accordance with the information contained in such application, which
shall set forth the following:
(1) Name and home address of the applicant.
(2) Business address of the applicant.
(3) Name and address of the owner of the sound truck.
(4) Make and license number of the sound truck.
(5) Name and address of the person operating the sound truck.
(6) Name and address of the person operating the sound equipment.
(7) The purpose for which the sound truck will be used.
(8) The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck.
(9) A certificate from an engineer that such amplifying machine is so
equipped and regulated by decibels that the sound coming from
such machine cannot be audibly heard at a distance greater than
100 feet from the sound truck or amplifying machine.
C. After the issuance of said permit, the Township Secretary shall return
one certified copy of the application to the permittee, together with the
permit, which must be in the possession of the operator of the sound
truck during such time that the sound-amplifying equipment is in
operation. Such certified application and permit shall, upon request, be
promptly exhibited to any police officer of the Township of Radnor.
§ 200-2 RADNOR CODE § 200-3
C:442
§ 200-4. Horns.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sound any horn or
warning device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except
when required by law or to give timely warning of impending danger to
persons driving other vehicles or to persons upon the street. No person
shall sound any horn or warning device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus
or other vehicle which shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or
for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
§ 200-5. Construction work.
§ 200-6. Refuse collection. [Amended 11-26-1979 by Ord. No.
79-28]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or their agents or
employees, engaged in the collection of garbage, rubbish or refuse in the
Township to make any such collections between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., current time.
§ 200-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Any person, persons, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of such
fine and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding
30 days. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
D. No permit so issued may be used which attracts the attention of
motorists or pedestrians, causing the blocking of streets and thereby
creating a traffic congestion and hazard.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or their agents
or employees owning or occupying any building, premises or other
place in the Township of Radnor to operate or permit to be operated any
type of machinery, appliance, equipment or hand tool which emits noise
beyond the premises upon which said machinery, appliance, equipment
or hand tool is being operated or used between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., current time or on any Sunday or legal holiday.
B. The Community Development Department shall be authorized to issue
permits for emergency construction and repair upon submission of
adequate proof of the necessity of such work. [Amended 6-29-1977
by Ord. No. 77-18]
§ 200-3 CHARTER § 200-7
C:443
Chapter 205
PARK AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 109.
Animals — See Ch. 115.
Hunting and weapons — See Ch. 180.
Littering — See Ch. 190.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 270.
§ 200-7 RADNOR CODE § 200-7
C:444
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 4-28-1975 by Ord. No. 1607 (Ch. 96 of the 1974 Code)]
§ 205-1. Applicability.
The following rules and regulations are applicable to all Radnor Township
park and recreation areas.
§ 205-2. Hours. [Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
The park and recreation areas shall be open from dawn until dark
throughout the year. Use at any other time shall be by written authorization
of the Recreation Department.
§ 205-3. Permit required for group use.
The use of ballfields, picnic areas, camping areas and conservation areas by
sponsored or organized groups of more than 10 persons shall be by permit
only and shall be scheduled by the Recreation Department.
§ 205-4. Restricted activities.
A. The following are prohibited:
(1) Damaging, defacing, destroying or removing any property,
vegetation, building, equipment or notices.
(2) Discarding of trash, garbage or other litter except into containers
provided for that purpose.
(3) Possession or use of any type of firearms where such possession or
use is in violation of the Pennsylvania Uniform Firearms Act, 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq. Archery equipment may only be used in
special areas as may be provided for such use. [Amended
10-11-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-38]
(4) Possession or use of alcoholic beverages.
(5) Fires, except in facilities especially provided for that purpose.
(6) Boisterous, immoral or indecent actions or conduct annoying to
other users of the park.
(7) Motorized vehicles, except licensed vehicles on designated
roadways and within posted speed limits weighing less than 10,000
pounds. Verbal permission may be given by the Township Manager
and/or the Director of Parks and Recreation for vehicles over
10,000 pounds. [Amended 10-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-32]
(8) Pets running free. Pets may accompany owners when under control
except in areas specifically posted against pets.
§ 205-1 CHARTER § 205-4
C:445
§ 205-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Any person violating any provision herein shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be liable to a fine of not more
than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 30
days.
(9) Swimming, boating, ice skating and golfing, except in those areas
specifically designated for those purposes.
(10) Hunting and trapping. [Added 8-6-1979 by Ord. No. 79-21]
B. Fishing in the pond areas shall be restricted to resident children 15
years of age or younger. [Added 4-25-1983 by Ord. No. 83-16]
§ 205-4 RADNOR CODE § 205-5
C:446
ARTICLE II
Athletic Fields
[Adopted 8-19-1996 by Ord. No. 96-22]
§ 205-6. Word usage; definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PLAYING FIELD — A field with one or more athletic facilities that are
permitted for use by the Township Department of Parks and Recreation.
§ 205-7. Reasons for closing of fields.
§ 205-8. Notice of closing required; exemption.
A. The Parks and Recreation Department can close a playing field for a
determined period of time for the following reasons:
(1) The playing field is under construction or renovation.
(2) The playing field has been damaged by overuse or severe weather.
(3) The playing field is part of an overall field rotation system.
B. The Department of Parks and Recreation reserves the right to close a
field for any other condition or circumstances that would render the
field unusable such as:
(1) The playing field site is needed for parking during a possible
renovation of a nearby building.
(2) The playing field suffers a sink hole which makes it unplayable.
A. In order for a playing field to be considered closed, the Township of
Radnor shall:
(1) Announce the closure of the field on the local access cable
television station on which Township messages are normally
carried with the same degree of frequency other Township
messages are carried for a period of at least one week prior to the
field closure.
(2) Advertise at least one week prior to the field closure in at least one
newspaper of general circulation in the Township that the field will
be closed.
(3) Post a minimum of two signs at the field indicating that the field is
officially closed.
B. In the event of an emergency field closing such as potential damage to
the field from weather conditions, the Township shall not be obligated
to satisfy the requirements in Subsection A(1) and (2).
§ 205-6 CHARTER § 205-9
C:447
§ 205-9. Violations and penalties.
If, when a playing field has been closed, individuals or groups play on
a closed field, they would then be considered trespassing. This violation
would then be cited and will carry a fine or punishment that shall be
determined by the District Justice.
§ 205-9 RADNOR CODE § 205-9
C:448
Chapter 206
PARKING, OFF-STREET
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 270. Parking and storage of vehicles — See Ch.
272.
§ 206-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Township of Radnor by providing for the
control, regulation, maintenance, cleanliness and preservation of parking
and accessory areas provided for or required in connection with any subject
premises as herein defined.
§ 206-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY AREA — Buffer zones, setbacks or other areas, surfaced or
natural, open space or improved space used in connection with subject
premises.
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials.
AUTHORIZED OFFICIAL — The Director of the Community Development
Department and such person as he shall designate.
FIRE LANES — Lanes of sufficient width for use by firefighting equipment
established in the parking area adjacent to buildings and structures.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
preparation, handling, cooking and consumption of food.
GARBAGE RECEPTACLE — A covered container which is rodent-, vermin-,
insect- and waterproof.
HOLDER — Owner, tenant, trustee, receiver, executor, managing agent or
other person who controls, in whole or in part, any subject premises.
LIGHTING PERIOD — One-half hour after sunset of any day to 1/2 hour
before sunrise of the following day.
PARKING AREA — Space provided by a holder for the parking of vehicles
on any subject premises, together with the means of ingress and egress
thereto, and the roads and driveways of any subject premises.
PARKING SPACES — Designated places in a parking area for the parking or
standing of automobiles, trucks, bicycles and other vehicles.
§ 205-9 CHARTER § 206-2
C:449
POTHOLES — Holes and cracks occurring on any paved or unpaved surface
of a parking area.
REFUSE — All solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage,
rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and
solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, cardboard,
tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, wood, glass, beddings,
crockery and similar materials.
SUBJECT PREMISES — Any premises which contains, in whole or part,
any parking area servicing any industrial, commercial (retail, wholesale
or services to the public), professional, entertainment, recreational,
apartment, townhouse, planned unit development or multiple-dwelling use
or area or other areas used for purposes or functions to which the general
public is invited, directly or indirectly, the ingress and egress thereto,
roads and driveways therein, buffer zones, setbacks or other open space in
connection therewith with respect to all of said areas used in connection
with such premises.
TRAFFIC LANES — Lanes for the control and regulation of automobile,
truck, bicycle, other vehicle and pedestrian flow in a parking area.
TRASH RECEPTACLES — A container with appropriate covers to receive
hand-carried, discarded paper and trash.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway.
§ 206-3. Traffic and parking control standards.
Owners of subject premises shall conform to any or all of the following
standards relating to traffic and parking control on subject premises where
such conformance is deemed necessary to promote the public health, safety
and welfare and to ensure the safe and unhazardous use of such subject
premises:
A. Fire lanes, at least 10 feet wide, shall be established and maintained in
the parking area at the front, side and rear of all buildings and
structures on subject premises and shall be properly painted and
marked as such. Vehicular parking and standing is prohibited in a fire
lane.
B. Traffic lanes for the control and regulation of automobile, truck,
bicycle, other vehicle and pedestrian flow in the parking area shall be
established and maintained and properly delineated through the use of
pavement markings, signs or median strips.
C. Parking lines for parking spaces shall be established and maintained in
the parking area and shall be properly painted and marked as such.
§ 206-2 RADNOR CODE § 206-3
C:450
§ 206-4. Regulations for maintenance.
Any owner of a subject premises shall comply with the following
regulations:
D. Provision shall be made on subject premises for the parking of bicycles
and motorbikes.
E. Parking spaces in the parking area hereafter established shall be set
aside and designated for handicapped persons, and ramp facilities shall
be provided where necessary.
F. Provision shall be made for the safe movement of pedestrians while in
the parking area or accessory area through the use of walkways,
medians and crosswalks.
G. Curbing and traffic barriers or islands shall be built where necessary
and maintained so as to enforce desired traffic patterns within the
parking area. Where possible, traffic islands shall contain vegetation
and landscaping conducive to growth in a parking area environment.
H. Approved stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at entrance or exit
locations to a parking area or at intersections within the parking area
where required for traffic safety.
I. Signs regulating parking, traffic flow and speed limits on subject
premises shall be erected where deemed necessary by the authorized
official.
A. All roads, sidewalks, driveways and parking areas used in connection
with subject premises must be kept in proper repair, free from potholes,
snow and ice, except that snow may be piled on subject premises so
long as it does not interfere with the internal circulation and parking of
the parking area and does not hinder driver vision when entering or
leaving the subject premises.
B. Subject premises must be kept free and clear of ashes, dirt, debris,
rubbish, garbage, refuse and other obstructions and must be kept
properly required and maintained.
C. Fire lanes, traffic lanes and parking lines for parking spaces, where
required, shall be maintained and properly painted and marked so that
such lanes and lines will be clearly visible to vehicle operators and
pedestrians.
D. Because of the traffic and safety hazard resulting from the random
leaving of shopping carts in parking and accessory areas any persons,
holders which provide shopping carts for their customers and allow
their customers to remove such carts from their store premises are
required to take whatever steps are necessary to ensure that such carts
are not left in parking or accessory areas after use by such customers.
Shopping cart collection stations may be used in a parking area,
§ 206-3 CHARTER § 206-4
C:451
provided that such stations do not create a traffic hazard, are kept free
of snow and ice and are frequently policed by the store's employees so
that the capacity of the stations is not exceeded. Failure of a holder to
remove its cart from a parking or accessory area, other than from a
cart collection station with sufficient capacity, for more than 30 minutes
after use by a customer shall constitute a violation of this chapter by
such holder. Each cart that remains in a parking or accessory area in
violation of this regulation shall constitute a separate offense.
E. All lighting on subject premises must be kept in proper working order
and lighted during the lighted period when the subject premises or any
portion thereof is being used by the holder, or when the subject
premises or any portion thereof is open for business. The authorized
official may require the holder of any subject premises to reduce
outdoor lighting after business hours.
F. All fences, signs, screening, curbing, traffic barriers and islands, grass,
trees, shrubbery, landscaping, retaining walls, slopes and other space
used in connection with subject premises must be maintained and/or
repaired.
G. All water drains and water drainage systems used in connection with
subject premises must be kept clean and in proper working order.
H. All stormwater retention ponds and systems related thereto used in
connection with subject premises shall be maintained in proper
working condition.
I. All exterior areas on subject premises must be kept free and clear of the
storage of goods, wares and merchandise. Loading and unloading are to
be done in designated zones only.
J. All refuse and rubbish must be stored in a designated place or placed in
proper garbage receptacles which shall be screened from public view
by fencing or other appropriate techniques.
K. There shall be, at convenient places for use by the public, proper trash
receptacles which shall be sufficiently serviced to prevent overflow.
L. Facilities for the parking of bicycles and motorbikes on subject
premises and parking spaces and related ramp facilities for
handicapped persons shall be maintained and properly designated.
M. Any deterioration of the exterior of any building on subject premises
with respect to painted surfaces, siding, roofing, brickwork, mortar
joints, signs, copings, overhangs, porches or other appendages,
entrance or exit doors, display windows or any other part of the
building exterior where such deterioration constitutes a hazard to the
public and would cause significant and serious damage to the structure
itself must be repaired or corrected.
§ 206-4 RADNOR CODE § 206-4
C:452
§ 206-5. Vehicles and traffic control.
§ 206-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 206-7. Higher standards to prevail.
Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions or standards than are
imposed by the provision of any law, ordinance, regulation or private
N. Traffic and parking control standards to which holders of subject
premises have conformed under § 206-3 of this chapter must be
maintained.
O. Engineering requirements, landscape plans, parking and traffic control
plans or any other criteria or requirements upon which a subdivision
plan is or has been approved for subject premises must be adhered to at
all times.
A. The following vehicle and traffic control regulations shall be applicable
to all users of a parking area:
(1) No vehicle shall be driven or propelled within a parking area, as
defined herein, in excess of 15 miles per hour.
(2) No person shall park or stand a motorized vehicle:
(a) Within a fire lane, except as otherwise permitted under § 206-3
of this chapter.
(b) Within a traffic lane.
(c) On a sidewalk.
(d) In an area or space posted as a no-parking zone.
(3) All persons using a parking area shall obey all traffic control
devices, including stop signs, yield signs, directional signs and
entrance and exit signs contained in such parking area.
(4) Where parking spaces are designated in a parking area, the
parking and standing of vehicles shall only be permitted within
such parking spaces.
B. This section shall be enforced by the Radnor Township Police
Department.
A. This chapter, except for § 206-5, shall be administered and enforced by
the authorized official.
B. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who or which violates any
provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction by a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $300. Each
day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 206-4 CHARTER § 206-7
C:453
agreement, this chapter shall control. Where greater restrictions are
imposed by any law, ordinance, regulation or private agreement than are
imposed by this chapter, such greater restrictions and standards shall
control.
Chapter 209
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 209-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, not exempted by § 209-5 hereof, who
is not the holder of a valid and unexpired license issued pursuant to this
chapter, to engage in selling or soliciting the sale or purchase, by use of
any sample or otherwise, of food, printed matter, services, goods, wares or
merchandise of any description or to engage in soliciting contributions, gifts
or pledges of money by visitation to private homes or residences or on the
public streets or highways of Radnor Township.
§ 209-2. Application; fee; renewal.
A. Any person, not exempted by § 209-5 hereof, desiring to obtain a license
to engage in the activities described in § 209-1 herein shall make
application therefor, in person, to the Police Department.
B. The applicant shall supply, over his/her signature, the following
information:
(1) His/Her true name.
(2) His/Her place and date of birth and Social Security number.
(3) His/Her temporary address.
(4) His/Her residence address.
(5) The address at which he/she will receive notices under this chapter.
(6) The name and address of his/her employer or principal, if any, and
the nature of the business activity thereof.
(7) The nature of business or activity in which the applicant wishes to
engage within the Township.
(8) List any other current or expired soliciting permits within the last
24 months from Radnor Township or any other entity.
(9) A true statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted in
any jurisdiction of any crime other than of minor traffic violations
and, if so, of what crime or crimes. The Department shall not issue
a peddling or solicitation license to any applicant convicted of any
felony or misdemeanor who is still under court-ordered supervision
of any kind as a result of said conviction(s).
§ 206-7 RADNOR CODE § 209-2
C:454
§ 209-3. Rules of conduct.
Every person to whom a license has been issued hereunder shall, in the
carrying on of his/her business or activities in the Township, comply with
the following rules of conduct:
C. The applicant shall, together with his/her application, submit to the
Police Department his/her photograph, the fingerprints of his/her two
hands, and a written description of himself/herself, all to be recorded by
the Radnor Township Police, and shall pay a fee in the amount of $100
to defray the cost of administering this chapter.
D. Upon submission of said application and supporting evidence of
identification and the payment of a fee as aforesaid, there shall be
issued to the applicant a license in the form of a card, which shall,
unless revoked, entitle the licensee to engage in the activities described
in § 209-1 hereof for a period of six months from the date of issuance.
A. He/She shall carry his/her license card at all times and exhibit it upon
request to any peace officer or any person upon whom he/she shall call
or with whom he/she shall talk in carrying on his/her licensed activities.
B. He/She shall not permit any other person to have possession of his/her
license card and shall immediately report its loss to the Police
Department. He/She shall not cause or permit his/her license card to be
altered or defaced.
C. He/She shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling house without
invitation or permission of the occupant and shall immediately leave
any premises upon request.
D. He/She shall not represent his/her license card to be an endorsement of
himself/herself or of his/her goods or services or of the goods or
services of his/her principal employer.
E. He/She shall immediately surrender his/her license card upon
revocation of his/her license as hereinafter provided.
F. He/She shall peddle, solicit or distribute merchandise only between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday unless
specifically having been invited to a house by the occupant or having
made an appointment with such person previously; provided, however,
that ice cream trucks and peddlers engaged in similar activity shall be
permitted to operate until dusk, which, for the purposes of this
subsection, is hereby defined as occurring 1/2 hour after sunset.
G. Every person licensed to solicit or peddle in the Township shall report in
person on those days on which he/she intends to solicit or peddle and
register with the Radnor Police Department by signing a registration
book, indicating his/her name, license number and names and licenses
numbers of all licensed helpers.
§ 209-2 CHARTER § 209-3
C:455
§ 209-4. Suspension and/or revocation of license; hearings.
§ 209-5. Exemptions.
H. He/She shall comply with "No Soliciting" notices on any property or
business in the Township.
I. In an effort to ensure pedestrian safety and maintain the efficient flow
of traffic, no person, firm, or corporation, required to be licensed under
§ 209-1, License required, shall distribute flyers, solicit funds, or can on
any roadway, medial barrier, berm, shoulder, or traffic way within
Radnor Township.
A. The Superintendent of Police or designate may immediately suspend
any license for just cause or in the interest of public safety.
B. Any license hereafter issued may be revoked by the Board of
Commissioners upon the failure of the licensee to comply with the
standards of conduct established by § 209-3 hereof or upon
ascertainment that the licensee has made any false statement in his/her
application for license hereunder. Notice of revocation shall be given by
written notice personally served or sent by registered mail to the
address designed for this purpose in the application for license.
C. Any person whose license has been revoked shall be entitled to appear,
with counsel, if he/she so desires, before the Board of Commissioners at
a regular or special meeting and be heard in behalf of a request for
reinstatement of his/her license.
A. The following persons are exempted from the licensing requirements of
this chapter:
(1) Persons soliciting contributions in behalf of organizations or
nonprofit corporations or a political entity for the purpose of
political canvassing exempted from the provisions of or duly
registered pursuant to 10 P.S. § 162-1 et seq., as amended, who,
while soliciting, are possessed of a card or other written evidence
of their appointment or authority to solicit for said organization or
corporation or political entity.
(2) Persons who have been licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to engage in an activity described in § 209-1 hereof,
when so engaged; including, without limitation, real estate,
insurance or securities brokers and salespeople.
(3) Persons soliciting funds or canvassing for purposes permitted
under the Act of 1937, June 3, P.L. 1333 (25 P.S. § 2601 et seq.), as
amended.
(4) Authorized persons, carrying satisfactory identification, engaged in
making surveys or collecting information for the federal, state,
county, or Radnor Township government or any agency thereof.
§ 209-3 RADNOR CODE § 209-5
C:456
§ 209-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before a District Justice, be subject to a penalty or fine
of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 30 days, for each such violation.
Chapter 214
PEST CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Sanitation — See Ch. 230.
Solid waste — See Ch. 240.
§ 214-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ERADICATION — The elimination of rodents or insects and other pest
life from any building, lot or premises through the use of traps, baiting,
fumigation or any other method of extermination approved by the Health
Officer, subject to applicable laws relating to poisonous substances and
fumigants.
HARBORAGE — Any condition which provides shelter or protection for
rodents, harmful insects or other pest life.
Also exempt shall be authorized persons, carrying satisfactory
identification, engaged in making surveys or collecting information
for any bona fide educational or quasi-governmental agency, if
such activity has previously been approved by the Board of
Commissioners.
B. In an effort to ensure pedestrian safety and maintain the efficient flow
of traffic, no person, firm, or corporation exempt from licensing under
this section shall distribute flyers, solicit funds, or can on any roadway,
medial barrier, berm, shoulder, or traffic way within Radnor Township.
C. Any person who is exempt under this subsection or any person who is
engaged in political canvassing shall only conduct such activities
Monday through Saturday from 9:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m.
D. He/She shall comply with "No Soliciting" notices on any property or
business in the Township.
§ 209-5 CHARTER § 214-1
C:457
PERSON IN CONTROL — The owner or part owner of a building, lot or
premises, whether an individual, partnership or corporation or the agent
or occupant of a building, lot or premises or any other person who has
the use or custody of the same or any part thereof, whether an individual,
partnership or corporation.
RODENTPROOFING — The treatment or shielding with material impervious
to rodent gnawing of all actual potential openings in the exterior and
interior walls, ground or first floors, roofs, foundations, basements,
sidewalk grating and other places that may be reached by rodents from the
ground or by climbing or burrowing.
§ 214-2. Elimination of harborages.
All buildings, lots or premises in this Township shall be kept free from
any condition conducive to rodents, insects and other pest life. The person
in control shall not allow the accumulation of water, garbage, building
material, brush, woodpiles or any other material which may afford
harborage or provide food for rodents, harmful insects or other pest life.
All garbage shall be wrapped. Garbage and waste material shall be placed
in approved watertight containers with tight-fitting lids and stored in such
a manner as not to create an attraction or harborage for rodents, harmful
insects or other pest life.
§ 214-3. Eradication measures.
§ 214-4. Rodentproofing.
A. When any building, lot or premises is subject to infestation by rodents,
harmful insects or other pest life, the person in control shall apply
continuous or repeated eradication measures, as required by the
Health Officer, until there is no evidence of an infestation remaining.
B. No building shall be demolished until the Health Officer informs the
Department of Community Development that the building and premises
are free from the infestation of rodents, harmful insects or other pest
life.
C. The Health Officer may, in his/her discretion, order the person in
control of any inland swamp, pond, creek, lake, pool, sunken lot, quarry
or abandoned excavation or any other place where stagnant water may
collect to fill in or drain the same or to employ other methods to prevent
the breeding of harmful insects and other pest life.
A. Whenever conditions inside, outside or under any building or buildings
or on any lot or premises provide harborage for rats, the Health Officer
may require all or any one or more buildings or premises to be
rodentproofed and harborages removed.
B. The person in control of a building or premises required to be
rodentproofed shall maintain the rodentproofing in good repair. No
person shall injure the rodentproofing. When the rodentproofing is
§ 214-1 RADNOR CODE § 214-4
C:458
§ 214-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-28-1988 by Ord. No.
88-32; 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof by a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 30
days.
Chapter 218
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of standard codes of technical
regulations — See Charter § 3.06.
Code Appeals Board — See Ch. 15.
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 144A.
Contractors — See Ch. 145.
Fees — See Ch. 162.
Grading, excavations and fills — See Ch. 175.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Sewers — See Ch. 235.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 245.
Street excavations — See Ch. 250, Art. VI.
§ 218-1. Repealer.
Chapter 218, Plumbing, of the Township of Radnor is hereby repealed and
a new Chapter 218 as set forth below is hereby enacted.
§ 218-2. Adoption of code by reference.
Certain documents on file in the office of the Secretary of the Township of
Radnor, being marked and designated as the 2009 International Plumbing
Code, are hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of Radnor Township,
Delaware County, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the purpose
of establishing minimum regulations governing the design, installation,
maintenance and construction of plumbing systems as herein provided; and
each and all of the provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the 2009
International Plumbing Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
injured in the course of making alterations, installations, additions
or repairs to the building, the person in control shall restore the
rodentproofing in good condition.
C. No person shall undertake to remodel or alter any existing building or
portion thereof for the purpose of rodentproofing without first
submitting plans for approval to the Community Development
Department. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 214-4 CHARTER § 218-2
C:459
part hereof as if fully set forth in this chapter with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes as prescribed by this chapter.
§ 218-3. Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes to Code.
The following sections and subsections of the 2009 International Plumbing
Code are hereby added, amended, changed, and clarified as set forth below.
A. Chapter 1, Administration.
(1) Section 101, General.
(a) In Subsection 101.1, Title. Insert "Township of Radnor" as the
name of the jurisdiction.
(b) Insert a new Subsection 101.5 to read as follows:
101.5 Terms. Whenever in the Plumbing Code a municipality
is mentioned and no name is given, said municipality shall
be construed to mean the Township of Radnor; and when a
state is mentioned, the same shall mean the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania; and when the Department of Plumbing
Inspection is mentioned, the same shall mean the Department
of Community Development.
(2) Section 103, Department of Plumbing Inspection.
(a) Delete Subsections 103.1 through 103.3 and substitute with
the following:
103.1 General. The Director of Community Development or
any authorized agent or employee thereof shall be designated
as the Code Official for the purposes of this code.
103.2 Appointment. The Code Official and employees of the
Department of Community Development shall be appointed in
accordance with the personnel procedures and policies of the
Township of Radnor.
(b) Amend the subsection number of Liability to read: 103.3
Liability.
(3) Section 106, Permits.
(a) Subsection 106.5.4, Extensions. Delete the following on line
nine: "The fee for an extension shall be 1/2 the amount
required for a new permit for such work."
(b) Subsection 106.6.1, Work commencing before permit issuance.
Change the word "shall" on line three to "may."
(c) Subsection 106.6.2, Fee schedule. Delete this subsection and
substitute with the following:
§ 218-2 RADNOR CODE § 218-3
C:460
106.6.2 Fee schedule. Fees for all plumbing work shall be
charged as set forth in Chapter 162 of the Township Code.
(d) Subsection 106.6.3, Fee refunds. Delete in its entirety.
(4) Section 108, Violations.
(a) Subsection 108.3, Prosecution of violation. Delete the words
beginning on the second line "request the legal counsel of the
jurisdiction to."
(b) Subsection 108.4, Violation penalties. Delete this subsection
and substitute with the following:
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code or who shall fail to comply with the
requirements thereof, or who shall install, repair or alter a
plumbing system in violation of an approved plan or directive
of the Code Official, or of a permit issued under this code,
shall upon conviction be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(c) Subsection 108.5 Stop work orders. Insert in the first blank
"25" and in the second blank "1,000."
(5) Section 109, Means of Appeal. Delete this entire subsection and
substitute with the following:
SECTION 109
MEANS OF APPEAL
109.1 General. Whenever the owner or contractor involved in
the installation, repair or alteration of a plumbing system takes
exception to the decision of the Code Official in refusing to issue a
permit, or to approve plans as required by this code, such owner,
contractor or duly authorized agent or attorney may within 10
days after such decision take an appeal therefrom to the Code
Appeals Board. Such appeal shall be in writing, state the decision
of the Code Official and the reasons for the exception taken
thereto and filed with the Township Secretary. The Code Appeals
Board shall within 30 days from receipt of such appeal fix a date,
time and location to consider the appeal and to allow the person
to be heard if he states his desire to do so in the written appeal. A
prompt decision shall be rendered by the Code Appeals Board and
duly recorded with such decision being final.
(6) Add a new Section 111 to read as follows:
§ 218-3 CHARTER § 218-3
C:461
SECTION 111
LICENSING OF PLUMBING CONTRACTORS
111.1 Master plumber license. It shall be unlawful for any
person to engage in the business of plumbing as a master plumber
without first having obtained a license from the Department of
Community Development.
111.2 Application. Application shall be made on a form furnished
by the Township and shall include the name and address of the
business, partnership or corporation and the name of the
individual to be licensed, along with any other information which
the Township may require. One member of the business,
partnership or corporation shall be sufficient for the issuance of a
license.
111.3 Insurance. No license shall be issued to a master plumber
unless the applicant files a certificate of insurance with the Code
Official at the time of license application. The certificate of
insurance shall contain a provision that coverage afforded under
the policy will not be canceled, materially changed or not renewed
until at least 30 days' prior written notice has been given to
Radnor Township. The certificate of insurance must evidence
policies of insurance maintained at the expense of the applicant
for comprehensive liability, including products/completed
operations/broad contractual and property damage: each
occurrence, $500,000.
111.4 Change of place of business. Immediate notice shall be
given by any licensee hereunder to the Township of any change of
his place of business.
111.5 Misrepresentation. It shall be unlawful for any person
who does not have a master plumber's license issued by the
Township to engage in or represent himself as engaged in the
business of plumbing within Radnor Township.
111.6 License for institutions. A person certified as competent
by the Code Official may be licensed as a master plumber for the
care, alteration or addition of the plumbing and drainage system
of a designated manufacturing or mercantile building, institution,
hotel, apartment or similar building where the continuous services
of a master plumber are required, and receive a certificate of
license, but in such case the person so licensed shall not be
permitted to do any plumbing or drainage work in any building or
buildings other than those for which he is specifically licensed.
§ 218-3 RADNOR CODE § 218-3
C:462
111.7 License fees. License fees for master plumbers and
institutional plumbers shall be charged as set forth in Chapter
162, Fees, of the Township Code and shall be valid for a period of
one year from the date issued.
111.8 Revocation of licenses. A license may be suspended or
revoked by the Code Official for violation of any section of this
chapter, or for violation of any standards, conditions or
requirements under which a plumbing permit is issued by the
Township. Notification and justification for such action shall be
provided to the licensee by certified and regular mail. The
licensee, agent or attorney may, within 10 calendar days from
the date of the notice, appeal the decision of the Code Official
to the Code Appeals Board. The appeal shall be in writing, state
the decision of the Code Official and reasons for taking exception
thereto and shall be filed with the Township Secretary. The Code
Appeals Board shall, within 30 days from receipt of such appeal,
fix a date, time and location to consider the action taken by the
Code Official. The Code Appeals Board shall render a prompt
decision and affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Code
Official, with such decision being duly recorded and final.
B. Chapter 2, Definitions.
(1) Section 202, General Definitions.
(a) Amend the definition of "Code Official" to read as follows:
CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of Community Development
charged with the administration and enforcement of this code,
or a duly authorized representative.
(b) Insert the definition of "department" to read as follows:
DEPARTMENT. The Department of Community Development
of Radnor Township or any authorized agent or employee
thereof.
(c) Insert the definition of "institutional plumber" to read as
follows:
INSTITUTIONAL PLUMBER. Any person who shall have
qualified and registered as an institutional plumber in
accordance with the terms of this chapter and under the rules
and regulations of Radnor Township.
(d) Insert the definition of "master plumber" to read as follows:
MASTER PLUMBER. Any person who shall have qualified as
a master plumber in accordance with the terms of this chapter
and under the rules and regulations of Radnor Township.
§ 218-3 CHARTER § 218-3
C:463
Chapter 222
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of standard codes of technical
regulations — See Charter § 3.06.
Code Appeals Board — See Ch. 15.
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 134.
Existing buildings — See Ch. 135.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 142.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 144A.
Contractors — See Ch. 145.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 156.
Fees — See Ch. 162.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
Fuel gas — See Ch. 172.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Pest control — See Ch. 214.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
Sanitation — See Ch. 230.
Sewers — See Ch. 235.
Solid waste — See Ch. 240.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 267.
Parking and storage of vehicles — See Ch.
272.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
(e) Insert the definition of "Township" to read as follows:
TOWNSHIP. The Township of Radnor in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
C. Chapter 3, General Regulations.
(1) Section 305, Protection of Pipes and Plumbing System
Components.
(a) In Subsection 305.6.1, Sewer depth, insert 24 on lines three
and five.
D. Chapter 9, Vents.
(1) Section 904, Vent Terminals.
(a) Subsection 904.1, Roof extension. Insert the number 15 online
two.
E. Chapter 10, Traps, Interceptors and Separators.
(1) Section 1002, Trap requirements.
(a) Subsection 1002.3, Prohibited traps. Add to number 5: "except
when approved by the Code Official."
§ 218-3 RADNOR CODE § 222-1
C:464
§ 222-1. Repealer.
Chapter 222, Property Maintenance, is hereby repealed and a new Chapter
222 updating standards to the 2009 International Property Maintenance
Code be and is hereby enacted.
§ 222-2. Adoption of code by reference.
Certain documents on file in the office of the Secretary of the Township of
Radnor, being marked and designated as the 2009 International Property
Maintenance Code, as published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
are hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code for the Township
of Radnor, Delaware County, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for
the purpose of establishing minimum regulations governing the conditions
and maintenance of buildings and structures within Radnor Township; and
each and all of the provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the 2009
International Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this chapter with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes as prescribed herein.
§ 222-3. Additions, insertions, deletions and changes to code.
The following sections and subsections of the aforementioned 2009
International Property Maintenance Code are hereby added, amended,
changed and clarified as set forth below.
A. Chapter 1, Administration.
(1) Section 101, General.
(a) In Subsection 101.1, Title. The "Township of Radnor" shall be
inserted as the name of the jurisdiction.
(2) Section 103, Department of Property Maintenance Inspection.
(a) Delete Subsections 103.1 through 103.3 and substitute with
the following:
103.1 General. The Director of Community Development or
any authorized agent or employee thereof shall be designated
as the Code Official for the purposes of this code.
103.2 Appointment. The Code Official and employees of the
Department of Community Development shall be appointed in
accordance with the personnel procedures and policies of the
Township of Radnor.
103.3 Deputies (New)
103.4 Liability (New number)
§ 222-1 CHARTER § 222-3
C:465
103.5 Fees. Insert the following for appropriate schedule:
Fees for property maintenance inspections and rental housing
inspections shall be charged in accordance with the fee
schedule as set forth in Chapter 162, Fees, of the Code of
the Township of Radnor. Fees shall be paid upon the filing of
an application and shall expire as of March 31, at or prior to
which time a fee shall be paid for an additional 12 months.
Fees shall not be charged for dwellings on the grounds of any
educational, religious, or charitable institution.
(3) Section 104, Duties and Powers of the Code Official.
(a) Delete Subsection 104.1, General, and replace with the
following:
104.1 General. It shall be the duty and responsibility of
the Director of Community Development, or his authorized
representative, to enforce the provisions of this code.
(4) Section 106, Violations.
(a) Subsection 106.4, Violation penalties. Delete the present
subsection and substitute the following:
106.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation
who shall violate any provision of this code shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(5) Section 110, Demolition.
(a) Insert a new Subsection 110.5 to read as follows:
110.5 Certificate of extermination. A certificate of
extermination by a recognized exterminating/termite control
company addressing the existence of any wood destroying
insects, rodents, or other harmful insects or pest life shall be
received prior to the issuance of a demolition permit.
(b) Insert a new Subsection 110.6 to read as follows:
110.6 Shade Tree Ordinance. Prior to the issuance of a
demolition permit, applicant shall demonstrate compliance
with the demolition provisions of Ordinance No. 2003-21,
Shade Tree Ordinance.128
(6) Section 111, Means of Appeal.
(a) Delete the entire section and substitute the following:
128. Editor's Note: See Ch. 263, Trees.
§ 222-3 RADNOR CODE § 222-3
C:466
SECTION 111
MEANS OF APPEAL
111.1 Appeals. Whenever the owner of a property takes
exception to a notice issued by the Code Official in the
enforcement of this code, such owner, duly authorized agent
or legal representative may, within 10 calendar days from
receipt of notification, file an appeal with the Code Appeals
Board. Such appeal shall be in writing, state the decision
of the Code Official and the reasons for the exception taken
thereto and be filed with the Township Secretary. The Code
Appeals Board shall, within 30 days from the date of filing, fix
a date, time and location to consider the appeal and to allow
the person to be heard if he states his desire to do so in the
written appeal. A prompt decision shall be rendered by the
Code Appeals Board and duly recorded, with such decision
being final.
B. Chapter 2, Definitions.
(1) Section 202, General Definitions.
(a) Insert the definition of "applicant" to read as follows:
APPLICANT. The owner, authorized agent or legal
representative of any dwelling unit as herein defined which is
being offered for rent or lease.
(b) Amend the definition of "Code Official" to read as follows:
CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of Community Development
charged with the administration and enforcement of this code
or his duly authorized representative.
(c) Insert the definition of "Department" to read as follows:
DEPARTMENT. The Department of Community Development
of the Township of Radnor.
(d) Insert the definition of "dormitory" to read as follows:
DORMITORY. A building or combination of buildings used for
living quarters as an accessory use to a college, university,
convent, monastery or other similar permitted use within a
Planned Institutional Zoning District.
(e) Amend the definition of "dwelling unit" to read as follows:
DWELLING UNIT. A building or entirely self-contained
portion thereof containing complete housekeeping facilities,
including not more than one kitchen used exclusively for the
residence of one family.
§ 222-3 CHARTER § 222-3
C:467
(f) Insert the definition of "hotel" to read as follows:
HOTEL, MOTEL OR INN. A building arranged or used for
shelter and accommodation for compensation of more than 20
persons.
(g) Insert the definition of "single-family dwelling" to read as
follows:
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building on a lot designed
and occupied exclusively as a residence for one family.
(h) Insert the definition of "two-family dwelling" to read as follows:
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A building on a lot designed and
occupied exclusively as a residence for two families living
independently of one another.
(i) Insert the definition of "multiple-family dwelling or apartment
house" to read as follows:
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING OR APARTMENT
HOUSE. A building on a lot, designed and used exclusively as
a residence for three or more families living independently of
one another.
(j) Insert the definition of "family" to read as follows:
FAMILY. One or more persons occupying the same dwelling
unit and living and cooking as a single housekeeping unit,
said unit consisting only of individuals who are related by
blood, marriage or otherwise by law, except that such unit
may also consist of foster children, domestics and one other
individual not related to others in the housekeeping unit.
A family as herein defined specifically excludes individuals
and groups occupying a boarding or rooming house, lodging
house, club, fraternity, dormitory, hotel or other similar living
environment.
(k) Amend the definition of "rooming house" to read as follows:
ROOMING HOUSE. A building which has a dwelling unit
occupied by the owner and which has accommodations for not
more than three roomers.
C. Chapter 3, General Requirements.
(1) Section 302, Exterior Property Areas.
(a) Subsection 302.4 Weeds. Insert the number 12 on line two to
mean height in inches.
(b) Delete Subsection 302.8, Motor vehicles.
§ 222-3 RADNOR CODE § 222-3
C:468
(c) Add new subsection 302.10, Prohibited Furniture, to read as
follows:
302.10 Prohibited furniture. Furniture which would be
adversely affected by the elements and/or susceptible to
infestation by insects, rats, or other vermin is prohibited from
being placed or stored on the exterior of a dwelling. Such
prohibited furniture shall include, but is not limbed to,
upholstered couches and chairs, davenports, beds, divans,
and any other interior-type fabric-covered articles not
designed or intended for use on the exterior of a dwelling.
(2) Section 304, Exterior Structure.
(a) Subsection 304.14, Insect screens. Delete the words "During
the period from [DATE] to [DATE]," and begin the sentence
with the word "Every."
(3) Section 308, Rubbish and Garbage.
(a) Subsection 308.2, Disposal of rubbish. Amend to read as
follows:
308.2 Disposal of rubbish. Both the owner and occupant of
a structure shall be responsible for the disposal of all rubbish
in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in
approved containers.
(b) Subsection 308.3 Disposal of garbage. Amend to read as
follows:
308.3 Disposal of garbage. Both the owner and occupant
of a structure shall be responsible for the disposal of garbage
in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in
an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage
containers.
D. Chapter 6, Mechanical and Electrical Requirements.
(1) Section 602, Heating Facilities.
(a) Delete Subsection 602.2, Residential occupancies, and insert
the following:
602.2 Residential buildings, minimum level of heat.
Every owner of a rental dwelling shall be responsible for
maintaining the temperature in every occupied unit at not less
than 68° F., but not less than 65° F. between the hours of
12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m.
(b) Delete Subsection 602.3, Heat supply.
§ 222-3 CHARTER § 222-3
C:469
Chapter 226
RENTAL PROPERTIES
(c) Subsection 602.4, Occupiable work spaces. Delete the words
"during the period from [DATE] to [DATE]" on the second and
third lines.
(2) Section 605, Electrical Equipment.
(a) Subsection 605.2 Receptacles. Add the words "ground fault
circuit interrupter" between the words "one" and "receptacle"
on line five, and delete the word "new" on line six.
§ 222-3 RADNOR CODE § 222-3
C:470
ARTICLE I
Rental Unit Regulations
[Adopted 6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-25; 6-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-12]
§ 226-1. Intent and objective.
It is the purpose of this article to protect and promote the public health,
safety and welfare of residents within the Township and to establish the
obligations of both owners and tenants of rental units within the Township
to improve the maintenance and quality of rental units by compliance
with applicable codes and ordinances of the Township, to preserve the
residential quality of neighborhoods, to require the licensing of rental units
and to establish procedures for the issuance of formal warnings, and the
nonrenewal and suspension of such license.
§ 226-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE — Any code or ordinance adopted, enacted and/or in effect in and
for the Township of Radnor concerning fitness for habitation or the
construction, maintenance, operation, occupancy, use or appearance of any
premises of any dwelling unit under the provisions of this article. Included
herein are the following which are in effect as of the date of this article:
National Fire Code; International Plumbing Code; International Mechanical
Code; Uniform Construction Code; International Property Maintenance
Code; National Electrical Code; and any duly enacted amendment thereto.
CODE OFFICIAL — The Director of Community Development charged with
the administration and enforcement of this article or his duly authorized
representative.
COMMON AREA — Space which is not a part of the rental unit and which
is shared with other occupants of a rental unit, whether they reside in the
rental unit or not. Common areas shall be considered part of the premises
for the purpose of this article.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Development of the
Township of Radnor.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — Any form of conduct, action, incident or
behavior perpetrated, caused or permitted by any tenant of a rental unit
or guest that is so loud, untimely (as to hour of the day), offensive, riotous
or that otherwise disturbs other persons of reasonable sensibility in their
peaceful enjoyment of their premises such as that a complaint is made to
the police or Code Official. It is not necessary that such conduct, action,
incident or behavior constitute a criminal offense, nor that criminal charges
be filed against any person in order for a person to have perpetrated,
caused or permitted the commission of disruptive conduct as herein
defined; provided, however, that no disruptive conduct shall be deemed
§ 226-1 CHARTER § 226-2
C:471
to have occurred unless the Code Official or police have investigated and
determined that such did occur.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT — A written report of disruptive conduct
on a form prescribed by the Code Official or the Superintendent of Police.
DORMITORY — A college, university, or other educational building
containing living and/or sleeping accommodations for students.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking and sanitation.
LICENSE — An annual license issued by the Department to the owner of
a rental unit under this article which is required for the lawful rental and
occupancy of dwelling units.
ON-CAMPUS HOUSING — A college, university, or other educational
building containing a rental unit for living and/or sleeping accommodations
for students, faculty or guest.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property, including the guardian of the estate of
any person or the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by the court.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures thereon.
POLICE — The Police Department of Radnor Township.
RENTAL AGREEMENT — A written agreement between the owner and
tenant, embodying the terms and conditions concerning the use and
occupancy of a rental unit.
RENTAL HOUSING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Rental Housing Board of
Appeals as appointed by the Board of Commissioners.
RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit occupied under a rental agreement and
containing living and/or sleeping accommodations with or without cooking
and/or individual sanitary facilities, including dormitory rooms.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT — A building on a lot designed and
occupied exclusively as a residence for one family.
A.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT — A building on a lot designed and
occupied exclusively as a residence for two families living
independently of one another.
B.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT or APARTMENT HOUSE — A
building on a lot designed and used exclusively as a residence for three
or more families living independently of one another.
C.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building which has a dwelling unit occupied
by the owner and which has accommodations for not more than three
roomers.
D.
§ 226-2 RADNOR CODE § 226-2
C:472
TOWNSHIP SECRETARY — The Township Secretary or Assistant Secretary
of the Township of Radnor.
STUDENT TENANT — As defined in the Radnor Township Zoning
Ordinance.129
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Police of the Township of
Radnor or duly authorized representative.
TENANT — Any individual who resides in a rental unit governed by this
article with whom a legal relationship with the owner is established by a
written rental agreement or other occupancy agreement.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor.
§ 226-3. Owner responsibilities.
§ 226-4. Tenant responsibilities.
A. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep and maintain all rental units
in compliance with applicable codes and ordinances of the Township,
including the student housing requirements of the Radnor Township
Zoning Ordinance.
B. Every owner shall exercise due diligence in determining whether a
tenant is or has become, during the period of the lease term, a student
tenant.
C. Every owner shall be responsible for regulating the proper use and
occupancy of rental units, and for regulating the conduct and activities
of their tenants and guests, which conduct takes place within the rental
unit or on the premises.
D. This section shall not be construed as diminishing or relieving, in any
way, the responsibility of tenants or their guests for their conduct or
activity; nor shall it be construed as an assignment, transfer or
projection over or onto any owner of any responsibility or liability which
tenants or their guests may have as a result of their conduct or activity
under any private cause of action, civil or criminal enforcement
proceedings; nor shall this section be construed so as to require an
owner to indemnify or defend tenants or their guests when such action
or proceeding is brought against the tenant based upon the tenant's
conduct or activity. Nothing herein is intended to impose any additional
civil/criminal liability imposed by existing law.
E. This article is not intended to, nor shall its effect be, to limit any other
enforcement remedies which may be available to the Township against
an owner, tenant or guest thereof.
A. Tenants shall comply with all obligations imposed by this article and all
applicable codes and ordinances of the Township.
129. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 226-2 CHARTER § 226-4
C:473
§ 226-5. Enforcement.
B. A tenant or proposed tenant of a single-family dwelling shall disclose to
the owner whether he or she is a student tenant, as defined in the
Radnor Township Zoning Ordinance.
C. A tenant of a single-family dwelling shall immediately notify the owner
upon a change in such tenant's status to a student tenant.
D. No tenant of a single-family dwelling shall permit an individual who is
or would be a student tenant to reside in or sublet the rental unit unless
the student housing provisions of the Radnor Township Zoning
Ordinance have been met.
E. The tenant shall conduct himself or herself, and require all other
persons, including, but not limited to, guests on the premises within his
or her rental unit with his or her consent, in a manner that is not
disruptive conduct.
F. The tenant shall, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law or
ordinance, occupy or use his or her rental unit for no other purpose
than a residence.
G. The tenant shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit others on the
premises to engage in, any conduct declared illegal under the
Pennsylvania Crimes Code, or Liquor Code, or Controlled Substance,
Drug and Device Cosmetic Act.
H. When the police or the Code Official investigate an alleged incident of
disruptive conduct, a report shall be completed upon a determination
that the incident did, in fact, occur and constitutes disruptive conduct
as defined by this article. The information filled in on such report shall
include, if possible, the identity of the alleged perpetrator(s) and all
other obtainable information, including the factual basis for the
disruptive conduct. Where the police make such an investigation, a
copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Code Official. A copy of the
report shall be forwarded to the owner, whether the person making the
investigation is the police or the Code Official.
I. A violation of any of the above provisions by a tenant may be deemed a
breach of the tenant's rental agreement, subjecting the tenant to
summary eviction by the owner, in accordance with such rental
agreement and other applicable laws.
A. Upon a determination by the Code Official that a violation of this article
did occur, a written notice shall be forwarded to the owner advising him
of the location of the property in question, code section violated,
statement of the violation, a time limit for corrective action, right of
appeal and that failure to correct the violation within the time specified
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described. Such
notice shall be forwarded by certified and regular mail. The Code
§ 226-4 RADNOR CODE § 226-5
C:474
§ 226-6. Rental agreement.
§ 226-7. License and inspection of rental units.
Official shall also include a statement advising the owner if the violation
is subject to disciplinary action as set forth in § 226-8 of this article.
B. The Code Official may require the owner to submit a written report
setting forth what action has or will be taken to remedy the violation
and what steps will be taken to prevent a reoccurrence of the violation.
C. The Code Official shall review the report and, if adequate steps have
been taken to address current and future violations, the plan shall be
approved. Failure by the owner to enforce the plan shall constitute a
violation of this article.
A. All rental agreements shall be in writing. No oral leases or oral
modifications to a lease shall be permitted. There shall be no more than
one rental agreement for each dwelling unit, which shall include the
name, permanent address, telephone number, student tenant status of
each tenant, as well as any additional persons which may be liable
under the agreement, and the duration of said agreement. A copy of the
rental agreement shall be provided to the Township when requested by
the Code Official.
B. The owner shall provide the tenant with copies of the rental agreement
which shall include the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
premises; and
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of any manager or
agent.
C. The owner and tenant may include in the rental agreement terms and
conditions not prohibited by this article or other applicable ordinances,
regulations and laws.
D. Except as otherwise provided by this article, no rental agreement may
provide that the owner or tenant agrees to waive or forego rights or
remedies under this article. A provision prohibited by this subsection
included in the rental agreement is hereby declared unenforceable.
E. Following the effective date of this article, a summary or full text of the
ordinance and any amendments thereto, shall be attached to each
rental agreement when presented to the tenant for signature. If a
summary or full text of the ordinance has been provided when the
rental agreement was first executed, the summary or ordinance does
not have to be provided upon renewal. Where a rental agreement has
been entered into prior to the effective date of this article, the owner
shall provide all tenants with a summary or ordinance within 45 days
following the effective date of this article.
§ 226-5 CHARTER § 226-7
C:475
A. As a prerequisite to entering into any rental agreement permitting the
occupancy of a rental unit, or extending the time period of any rental
agreement, the owner shall be required to file an application and obtain
a license from the Department. The application shall be on a form
provided by the Township.
B. The owner of a single-family dwelling rental unit shall disclose on the
application the number of student tenants proposed to reside in the
rental unit during the lease term or extension thereof.
C. As a condition of any license for a single-family dwelling, the owner
shall immediately notify the Township of any change in the number of
student tenants residing in a rental unit.
D. The Department shall maintain detailed records regarding the
residence location of student tenants within the Township.
E. Upon the effective date of this article, no license or renewal of a license
shall be granted, nor shall any change in occupancy within a rental unit
be permitted, if such license, renewal of license, or change in
occupancy shall cause the number of student tenants residing within a
one-thousand-foot radius of another student tenant rental unit to
exceed two students; provided, however, that where such rental unit
exists as legal nonconforming use, the owner of that property shall be
entitled to apply for renewal of a license until such time as the property
is not occupied by student tenants for a period in excess of one year.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to rental units located
within a multifamily dwelling, apartment house, dormitory, or oncampus
housing.
F. Upon the effective date of this article, no license permitting the
occupancy of a two-family dwelling unit shall be granted, nor shall any
change in occupancy be permitted, if such license would cause a
student tenant to reside in such unit; provided, however, that where
such unit exists as a legal nonconforming use, the owner of that
property shall be entitled to apply for renewal of a license until such
time that the rental unit is not occupied by student tenants for a period
of one year.
G. License fees shall be charged in accordance with the Fee Schedule as
set forth in Chapter 162, Fees, of the Code of the Township of Radnor,
or by separate resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Fees shall be
paid upon the filing of an application and shall expire as of June 30, at or
prior to which time a fee shall be paid for an additional 12 months.
H. All rental unit licenses shall have an annual term and each rental unit
shall be subject to a minimum of at least one inspection every three
years based upon a schedule established by the department or when an
application is submitted for a license. The department shall establish
geographic areas and require that rental units in each of these
geographic areas be made available for inspection in the designated
year.
§ 226-7 RADNOR CODE § 226-7
C:476
§ 226-8. Grounds for formal warning, nonrenewal or suspension of
license.
I. Upon showing of probable cause that a violation of this article or any
other ordinance has occurred, the Code Official may apply to the
District Court having jurisdiction for a warrant to enter and search the
premises.
A. Enforcement action may be initiated against an owner which may result
in a formal warning, nonrenewal or suspension of the owner's license,
or the filing of an ordinance citation for the violation of any provision
that imposes a duty upon the owner, including failing to regulate the
breach of duties by tenants, as defined in this article. In all enforcement
actions, the existence of housing, rental or dormitory rules and
regulations, and the effectiveness of their enforcement shall be
considered.
B. Definitions of options.
FORMAL WARNING — Formal written notification of at least one
violation of this article. Upon satisfactory compliance with this article
and any conditions imposed by the Code Official, the formal warning
shall be removed when the owner applies for renewal of a license.
LOSS OF PRIVILEGE TO RENT TO STUDENT TENANTS — Any singlefamily
or two-family dwelling units being rented to student tenants as
of the date of enactment of student housing regulations in the Radnor
Township Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted to continue unless and
until the student rental unit is no longer leased to students for a period
of one year or more. If the student rental unit has not been leased to
students for a period of one year or more, the licensing of new student
housing in that rental unit must meet all requirements of the Radnor
Township Zoning Ordinance.
NONRENEWAL — The denial of the privilege to apply for license
renewal after expiration of the current license. Current occupants may
be permitted to remain in the premises until the end of the license term
upon full compliance with the provisions of this article. Application for
license renewal and occupancy of a dwelling unit shall not be permitted
until a time set by the Code Official.
SUSPENSION — The immediate loss of the privilege to rent a dwelling
unit for a period of time set by the Code Official. Upon full compliance
with the terms of this article, the owner may apply for license renewal.
Upon suspension of a license, the owner shall take immediate steps to
evict the tenants.
C. When applying discipline under this section, the Code Official shall
consider the following criteria:
(1) The effect of the violations on the health, safety and welfare of the
tenant of a rental unit and other persons residing within the
premises.
§ 226-7 CHARTER § 226-8
C:477
(2) The impact of the violations on the neighborhood.
(3) Whether the owner has committed prior violations of this article or
has received prior notices of violations.
(4) Whether the owner has been subject to disciplinary proceedings
under this article.
(5) Action taken by the owner to correct violations and to prevent
future violations.
(6) The policies and lease language employed by the owner to manage
the rental unit to enable the owner to comply with this article.
(7) In addition to applying discipline as set forth in this section, the
Code Official may impose upon existing or subsequent licenses
reasonable conditions related to fulfilling the terms of this article.
D. Any of the following may subject an owner to enforcement as provided
for in this section:
(1) Failure to correct a violation that applies to the premises within a
time period set forth by the Code Official.
(2) Refusal to allow the inspection of the premises as required by this
article.
(3) Failure to exercise due diligence in investigating whether a tenant
meets the requirements of this article and the Radnor Township
Zoning Ordinance with respect to student housing.
(4) Failure to disclose student tenants to the Township renting a singlefamily
or two-family dwelling unit.
(5) Failure to take steps to remedy and prevent violations of rental
units as required by this article.
(6) Failure to file and implement an approved plan to remedy and
prevent violations as required by § 226-5 of this article.
(7) Failure to execute and comply with requirements for rental
agreements as set forth in § 226-6 of this article.
(8) Three violations of this article or other ordinances of the Township
that apply to the premises during a license term. For the purpose of
this article, there need be no criminal conviction before a violation
can be found to exist.
E. Upon a determination that grounds exist for the issuance of a formal
warning, or that the license is subject to nonrenewal or suspension, the
Code Official shall notify the owner of the action to be taken and the
reason therefor. Notification shall be in writing, addressed to the owner
of the premises, with a copy to the tenants, and contain the following
information:
§ 226-8 RADNOR CODE § 226-8
C:478
§ 226-9. Delivery of notification.
All notices shall be sent to the owner and tenants by certified and regular
mail. In the event the notice is returned by the postal authorities marked
"unclaimed" or "refused," then the Code Official may attempt delivery by
(1) The address of the premises in question and identification of the
rental unit(s) affected.
(2) A description of the violation(s) that have been found to exist.
(3) A statement that the notice constitutes a formal warning or that the
license is subject to nonrenewal or suspension. In a case where the
license is subject to nonrenewal or suspension, the statement shall
include the effective date and duration of such action.
(4) A statement that, due to non-renewal or suspension of a license, the
owner is prohibited from renting the premises during the period
said action is in effect.
(5) A statement informing the owner of the right to appeal the decision
of the Code Official to the Rental Housing Board of Appeals. The
appeal shall be signed and submitted by the owner and filed with
the Township Secretary within 15 calendar days from the date
printed on the notice. A detailed statement shall be filed, including
the ground(s) and the reason(s) alleged as to why the
determination of the Code Official is incorrect or should be
overturned and a statement of relief requested by the applicant.
The appeal shall be accompanied by the required fee as set forth in
Chapter 162, Fees of the Township Code.
(6) Upon receipt of the appeal and required fee, the Secretary shall
schedule a public hearing of the Rental Housing Board of Appeals.
The meeting shall be at a time and date as determined by the
Rental Housing Board of Appeals, however, not less than 30
calendar days from receipt of the appeal.
(7) The owner, Code Official and owners of properties within a radius
of 500 feet shall receive written notice of the date, time and
location of the hearing.
(8) The appellant and all other parties having an interest may be
heard. The Rental Housing Board of Appeals shall render a decision
based upon the facts and arguments of the appellant, Code Official,
police and any relevant factual presentations of other parties. Such
decision shall be made at following the public hearing or not less
than 15 calendar days thereafter. The decision shall be reduced to
writing stating clearly the factual and legal basis for the decision
and forwarded to the owner within 30 calendar days from the last
hearing conducted by the Rental Housing Board of Appeals.
Decisions of the Rental Housing Board of Appeals shall be final.
§ 226-8 CHARTER § 226-9
C:479
personal service. The Code Official shall also post the notice at a
conspicuous place on the premises.
§ 226-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this article or who shall fail to
comply with the requirements thereof shall, upon conviction, be subject to
a fine of not more than $1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
§ 226-11. Miscellaneous provisions.
A. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any notice required to be
given to the owner under this article shall have been received by such
owner if the notice was given to the owner in accordance with this
article.
B. A claimed lack of knowledge by the owner of any violation of this article
shall be no defense to a notice providing a formal warning, the loss of
privilege to rent to student tenants or notice of license nonrenewal, or
suspension or proceedings as long as notices prerequisite to institution
of such proceedings have been given and deemed received in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
C. It shall be the duty of the owner of a rental unit to notify the Code
Official in writing of any change in ownership of the premises or the
number of rental units on the premises. It shall also be the duty of the
owner to notify the Code Official in writing of any change in tenants
within a rental unit or the changing of a dwelling unit from owneroccupied
to non-owner-occupied, which thereby transforms the
dwelling unit into a rental unit.
D. All applications and/or licensing fees shall be set by separate resolution
on an annual basis by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 226-9 RADNOR CODE § 226-11
C:480
Chapter 230
SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 19.
Environmental Advisory Committee — See Ch.
33.
Citizens Council on Environmental
Affairs — See Ch. 34.
Air pollution — See Ch. 98.
Animals — See Ch. 115.
Public bathing places — See Ch. 120.
Littering — See Ch. 190.
Pest control — See Ch. 214.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Sewers — See Ch. 235.
Solid waste — See Ch. 240.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 245.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 230-1. Adoption of rules and regulations; title. [Amended
6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
The following sanitary rules and regulations hereby are adopted. Said rules
shall be known and may be cited as the "Sanitary Rules and Regulations of
Radnor Township."
§ 230-2. Determination of violation. [Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-18]
Any and every person who creates, continues or maintains any nuisance
prejudicial to the public health, so adjudged by the Community
Development Department, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
chapter and shall also be liable for the expense of the abatement and
remedy thereof.
§ 230-3. Littering.130
No person shall throw, sweep or deposit in any manner onto any sidewalk,
street, road, ditch, gutters, storm sewers or public place or onto the private
premises of another any ashes, rubbish, tin cans, offal, garbage, dead
animals, decaying vegetable matter or organic waste substance or other
debris of any kind within the limits of this Township, and no putrid or
decaying animal or vegetable matter shall be kept in any house, cellar or
adjoining outbuildings or grounds for more than 24 hours.
§ 230-4. Prohibited accumulations.
No owner, lessee or occupant of any building shall permit the accumulation
of any ashes, rubbish, tin cans, garbage or other debris on any sidewalks or
130. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Littering.
§ 226-11 CHARTER § 230-4
C:481
thoroughfares abutting said building or in yards or vacant ground forming
part of the premises.
§ 230-5. Stagnant water. [Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
When any lot or excavation in the Township of Radnor shall from any cause
whatsoever become the repository of stagnant water or of any decaying
or offensive substance, liquid or solid, it shall be the duty of the owner
or occupant of said premises, within a specified time given in a written
notice from the Community Development Department, to cause such lot or
excavation to be drained or to be filled with clean earth or other inoffensive
substance.
§ 230-6. Lodging of complaint. [Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No.
77-18]
Whenever any citizen of the Township is desirous of lodging information
of the existence of any nuisance in any part of said Township, he or she
shall be required to lodge such complaint at the office of the Community
Development Department, in writing, over his or her signature, such
complaint to designate the nature of the nuisance, the location thereof and
the name of the owner or occupant of the property upon which it is alleged
to exist.
§ 230-7. Slaughterhouses. [Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
No person or persons, firm or corporation, without the written consent of
the Community Development Department and compliance with all other
Township ordinances, shall build or use any building as a slaughterhouse
within the limits of this Township.
§ 230-8. Pigpens. [Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
No pigpen shall be built or maintained in this Township without the written
consent of the Community Development Department. No pen shall be
constructed within 100 feet of any stream nor within 500 feet of any street
or inhabited house nor where, as a source of fly breeding, it may become a
menace to the public health. When garbage is fed to pigs, the same shall be
cooked and provisions shall be made so that all unconsumed garbage shall
be removed daily and disposed of by burial.
§ 230-9. Stables.
All stables must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. All accumulations
of manure shall be so disposed of as to prevent noxious odors and shall be
covered or screened and removed when ordered.
§ 230-10. Privies and cesspools.
A. Permit; fee. No privy or cesspool shall be cleaned or emptied without
first obtaining a permit from the Sewer Department, which permit shall
§ 230-4 RADNOR CODE § 230-10
C:482
§ 230-11. Wastewater.
No person, firm or corporation shall drain, empty, pump or allow to run
into any ground, gutter, watercourse, alley or street the contents of any
kitchen, laundry or other wastewater or any liquids deleterious to health.
Such drainage, when not connected with a sewer, must be collected into
cesspools or drainage fields provided with proper traps and properly
covered.
§ 230-12. Public urination. [Added 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-09]
be granted on application, with a fee of $15 for each permit. This fee
shall cover the removal of septic wastes from one system only and shall
be good only on the date of issue. [Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No.
77-18; 3-28-1988 by Ord. No. 88-13]
B. Regulations. The cleaning, emptying and removing of the contents of
privy vaults or cesspools shall be done in an inoffensive manner, and
any contractor having begun any such work shall, without interruption
or delay, finish the same and shall in every instance leave the privy vault
or cesspool in as good condition as when the work was undertaken. The
contents of the privy vaults or cesspools so removed shall be conveyed
to such places as are approved by the Community Development
Department and Sewer Department, in airtight receptacles so as to
prevent the emission of noxious odors, and disposed of according to the
directions of the Community Development Department hereinafter
provided for. The contents of any privy or cesspool shall not be
transported through the streets except in a manner to prevent said
contents from being exposed in the open air, unless the Community
Development Department shall so permit in writing. [Amended
6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
C. Drainage. No privy or cesspool or other receptacle for human
excrement shall be constructed, maintained or used which directly or
indirectly drains or discharges over or upon the surface of the ground
or into any waters of the state.
D. No privy shall hereafter be constructed in said Township except where
building operations so demand. Such privy may be used in connection
with such building operations until such time as proper sanitary
facilities are provided and must be maintained in an inoffensive and
sanitary manner.
E. All privy vaults, cesspools or reservoirs as above named shall be
cleaned at any time when directed by the Health Officer. [Amended
6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings shown:
PARKING AREA — Space provided by an owner or tenant for the
parking of vehicles on any premises described herein, together with
§ 230-10 CHARTER § 230-12
C:483
§ 230-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No.
77-18; 11-28-1988 by Ord. No. 88-32; 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-09]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any
of these rules and regulations shall, upon conviction therefor before a duly
authorized District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine or penalty of not more
than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding
30 days.
Chapter 235
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 78.
Grading, excavations and fills — See Ch. 175.
Plumbing — See Ch. 218.
Sanitation — See Ch. 230.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 245.
the means of ingress thereto and egress therefrom and roads and
driveways of any such premises.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Property not owned or leased by those persons
engaged in the use of that property for public urination.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public sidewalk, street, lane, highway, building,
parking area, park or recreation area or other property open for the use
of the public.
PUBLIC STREET — The entire right-of-way of any public street, road,
lane or highway of the Township of Radnor or of the County of Delaware
or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including the cartway,
sidewalks and unpaved portions thereof within the Township of Radnor.
The term includes a roadway open to the use of the public for vehicular
travel on grounds of a college or university or public or private school
or public or Township park.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate in a public place, including
in or on any street, road, lane, sidewalk, parking area or private
property in the Township of Radnor or any room (other than a
bathroom) or passageway of any public building.
§ 230-12 RADNOR CODE § 230-13
C:484
ARTICLE I
Connection and Use Regulations
[Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18]
§ 235-1. Connection with public sewer required; notice. [Amended
9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-12]
Whenever any sewer constituting a branch or extension of the Township
sewer system has been completed and is ready for public use, it shall be the
duty of the Township Engineer to cause a printed or written notice of the
completion of such sewer, together with a copy of this article, to be served
in the manner hereinafter provided on the owners of each property abutting
on the highway, road, street or way along which such sewer has been laid,
and if the Township Engineer shall so elect, notice of such completion may
also be advertised in one newspaper circulated within the Township limits;
such notice in each instance shall state that it is the duty of such owners
to cause the buildings erected on their premises requiring sewage drainage
and situate within 200 feet of such sewer to be connected therewith at their
own expense and subject to the payment of the annual sewer rental for the
use of the same, and that upon the failure of any such owner to comply with
the requirements of such notice and of this article, the Township Engineer
will cause such connection to be made at the expense of such owner, who
shall thereupon also become subject to the penalty provided for violation of
this article.
§ 235-2. Time limit for connecting.
It shall be the duty of every owner of premises abutting on any such
sewer, within 60 days of service of such notice as aforesaid or, in case of
the erection of a new building on any such premises after the sewer has
been made ready for public use, then within 60 days from the completion
of such new building, to cause each old or new building thereon erected
requiring sewage drainage and located within 200 feet of such sewer to be
separately connected therewith, unless special permission to the contrary
shall have been granted by the Board of Commissioners; provided that in
every instance all connections shall be made directly to the sewer and not
through any intermediate well; and provided further that from and after the
expiration of 60 days from the notice of the completion of any such sewer
as aforesaid, no well shall be used for sewage drainage from any building
within 200 feet from such sewer.
§ 235-3. Other connections. [Amended 9-22-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-12]
If at any time the Township Engineer shall deem it necessary for the
public health to require that any building erected on premises abutting
on, adjoining or adjacent to any Township sewer, wheresoever any such
building may be located on such premises, shall be connected with such
sewer, the Township Engineer shall report the matter to the Township
Manager and, after receiving the approval and authorization of said
§ 235-1 CHARTER § 235-3
C:485
Township Manager in any such case, shall thereupon cause to be served
upon the owner or owners of any such buildings, in the manner hereafter
provided, a copy of this article and a printed or written notice directing
that the necessary connections be made within 60 days from the date of its
service, such notice to be similar in form to that referred to in § 235-1 of
this article.
§ 235-4. Failure to comply or pay bill. [Amended 9-22-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-12]
Upon the failure of any owner of premises situate along the line of a
Township sewer, who has been duly notified as hereinbefore provided to
cause any building or buildings erected on such premises to be connected
with any such sewer, to comply with the requirements of any such notice or
with the provisions of this article, the Township Engineer shall report such
failure to the Township Manager, and if said Manager shall then so direct,
the Township Engineer shall cause the necessary connections to be made
and, upon completion of the work for the same, shall render a bill covering
the cost of said work to the owner of such premises and file a duplicate
thereof with the Director of Finance, to whom such bill shall be made
payable for the use of the Township. All such bills shall contain a notice that
if said bills are not paid within 30 days after the date thereof, the same will
be collected in the manner provided by law. Upon the expiration of 30 days
after said bills shall have been rendered to the owners of such premises,
it shall be the duty of the Director of Finance, to refer to the Township
Solicitor all such bills remaining unpaid, and the Township Solicitor shall
thereupon take the necessary action to effect the collection of such unpaid
bills in the manner provided by law.
§ 235-5. Discharge regulated; permit.
The owners of premises abutting on such sewers and, as well, the owners
of premises not abutting thereon but so situated as to permit connection
therewith through adjoining or intermediate properties, may make
connections with the Township sewers for the purpose of having carried off
all sewage drainage, including the liquid refuse from any factory, laboratory,
workshop, stable, garage or other building, but excluding any drainage
resulting from rainwater, springs, wells or other groundwater, provided that
before sewer connections of any kind shall be made, a permit shall first be
obtained from the Township Engineer, and that all such connections shall
be made in accordance with rules and regulations prescribed and approved
by the Township Engineer and the Board of Township Commissioners, and
provided further that under no circumstances shall any sewage or drainage
containing matter of any sort liable to form a deposit in the sewer or drain
pipes or to create obstructions therein be discharged into any Township
sewer.
§ 235-3 RADNOR CODE § 235-6
C:486
§ 235-6. Service of notice.
Whenever the Township Engineer shall be required by any of the provisions
of this article to serve any notice on any property owner, such service shall
be deemed sufficient for all purposes if such notice shall have been left with
the property owner personally or left with the known agent or occupant of
the premises or, if there be no agent or occupant known to the Township
Engineer, then if the same shall have been posted on the premises.
§ 235-6 CHARTER § 235-6
C:487

ARTICLE II
Lateral Connections
§ 235-7. Application and permit; rules and regulations. [Amended
6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18; 9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-12131]
All lateral connections of property with the sewers of the Township of
Radnor shall be made only upon application and permit issued in such form
and upon payment as determined annually and published in Chapter 162,
Fees, and shall be made at the cost of the permittee in accordance with
the plumbing and health regulations of the Township132 and in accordance
with such rules and regulations and on such terms and conditions as the
Township Engineer or this Board shall from time to time adopt and
prescribe and the Board of Commissioners shall approve.
§ 235-8. Maintenance and repair. [Added 9-22-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-12]
Radnor Township shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of
all sanitary sewer mains. Lateral maintenance and repair from the house
to the main shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Where the
collector lines are laid in easements across private property, the Township
shall maintain and repair the sanitary sewer mains.
131. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 235-7, Violations and penalties as
amended, and redesigned former § 235-8 as § 235-7.
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 218, Plumbing.
§ 235-7 CHARTER § 235-8
C:489

ARTICLE III
Service Charges
§ 235-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONNECTION — Any new connection to the sanitary sewerage system
of the Township; or any connection to said system which requires the
installation of a larger sized water meter or where additional multifamily
units are being added which does not require a larger sized water meter;
provided, however, that credit shall be given for any previous capital
contribution.
§ 235-10. Determination of charges. [Amended 9-22-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-12]
There shall be due to the Township from each user of its sewerage system
an annual sewer service charge. This charge, expressed as a rate per
1,000 gallons of water used, shall be determined each year by the adoption
of the annual budget ordinance and shall apply to the amount of water
consumed by each user in the calendar year preceding the billing year.
The water consumption data shall be that which is obtained from the Aqua
Pennsylvania or its successor or from readings by the Township on meters
where there is a private water supply. The minimum bill amount shall be
determined annually and published in Chapter 162, Fees.
§ 235-11. Sewer Fund.
The money collected from the sewer service charges shall be placed in a
sewer fund which shall be maintained on a self-supporting basis.
§ 235-12. Payment; late penalties. [Amended 6-29-1977 by Ord. No.
77-18; 10-11-1977 by Ord. No. 77-27; 10-25-1982 by Ord. No. 82-25;
11-28-1983 by Ord. No. 83-34; 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-30;
9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-12; 10-8-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-11]
The face amount of all sewer service charges shall be payable on or before
May 31 of each year, with a penalty of 10% assessed on June 1. On the
first day of each subsequent month in which the account remains unpaid,
an interest charge of 0.5% of the unpaid service charge shall be added to
the account. All unpaid sewer service charges, penalties, and interest shall
be a lien against the property being served by the sewer, and the Township
Solicitor shall file such liens on or after January 31 of the following year in
which the account remains unpaid. Any collection, legal, and filing fees shall
be borne by the user.
§ 235-9 CHARTER § 235-13
C:491
§ 235-13. Collection and records. [Amended 10-25-1982 by Ord. No.
82-25]
The Finance Director shall collect all sewer charges, and the Finance
Department shall keep complete records of all sewer charges billed and
received.
§ 235-14. Water not discharged to sewerage system. [Amended
9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-12]
Whenever a significant amount of water is used which is not discharged into
the sewerage system and the quantity of water so used is measured by a
meter approved by the Township and installed and maintained without cost
to the Township, then readings from such meters shall be submitted to the
Township on an approved form which is due by March 1 of each year. Using
the information submitted, a credit shall be calculated and applied to the
property owner's account.
§ 235-15. Meters. [Amended 9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-12]
All properties with a private water supply using water that is discharged
into the Township sewerage system shall have a meter or meters to measure
water consumption by July 1, 1973. Any meter so installed shall be approved
by the Township and installed and maintained without cost to the Township.
Such meters shall be read by the residents and readings submitted to the
Township on the approved form which is due by March 1 of each year.
The readings provide the basis for the sewer service charge which shall be
calculated annually by the Township.
§ 235-16. Capital contribution charges.
§ 235-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-28-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-32; 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof by a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
A. A sanitary sewer capital contribution charge shall be paid for a permit
to connect to the sewer system. Such charges shall be determined
annually and published in Chapter 162, Fees. [Added 3-28-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-14; 9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-12]
(1) Single-family connection.
(2) Multifamily connection.
(3) Commercial and all other connections.
B. Where a structure will contain both residential and nonresidential uses,
the charge shall be determined by adding the above residential charge
to whatever the nonresidential charge would be without the residential
use.
§ 235-13 RADNOR CODE § 235-17
C:492
more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 235-18. Applicability.
Sections 235-10 and 235-11 of this article shall not apply to those properties
located within the Bryn Mawr Sewer District where a separate agreement
with the Township of Haverford governs sewer service charges.
§ 235-17 CHARTER § 235-18
C:493

ARTICLE IV
Wastewater Treatment Standards
[Added 4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-08]
§ 235-19. Purpose; title.
§ 235-20. DELCORA standards adopted.
The DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations are hereby adopted by
Radnor Township to govern the conduct of all discharges to the DELCORA
Wastewater Management System.
§ 235-21. Violations.
The Board of Commissioners of Radnor Township hereby ordains and
establishes that any person, firm or corporation who fails or refuses to
comply with the DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations, embodied in
DELCORA Resolution No. 91-04, adopted May 22, 1991, as the same may
be amended from time to time, which is incorporated herein by reference
A. This article is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and other aspects of the general welfare. These
general goals include, among others, the specific enforcement of the
various regulations promulgated by the Delaware County Regional
Water Quality Control Authority (DELCORA), the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) and such other
agencies which may succeed the aforementioned agencies to
implement the Delaware County Wastewater Management Plan and the
National Pretreatment Standards, 40 CFR 401 et seq. [Amended
11-25-1996 by Ord. No. 96-30]
B. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Radnor Township
Wastewater Treatment Ordinance."
A. It is intended that this article provide for the enforcement and
prosecution of the DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations and the
National Pretreatment Standards.
B. It is the specific intent of this article to provide a means of enforcement
of the National Pretreatment Standards promulgated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency as set forth in 40 CFR 401 et
seq. (1983) pursuant to the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.
C. The DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations shall be minimum
standards and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of user within
Radnor Township.
§ 235-19 CHARTER § 235-21
C:495
and attached hereto as Appendix A,133 shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in this article.
§ 235-22. Penalties. [Amended 9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-12]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of any article
shall be subject to pay a fine of up to $1,000 or the maximum legal limit of
the fining authority, whichever is greater, and/or, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that each violation continues of this article and/or DELCORA's Standards,
Rules and Regulations, as amended, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 235-23. Prosecutions.
§ 235-24. Local limitations. [Added 11-25-1996; amended 9-22-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-12]
The eastern area local limitations for discharge of wastewater as provided
by DELCORA Resolution No. 91-04, which is on file at the Township
Municipal Building, is made a part hereof and identified as Exhibit C,134 are
adopted as the local limitations for all discharges of wastewater within the
Township of Radnor.
A. The Township of Radnor hereby appoints DELCORA or its designee as
its agent having the power of the Township of Radnor to institute
proceedings in the name of the Township of Radnor against any and all
persons, firms or corporations who violate the provisions of this article.
B. In cases involving the enforcement of this article, the Solicitor of
DELCORA or its designee may cause subpoenas to be issued for
witnesses for the prosecution and may conduct the hearing on behalf of
the Township of Radnor.
133. Editor's Note: DELCORA Res. No. 91-04 is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
134. Editor's Note: DELCORA Res. No. 91-04 is on file in the office of the Township of Secretary.
§ 235-21 RADNOR CODE § 235-24
C:496
ARTICLE V
Storm Drainage Systems
[Added 4-23-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-20]
§ 235-25. Purpose.
The Township has constructed from time to time storm drainage projects on
private property deemed to be necessary as an improvement to its storm
sewer system.
§ 235-26. Computation of assessment.
Upon completion of the project, the Township Engineer shall compute
the assessment chargeable to each property owner benefitted or
accommodated by the storm drainage system using an assessment method
approved by the Township Solicitor.
§ 235-27. Properties accommodated.
The cost of the construction, engineering, inspection and all other related
costs shall be assessed against the properties accommodated by the storm
drainage system, and the assessments shall be payable in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 9, Assessments, of the Code of the Township of
Radnor.
§ 235-28. Condemnation of easements; compensation.
The Township Solicitor is hereby authorized to draft and file the necessary
papers to effect condemnation of any easements that may be required. The
Township Engineer is hereby authorized to enter into negotiations with any
property owners to effect payment of just compensation for required storm
drainage easements.
§ 235-25 CHARTER § 235-28
C:497

ARTICLE VI
Adoption of PWD Wastewater Control Regulations by Reference
[Added 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
§ 235-29. Adoption and incorporation.
Radnor Township hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the City of
Philadelphia Water Department ("PWD") Wastewater Control Regulations,
effective January 1, 2013, which shall apply to all Radnor Township
wastewater flowing into the Lower Merion Township Wastewater System.
A copy of the January 1, 2013, PWD Wastewater Control Regulations is
attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit A.135
§ 235-30. Additional requirements.
The Township's adoption of the PWD Wastewater Control Regulations shall
be implemented and enforced in accordance with the following additional
requirements:
A. The PWD and/or Township may enforce the PWD Wastewater Control
Regulations, including inspections and penalties, and shall provide
notice of such enforcement.
B. All notifications and reports required by a user subject to the PWD
Wastewater Control Regulations shall be provided to both the PWD and
the Township.
C. Any industrial user responsible for any accidental discharge of
wastewater must immediately notify both the PWD and the Township of
said discharge.
D. The knowing transmittal of false information by an industrial user to
either the PWD or the Township is prohibited and constitutes a
wastewater control regulation violation.
E. The PWD or the Township may require an industrial user to install
monitoring and pretreatment facilities, and these shall be provided and
operated at the user's own expense.
F. Any authorized officer or employee of the PWD may, upon 24 hours'
notice to the Township, enter and inspect, sample or test at any
reasonable time any part of the Township's wastewater collection
system and, as permitted by law, enter onto private property to inspect,
sample or test waste discharges of industrial users; the Township may
also choose to inspect, sample and test waste discharges of the
industrial users subject to the PWD Wastewater Control Regulations.
G. Where a discharge to the wastewater collection system appears to
present an imminent danger to the health and welfare of persons, or
presents or may present an imminent danger to the environment, or
135. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 235-29 CHARTER § 235-30
C:499
threatens to interfere with the operation of the PWD's wastewater
treatment system, the PWD or the Township may immediately initiate
steps to identify the source of the discharge, and to prevent said
discharge.
H. In addition, to those penalties for violations specified in the PWD
Wastewater Control Regulations, effective January 1, 2013, any user
who is found to have violated, continues to violate or fails to comply
with any provisions of the regulations and permits issued hereunder
shall be liable to the Township for a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000
plus attorneys' fees and costs of prosecution for each and every
violation or, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 90 days for each violation. Each day a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 235-30 RADNOR CODE § 235-30
C:500
Chapter 237
SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 250. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 270.
§ 237-1. Obstruction of pedestrian traffic.
No person shall stand upon, sit upon or place oneself upon a sidewalk, curb
or public passageway in a manner that obstructs or seriously hinders the
flow of pedestrian traffic.
§ 237-2. Use prohibited in certain locations.
No person shall use, operate or cause to be propelled any skateboards
on sidewalks, streets and other public rights-of-way and public property
located within the following borders of the Wayne Business District:
Name of Street Side Location
Lancaster Avenue Both From Banbury Way/ Bloomingdale
Avenue on the west to Louella Court/
Louella Avenue on the east
North and South Wayne
Avenues
Both From West Avenue/Station Road on the
north to School Lane/West Wayne
Avenue on the south
§ 237-3. Violations and penalties.
Any such person who fails to heed a reasonable request by a police officer
to move in order to make an area passable and thereby remove a safety
hazard or any person who violates the provisions of § 237-2 above commits
a summary offense and shall be subject to the following:
A. First offense. The person shall be issued a written warning by the Police
Department. If the violator is a minor, the Police Department, in
addition to issuing a written warning, shall notify the parents, legal
guardians or other persons having legal custody of said minor and
provide the person with a copy of this chapter.
B. Second and subsequent offenses. A person violating this chapter a
second or subsequent time will be issued a fine of $25, plus costs, for
each offense, plus a copy of this chapter.
C. Third and subsequent offenses. A person violating this chapter a third
or subsequent time will be issued a fine of $50, plus costs, for each
offense, plus a copy of this chapter.
§ 235-30 CHARTER § 237-3
C:501
Chapter 240
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 190.
Pest control — See Ch. 214.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Sanitation — See Ch. 230.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 267.
§ 237-3 RADNOR CODE § 237-3
C:502
ARTICLE I
County Disposal Agreement
[Adopted 7-13-1987 by Ord. No. 87-19]
§ 240-1. Definitions.
A. The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article:
COLLECTOR — Any person collecting or transporting municipal solid
waste for owners or occupants of property in the municipality, including
the municipality itself if it undertakes the collection of municipal solid
waste directly, and any business or institution within the municipality
which generates municipal solid waste and uses its own employees and
equipment for the collection and transport of the waste.
CONTRACTOR — One or more contractors with whom the county or
the Delaware County Solid Waste Authority (hereinafter referred to as
"Authority") contracts for construction and operation of the proposed
resource recovery plant or plants or other solid waste facilities.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Radnor.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial
lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid or
semisolid material generated in residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities, and other
solid waste which is within the definition of "municipal solid waste" as
set forth in the Act and which the county, Authority, or contractor, by its
ordinance or regulations, is willing to accept at the plant, but excluding:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or
governmental entity, with the exception of the county, Authority or
designated contractor.
PLANT — The energy and/or material recovery facility or facilities,
transfer station or solid waste plants owned by the county or Authority
or contractor, including all associated property and equipment.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Any site owned and operated by the county,
the Authority or its designated contractor for the purpose of the
transfer, processing or disposal of municipal solid waste, including
landfills, resource recovery plants and transfer stations.
(1) Any liquid waste or sludge.
All wastes which are defined by existing or future federal or state
law or regulations as hazardous waste or industrial residual waste.
(2)
Any waste which may be marketable and which is intentionally
segregated for purposes of recycling.
(3)
Materials specifically excluded under applicable county
ordinances.
(4)
B. Certain terms used herein are also defined in the recitals hereto.136
§ 240-1 CHARTER § 240-2
C:503
§ 240-2. Accumulation and noncompliant disposal prohibited.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person
to accumulate upon any property in this municipality any municipal solid
waste or to dispose of it except in accordance with this article, and other
applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
§ 240-3. Efficient operations and charges.
The municipality has been advised by the county that the solid waste plan
proposes to provide for a plant or plants which will be operated efficiently
and economically by the contractor and/or by the county and in accordance
with all applicable laws and regulations, and also that the contractor and/or
the county will impose reasonable charges, which will be uniform among all
classes of users of the plant or plants.
§ 240-4. Licensing of collectors.
Except as it pertains to municipal solid waste collected directly by this
municipality, all collectors of municipal solid waste generated within the
municipality shall be licensed by the municipality and shall be responsible
for collecting municipal solid waste from properties in the municipality
pursuant to a contract between them and the municipality and/or contracts
between them and the owners or occupants of properties.
§ 240-5. Disposal at designated site; compliant operation of
collectors.
All collectors shall deliver and dispose of all municipal solid waste collected
within the municipality at the solid waste facility designated by the county
subject to such reasonable regulations for the operation thereof as may be
established by the county and/or the contractor. Delivery and disposal at
any other place shall be a violation of this article and cause for revocation of
the collector's license, except in special circumstances approved in advance
by the municipality and the county and/or contractor. All collectors shall
comply in their operation with all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations pertaining to the collection and transportation of municipal
solid waste.
§ 240-6. Private dumps, transfer stations and landfills.
No person shall use or permit to be used any property owned or occupied
by him within the municipality as a public or private dump, transfer station
or landfill for municipal solid waste, whether generated within the
municipality or elsewhere, without the express written approval of the
municipality.
136. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 87-19 is on file and available for inspection in the office of
the Township Secretary.
§ 240-2 RADNOR CODE § 240-7
C:504
§ 240-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30
days; and each day's continuance of a violation of this article as well as each
truckload of illegally delivered trash shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 240-8. Abatememt of nuisance.
In addition to the remedies provided in § 240-7 herein, any continued
violation of this article or other applicable law which shall constitute a
nuisance in fact or which, in the opinion of the governing body of this
municipality, shall constitute a nuisance may be abated by proceeding
against the violator in a court of equity for relief.
§ 240-9. Additional rules and regulations.
The collection of municipal solid waste in the municipality and the disposal
thereof shall be subject to such further reasonable rules and regulations
as may from time to time are promulgated by the governing body of the
municipality, including, but without limitation, regulations as to the form of
license application, the amount of fee to be charged for said licenses and the
terms of the licenses and license issuance procedures; provided, however,
that no such rules and regulations shall be contrary to the provisions of this
article, the county solid waste plan or applicable law.
§ 240-10. Amendments; contract.
The municipality reserves the right to amend this article or repeal it at any
time; provided, however, that the requirement for use of the designated
solid waste facility for disposal of municipal solid waste from the
municipality shall not be amended or repealed without the prior express
written approval of the county during the term of the contract between
the county (or Authority) and contractor providing for the construction
and operation of the plant, which contract shall have a term of 25 years.
For the purposes of securing the contractor's financing, such requirement
shall be deemed to be a contract between the county, the contractor and
the municipality, which the municipality (subject to the terms of the joint
cooperation agreement set forth below) agrees to enforce so that the
municipal solid waste from the municipality will be available to provide a
source of energy for the plant. If the municipality is not now a collector but
in the future it becomes a collector, it agrees to deliver all municipal solid
waste so collected to the plant.
§ 240-11. Joint cooperation agreement.
A. The municipality agrees to deliver or cause to be delivered, during the
term of this agreement, all municipal solid waste as defined herein
§ 240-7 CHARTER § 240-11
C:505
§ 240-12. Adoption of solid waste management plan.
generated within the municipality for disposal at a facility designated
by the county.
B. The county agrees to accept for disposal all such municipal solid waste
described in Subsection A above, upon completion and commencement
of operation of the plant, in accordance with a contract, containing
terms satisfactory to the county, with the contractor providing for
construction and operation of the plant.
C. The term of this agreement shall be for a period of 25 years, and said
term shall commence on January 1, 2017. The municipality, at its
option, may terminate this agreement with 30 days' written notice to
the county, in the event that the municipality will incur substantial costs
over and above the costs generally accepted by the other municipalities
in delivering municipal solid waste to the county during the term of this
agreement, provided that the municipality has first obtained final
approval from the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) for
its own plan under the Act or an approval from the Department for a
modification that brings the municipality under another plan that has
already obtained final approval. It is understood, however, that (upon
any such termination of this agreement by the municipality) the county,
the Authority and/or the county's contractor shall be relieved of any
responsibility to accept and dispose of municipal solid waste generated
within the municipality. It is further understood that any such
termination of this agreement by the municipality shall constitute a
repeal, whether express or implied. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-08]
D. The county shall hold harmless and defend the municipality from any
suit, claim or action challenging the legality of this article against the
municipality. In the event that any such suit, claim or action is brought
against the municipality, the municipality shall authorize the county,
through its designated legal counsel, to defend against the same, and
the municipality shall cooperate with the county in said defense and
shall give the County Solicitor notice of any such suit, claim or action
within five days of the municipality's receiving notice thereof.
A. The Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) has recommended
that the requirements of the Solid Waste Management Act can best be
accomplished on a county-wide basis. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-08]
B. The municipality, by formal resolution dated April 9, 1984, authorized
the county to prepare the solid waste management plan on the
municipality's behalf.
C. The county, through the staff of its Public Works Department, its
Planning Commission and Charles M. Harris and Associates, Inc.,
§ 240-11 RADNOR CODE § 240-12
C:506
§ 240-13. When effective.
This Article shall become effective July 13, 1987. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, this municipality shall have neither the right nor the obligation
to dispose of its municipal solid waste at the plant which is contemplated
under this article until said plant is constructed and fully operational.
Consulting Engineers, prepared a ten-year plan for solid waste
management.
D. The appropriate municipal officials of this municipality have reviewed
the findings and recommendations of the plan as it affects this
municipality, have found the plan acceptable and have recommended
that the plan be adopted.
E. The municipality, accordingly, hereby accepts and adopts the solid
waste management study prepared by the county as the ten-year plan
for solid waste management required by the Act.137
F. The county is hereby authorized to submit the plan to the DEP for the
final approval on behalf of the municipality. [Amended 7-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-08]
137. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 240-12 CHARTER § 240-13
C:507

ARTICLE II
Collection Licensing
[Adopted 9-28-1987 by Ord. No. 87-30]
§ 240-14. Accumulations and noncompliant disposal prohibited.
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful for any person to
accumulate upon any property in this municipality municipal solid waste or
dispose of it except in accordance with this article.
§ 240-15. License required.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to act as a collector
in this municipality without first obtaining a license from the municipality
pursuant to this article and such additional requirements that the
municipality may, by appropriate action, hereinafter establish, which
licenses, however, shall all require the licensees to comply with the
provisions of this article. The municipality hereby reserves the right to limit
the number of such licenses.
§ 240-16. Term and transferability of license.
Each collector's license hereinafter shall be effective for a maximum of one
calendar year terminating on June 30 of the year for which it was issued,
subject to renewal upon application. A license heretofore or hereafter
issued shall not be transferable and is subject to revocation by the
governing body of this municipality. Any person who possesses a valid
license issued by another municipality of Delaware County shall be entitled
to a license conditioned only upon continuing compliance with this article.
§ 240-17. Application, fee and issuance of license.
§ 240-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be committed to the county jail for
a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day's continuance of a violation of this
A. Application for a collector's license hereunder shall be made on a form
provided by the municipality.
B. The application must be accompanied by a license fee which is hereby
established initially at $25.
C. Upon receipt of said application by the municipality, the governing body
may examine the applicant and, within a reasonable period thereafter,
shall either issue a license or refuse to issue a license to the applicant,
stating the reasons for such refusal.
§ 240-14 CHARTER § 240-18
C:509
article as well as each truckload of illegally delivered waste shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 240-18 RADNOR CODE § 240-18
C:510
ARTICLE III
General Provisions; Recycling
[Adopted 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-17138]
§ 240-19. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Radnor Township Municipal Solid Waste
and Recycling Ordinance."
§ 240-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the Township of Radnor by regulating the collection,
storage, transportation, removal, dumping, deposit, disposal and recycling
of solid waste by:
§ 240-21. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings ascribed to
them in this section.
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty, nonaerosol, all-aluminum beverage and food
containers, excluding products such as pie pans and aluminum foil.
BIMETALLIC CANS — Empty, nonaerosol steel or tin-coated steel food and
beverage containers.
BULK WASTE — Items of solid waste which, due to their size, shape or
weight, cannot be collected as part of the normal weekly municipal waste
collection and, therefore, require special handling. It includes such items
as appliances, furniture, auto seats, playground equipment, box springs,
mattresses and other materials as defined by the Delaware County Solid
Waste Authority.
CLEAN PAPER PRODUCTS — Newspaper, magazines and periodicals, highgrade
office paper, corrugated paper, junk mail, telephone books and
paperback books.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes and those multiple-dwelling residential
buildings containing more than six dwelling units.
A. Instituting a comprehensive solid waste management program.
B. Establishing a mandatory recycling program pursuant to the
requirements of Act 101 of the Pennsylvania General Assembly, known
as the "Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act,"
and amendments thereto.139
138. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Article III, General
Provisions; Recycling, adopted 10-10-1994 by Ord. No. 94-28.
139. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 240-19 CHARTER § 240-21
C:511
COMMINGLED RECYCLABLES — Glass, aluminum cans, bimetallic and
ferrous cans and plastic bottles.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Lumber, roofing material,
sheathing, rubble, broken concrete, macadam, plaster and brick, conduit,
pipe, insulation and other material which results from a construction,
demolition or remodeling process.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or entirely self-contained portion thereof
containing complete housekeeping facilities, including not more than one
kitchen used exclusively for the residence of one family.
GLASS — Plain, uncolored or colored glass bottles and jars. Expressly
excluded from this definition of glass are blue glass, lead crystal, porcelain
products, light bulbs and tempered or plate glass.
GRASS — The low green herbage of pastureland and lawns.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments and
in residences.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Facilities that house or serve groups
of people such as hospitals, nursing homes, public and private schools and
universities.
LEAVES — The thin outgrowth of a twig or branch, usually green in color
and consisting of a broad blade and a stalk.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
MULTIFAMILY PROPERTIES — Commercial establishments being used as
rental housing apartment buildings or apartment complexes which have
more than six dwelling units per structure. This definition shall also include
apartment complexes owned and operated by institutional establishments.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint" and
distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions
and containing advertisements and matters of public interest, excluding
magazines.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties.
PLASTIC BOTTLES — Empty consumer product bottles made of
polyethylene terephaliate (PET) and high-density polyethylene (HDPE),
such as soft drink bottles and milk and bleach bottles.
RECYCLABLES/RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by
the Township of Radnor herein or by subsequent action for this board for
§ 240-21 RADNOR CODE § 240-21
C:512
separation, collection, processing, recovery or reuse as part of a recycling
program.
RECYCLING — The program or system of separation, collection, processing,
recovery or reuse of recyclables.
REFUSE — Any garbage, industrial lunchroom or office waste and other
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material,
resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities and any sludge
not meeting the definition of "residual or hazardous waste" in the Solid
Waste Management Act140 from a municipal, commercial or institutional
water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution
control facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable
materials. Refuse from residential dwellings is herein called "residential
refuse."
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS — Single-family dwelling units, including
individually owned townhouses and condominiums or a building or a group
of buildings having a common ownership and containing or comprising
multiple family dwelling units not exceeding six units in number.
TOWNSHIP — The governmental jurisdiction and legal entity of the
Township of Radnor, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
YARD WASTE — Garden residues, shrubbery, tree trimmings and similar
materials, but not including grass clippings and leaves.
§ 240-22. Administration.
A. All residential refuse and recyclables accumulated in the Township of
Radnor shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the Township.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any refuse within the
Township of Radnor.
C. The Department of Public Works is herewith authorized to make
regulations concerning the days and hours of collection and disposal
necessary for the efficient and effective operations of the Township's
solid waste and recycling program, provided that such regulations are
consistent with the practical intentions of the provisions herein
contained.
D. The Township will not be responsible for collecting or disposing of
refuse or recyclables other than residential refuse. The owners of such
nonresidential properties shall be responsible for the disposal of refuse
and recyclables from their premises. Such material shall be disposed of
in watertight vehicles provided with tight covers and so operated to
prevent offensive odors from escaping therefrom and materials from
being blown, dropped or spilled.
140. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. 6018.101 et seq.
§ 240-21 CHARTER § 240-23
C:513
§ 240-23. Storage, handling and disposal.
A. Precollection practices.
(1) Preparation of material.
(a) All material, before being placed in refuse or recycling
containers for collection, shall be drained and free from
liquids.
(b) Loose materials must be placed in containers. Construction
and demolition waste shall not be collected by the Township
but must be removed by owners or contractors through other
means.
(c) Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar material shall be
cut to lengths not to exceed three feet and securely tied in
bundles not more than two feet thick before being deposited
for collection at the curb.
(d) Grass clippings shall not be collected.
(e) Clean paper products must be placed in a paper shopping bag
or tied with string into a bundle not exceeding 50 pounds in
weight.
(f) Leaves must be raked in bulk to the curb area during the
designated leaf collection program. At other times of the year
bagged leaves will be collected according to the Public Works
rules and regulations.
(2) Containers.
(a) All refuse receptacles shall be durable, watertight and made of
rust-resistant metal or plastic and have a tight fitting lid. The
size of each container shall not exceed thirty-five-gallon
capacity.
(b) Recycling containers shall be durable plastic containers with
lids, which shall be distributed by the Township.
(c) All containers shall be maintained in good condition and must
not have ragged or sharp edges. Failure to comply with this
provision will result in termination of service.
(3) Storage.
(a) Refuse and recycling containers and paper bundles shall be
placed at the rear house line, clearly visible to the collector. No
person shall place any of these materials as well as any yard
waste except as noted above in any street or highway or
sidewalk. If containers are brought to the front of a property,
they shall not be brought out before 7:00 p.m. the day before
the regularly scheduled collection, and must be returned to the
§ 240-23 RADNOR CODE § 240-23
C:514
§ 240-24. Bulk waste; fee.
§ 240-25. Recyclables.
rear house line before 11:00 p.m. on the day of the regularly
scheduled collection.
(b) The Township may refuse to collect unreasonable
accumulations of refuse or materials improperly stored.
(c) It shall be a violation of this article for any person to throw,
dispose or deposit any refuse or recyclables on property other
than that which he legally occupies.
(d) The Township shall designate the type of refuse collection
containers at multifamily properties which exceed 10 units.
B. Frequency of collections. Refuse, paper and commingled recyclables
will be collected once each week, except for emergencies. The
Township will establish a regular schedule of refuse and recycling
collections, such schedule will be published and distributed to the
residents.
C. Reporting requirement for licensed haulers.
(1) Private refuse collection firms, registered with the Township, shall
provide to the Township on an annual basis the amount of waste
collected by them in the Township.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any waste collector to collect or transport
recyclables or refuse without written permission from the
Township.
A. General. The Township will provide open-truck refuse collections to
residential dwellings within the Township for bulk waste, for a fee.
B. Preparation. Loose materials shall be placed in containers. The
maximum weight limit for any one collection is 150 pounds.
Construction and demolition waste shall not be collected by the
Township but must be removed by owners or contractors through other
means.
C. Placement of items. Items to be collected must be placed at or near the
curb, and collectors shall not enter any building for the purpose of
making collections.
D. Application fee. The Public Works Department of the Township of
Radnor shall distribute application forms to be completed and signed by
any person requesting open-truck refuse collection. Such applications
must be submitted at least two weeks in advance of the collection day
when the collection is to be made. All applications shall be accompanied
by payment of the appropriate collection fee.
§ 240-23 CHARTER § 240-25
C:515
A. Introduction. The Township, recognizing the reclaiming of recyclable
materials is an important method for addressing the growing solid
waste disposal problem through conserving landfill space, and that
recycling conserves natural resources, reduces energy consumption
and promotes the general interest, and to be in compliance with
Pennsylvania Act 101,141 does hereby authorize and require collection,
processing, storage, transportation and recycling of materials in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Establishment of program. The Township hereby establishes a program
for the mandatory source separation of recyclables from municipal
waste by persons residing in single-family dwellings and multifamily
establishments and by commercial, institutional and industrial
establishments.
C. Residential recycling.
(1) All persons occupying residential dwellings shall separate
aluminum, bimetallic and ferrous cans, glass, plastic bottles, leaves
and clean paper products from other waste generated at their
residential dwelling and store such material until collection by the
Township. The Township may, by resolution, designate other
materials from residential dwellings to be separated from waste.
(2) The person occupying a residential dwelling shall deposit the
commingled recyclables into the recycling container and place it at
the rear house line for collection on the designated day.
(3) Persons occupying residential dwellings shall deposit the clean
paper products into a paper shopping bag or tie them into a bundle
and place it next to the recycling container for collection on the day
designated for recyclable collection.
D. Commercial and institutional recycling.
(1) Persons occupying commercial and institutional establishments
shall be required to separate, from other waste, at least the
following recyclable items: aluminum cans, high-grade office paper,
glass, bimetallic cans, corrugated paper and leaves.
(2) Each commercial and institutional establishment in Radnor
Township shall develop a collection system for recyclables at their
complexes and provide written documentation to the Township of
the total number of tons recycled and of the total number of tons of
waste generated annually.
E. Multifamily properties recycling.
(1) Persons occupying multifamily rental housing units shall be
required to separate, from other waste, all clean paper products
141. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 240-25 RADNOR CODE § 240-25
C:516
§ 240-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to termination of service, if any, and upon conviction thereof by a District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less that $100 and not more
than $1,000 and costs. Every violator of the provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a separate offense each and every day such violation
continues and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by this section for
each and every separate offense.
and leaves and at least two items from the following list: clear
glass, colored glass, aluminum cans, steel and bimetallic cans and
plastic bottles.
(2) An owner, landlord or agent of an owner or a landlord of
multifamily rental properties shall provide a collection system for
these recyclable materials at each property. The collection system
must include suitable containers for collecting and sorting
materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and written
instructions to the occupants.
(3) Owners, landlords or agents of owners or a landlord of multifamily
rental housing units shall annually provide written documentation
to the Township of the total number of tons recycled and the total
number of tons of waste generated annually.
F. Unauthorized collection.
(1) From the time of placement of recyclable items at the designated
collection location for residential dwellings, the recyclable items
shall become the property of the Township or its authorized agent.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person unauthorized by
the Township to collect, pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up any such items. Any and each such collection in violation hereof
from one or more locations shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
(2) It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of
waste which contains recyclables.
§ 240-25 CHARTER § 240-26
C:517
Chapter 245
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Grading, excavations and fills — See Ch. 175.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 255.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 240-26 RADNOR CODE § 240-26
C:518
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 245-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Radnor Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
§ 245-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces ground water
recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development throughout a watershed can also harm surface
water resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns,
accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion of
streambeds and streambanks, thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals, and pathogens. Ground water resources are also impacted
through loss of recharge.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
minimization of impacts of development, redevelopment, and activities
causing accelerated erosion and loss of natural infiltration, is
fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of
the people of the municipality and all of the people of the
commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
D. Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing ground
water recharge for water supplies and baseflow of streams, which also
protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by using project
designs that maintain the natural hydrologic regime and sustain high
water quality, ground water recharge, stream baseflow, and aquatic
ecosystems. The most cost-effective and environmentally advantageous
way to manage stormwater runoff is through nonstructural project
design that minimizes impervious surfaces and sprawl, avoids sensitive
areas (i.e., stream buffers, floodplains, steep slopes), and considers
topography and soils to maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
§ 245-1 CHARTER § 245-2
C:519
§ 245-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare within the municipality by maintaining the natural hydrologic
regime and minimizing the impacts described in § 245-2 of this chapter
through provisions designed to:
F. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
G. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
H. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
municipality.
A. Promote alternative project designs and layouts that minimize the
impacts on surface and ground water.
B. Promote nonstructural best management practices (BMPs).
C. Minimize increases in runoff stormwater volume.
D. Minimize impervious surfaces.
E. Manage accelerated stormwater runoff and erosion and sedimentation
problems and stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause these problems.
F. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
G. Utilize and preserve existing natural drainage systems as much as
possible.
H. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, requiring a
minimum of structures and relying on natural processes.
I. Focus on infiltration of stormwater to maintain ground water recharge,
to prevent degradation of surface and ground water quality, and to
otherwise protect water resources.
J. Maintain existing baseflows and quality of streams and watercourses.
K. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 93.4.a requiring
protection and maintenance of existing uses and maintenance of the
level of water quality to support those uses in all streams, and the
protection and maintenance of water quality in "special protection"
streams.
§ 245-2 RADNOR CODE § 245-3
C:520
§ 245-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff and surface and ground water quality and quantity by the authority
of:
§ 245-5. Applicability/regulated activities.
L. Address the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges from the
development site.
M. Provide a mechanism to identify stormwater controls necessary to meet
NPDES permit requirements.
N. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program that
addresses nonstormwater discharges into the municipality's separate
storm sewer system.
O. Preserve the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
P. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
Q. Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide
stormwater management and planning.
R. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities and BMPs that are implemented in
the municipality.
A. The Act of October 4, 1978, 32 P.S., P.L. 864 (Act 167) § 680.1 et seq., as
amended, the "Stormwater Management Act" (hereinafter referred to
as "the Act");
B. The Water Resources Management Act of 2002, as amended;
C. The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas of Radnor Township.
B. This chapter shall only apply to permanent structural and nonstructural
stormwater management BMPs constructed as part of any of the
regulated activities listed in this section.
C. This chapter contains only the stormwater management performance
standards and design criteria that are necessary or desirable from a
watershed-wide perspective. Local stormwater management design
criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and
details, outlet structure design, etc.) shall continue to be regulated by
the applicable municipal ordinances and applicable state regulations.
D. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall
be regulated by this chapter unless exempted by § 245-6.
(1) Land development.
§ 245-3 CHARTER § 245-5
C:521
§ 245-6. Exemptions.
(2) Subdivisions.
(3) Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime.
(4) Construction or reconstruction of or addition of new impervious or
semipervious surfaces (i.e., driveways, parking lots, roads, etc.).
(5) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(6) Redevelopment.
(7) Diversion piping or encroachments in any natural or man-made
channel.
(8) Nonstructural and structural stormwater management BMPs or
appurtenances thereto.
(9) Earth disturbance activities of greater than 5,000 square feet.142
E. Any of the above regulated activities which were approved more than
five years prior to the effective date of this chapter and resubmitted for
municipal approval.
F. Table 105.1 summarizes the applicability requirements of the
chapter.143 "Proposed impervious surface" in Table 105.1 includes new,
additional, or replacement impervious surface/cover. Repaving existing
surfaces without reconstruction does not constitute "replacement."
A. Exemptions for land use activities. The following land use activities are
exempt from the drainage plan submission requirements of this
chapter.
(1) Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(2) Agriculture when operated in accordance with a conservation plan,
nutrient management plan, or erosion and sedimentation control
plan approved by the County Conservation District, including
activities such as growing crops, rotating crops, tilling of soil, and
grazing animals. Installation of new or expansion of existing
farmsteads, animal housing, waste storage, and production areas
having impervious surfaces that result in a net increase in earth
disturbance of greater than 5,000 square feet shall be subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
142. Editor's Note: This ordinance applies to any earth disturbance activity greater than or
equal to 5,000 square feet that is associated with a development or redevelopment project.
Earth disturbance activities of less than one acre that are associated with redevelopment
projects are exempt from the § 245-24 streambank erosion requirements. Earth
disturbance activities and associated stormwater management controls are also regulated
under existing state law and implementing regulations. This ordinance shall operate in
coordination with those parallel requirements; the requirements of this ordinance shall be
no less restrictive in meeting the purposes of this ordinance than state law.
143. Editor's Note: Table 105.1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 245-5 RADNOR CODE § 245-6
C:522
(3) Forest management operations which are following the
Department of Environmental Protection's (DEP) management
practices contained in its publication "Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Guidelines for Forestry" and are operating
under an approved erosion and sedimentation plan and must
comply with the stream buffer requirements in § 245-23G.
(4) Road replacement, development, or redevelopment that has less
than 1,500 square feet of new, additional, or replaced impervious
surface/cover, or in the case of earth disturbance only, less than
5,000 square feet of disturbance, is exempt from this chapter.
B. Exemptions for land development activities.
(1) The following land development and earthmoving activities are
exempt from the drainage plan submission requirements of this
chapter.
(a) A maximum of 1,500 square feet of new, additional, or
replacement proposed impervious surface or, in the case of
earth disturbance resulting in less than 1,500 square feet of
impervious cover (as noted above).
(b) Up to a maximum of 5,000 square feet of disturbed earth.
(2) These criteria shall apply to the total development even if the
development is to take place in phases. The date of the municipal
ordinance adoption shall be the starting point from which to
consider tracts as "parent tracts" upon which future subdivisions
and respective earth disturbance computations shall be
cumulatively considered.
(3) The activities exempted above are still encouraged to implement
the voluntary stormwater management practices as indicated in
Appendix B.144
(4) The developer should first determine if the proposed activity would
result in the introduction of 1,500 square feet or more of new,
additional, or replacement impervious surface. If not, the developer
should next determine if the proposed activity would involve
earthmoving of over 5,000 square feet. If not, then the project is
exempt from the drainage plan requirements. Examples:
(a) A project introducing 1,600 square feet of impervious cover,
but only 4,900 square feet of earthmoving is regulated by this
chapter.
(b) A project involving 5,100 square feet of earthmoving, but
resulting in 1,400 square feet of impervious cover is regulated.
144. Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in Township offices.
§ 245-6 CHARTER § 245-6
C:523
§ 245-7. Repealer.
Any ordinance or ordinance provision of the municipality inconsistent with
any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
§ 245-8. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 245-9. Compatibility with other ordinances or legal requirements.
(c) A project introducing 1,400 square feet of impervious cover
and involving 4,900 square feet of earthmoving is exempt from
the drainage plan requirements of this chapter.
C. Additional exemption criteria:
(1) Exemption responsibilities. An exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to
protect public health, safety, and property.
(2) HQ and EV streams. An exemption shall not relieve the applicant
from meeting the special requirements for watersheds draining to
identified high quality (HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters and
Source Water Protection Areas (SWPA) and requirements for
nonstructural project design sequencing (§ 245-21).
(3) Drainage problems. If a drainage problem is documented or known
to exist downstream of or is expected from the proposed activity,
then the municipality may require the applicant to comply with this
chapter.
(4) Emergency exemption. Emergency maintenance work performed
for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare. A written
description of the scope and extent of any emergency work
performed shall be submitted to Radnor Township within two
calendar days of the commencement of the activity. If Radnor
Township finds that the work is not an emergency, then the work
shall cease immediately, and the requirements of this chapter shall
be addressed, as applicable.
(5) Maintenance exemption. Any maintenance to an existing
stormwater management system made in accordance with plans
and specifications approved by the municipal Engineer or Radnor
Township.
(6) Even though the developer is exempt, he is not relieved from
complying with other regulations.
§ 245-6 RADNOR CODE § 245-9
C:524
A. Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
B. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or stringent
requirements for stormwater management, the specific requirements
contained in this chapter shall be followed.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
municipality's requirements regarding stormwater matters that do not
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting
provisions in other municipal ordinances or regulations shall be
construed to retain the requirements of this chapter addressing state
water quality requirements.
§ 245-9 CHARTER § 245-9
C:525

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 245-10. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 245-11. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and raising
livestock, including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing,
mushroom growing, nursery, and sod operations and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is
not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A person who has filed an application for approval to engage
in any regulated activity defined in § 245-5 of this chapter.
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Engineering or site drawings maintained by the
contractor as he constructs the project and upon which he documents the
actual locations of the building components and changes to the original
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, unit of
government, or any other similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied, or maintained."
§ 245-10 CHARTER § 245-11
C:527
contract documents. These documents, or a copy of same, are turned over
to the municipal Engineer at the completion of the project.
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank or point from where water
begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASEFLOW — Portion of stream discharge derived from ground water; the
sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water
diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.
BIORETENTION — A stormwater retention area that utilizes woody and
herbaceous plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration occurs.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Methods, measures, or
practices used to prevent or reduce surface runoff and/or water pollution,
including but not limited to structural and nonstructural stormwater
management practices and operation and maintenance procedures. See
also "nonstructural best management practice (BMP)."
BUFFER — The area of land immediately adjacent to any stream, measured
perpendicular to and horizontally from the top-of-bank on both sides of a
stream (see "top-of-bank").
CHANNEL — An open drainage feature through which stormwater flows.
Channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made
drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly
full.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, or headward cutting of
channels and waterways caused by stormwater runoff or bankfull flows.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Delaware County Conservation District.
CONVEYANCE — A facility or structure used for the transportation or
transmission of something from one place to another.
CULVERT — A structure with its appurtenant works which carries water
under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — A man-made barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid. A dam may include a refuse bank, fill, or structure for
highway, railroad, or other purposes which impounds or may impound water
or another fluid or semifluid.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Delaware County Planning Commission,
Delaware County Conservation District, and/or agent of the governing body
involved with the administration, review, or enforcement of any provisions
of this chapter by contract or memorandum of understanding.
§ 245-11 RADNOR CODE § 245-11
C:528
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL (QUALIFIED) — A Pennsylvania-registered
professional engineer or registered professional land surveyor trained to
develop stormwater management plans.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely soon
after a rainfall event and become dry until the next rainfall event.
DEVELOPER — A person who seeks to undertake any regulated earth
disturbance activities at a project site in the municipality.
DEVELOPMENT — Any human-induced change to improved or unimproved
real estate, whether public or private, including but not limited to land
development, construction, installation, or expansion of a building or other
structure, land division, street construction, drilling, and site alteration,
such as embankments, dredging, grubbing, grading, paving, parking or
storage facilities, excavation, filling, stockpiling, or clearing. As used in
this chapter, development encompasses both new development and
redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract or parcel of land where any
regulated activity set forth in § 245-5 is planned, conducted, or maintained.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The outside bark diameter at
breast height which is defined as 4.5 feet (1.37m) above the forest floor on
the uphill side of the tree.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge that is not
confined to a single point location or channel, including sheet flow or
shallow concentrated flow.
DISCHARGE —
DISCHARGE POINT — The point of discharge for a stormwater facility.
DISTURBED AREAS — Unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DITCH — A man-made waterway constructed for irrigation or stormwater
conveyance purposes.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of the
lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed, located such that overland or
pipe flow from the project site would be directed towards it by gravity.
(verb) To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin, or
other point of interest;
A.
(noun) The rate and volume of flow of water such as in a stream,
generally expressed in cubic feet per second (see "peak discharge").
B.
§ 245-11 CHARTER § 245-11
C:529
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transport stormwater runoff that includes channels, swales,
pipes, conduits, culverts, and storm sewers.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the municipality after the
drainage plan has been approved.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the stormwater management
system, if any, to be used for a given development site, the contents of which
are established in § 245-13.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of land, including but not limited to clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development,
agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting activities, road
maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass peak
discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands, or
diminishes the course, current, or cross section of a watercourse, floodway,
or body of water.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including water/
stream channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan that is designed
to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation. Said plan must be
submitted to and approved by the appropriate conservation district before
construction can begin.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality which
satisfy Pennsylvania Code Title 25 Environmental Protection, Chapter 93,
Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed alteration. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land,
the land use shall be considered as "meadow" unless the natural land cover
is proven to generate a lower curve number or Rational "c" value, such as
forested lands.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land
areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this
commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or as delineated by the applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard
Boundary Map as being a special flood hazard area.
§ 245-11 RADNOR CODE § 245-11
C:530
FLOODWAY — The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of
the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to
the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the
top-of-bank.
FLUVIAL GEOMORPHOLOGY — The study of landforms associated with
river channels and the processes that form them.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
associated activities necessary for the management of forest lands. These
include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high-water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion
berm. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRADE —
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or man-made waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to convey surface
water.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies wells
and springs and is often between saturated soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies from rain or overland flow.
HEC-HMS — The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering
Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS). This model was used
to model the Darby-Cobbs and Crum Creek watersheds during the Act 167
plan development and was the basis for the standards and criteria of this
chapter.
HIGH QUALITY WATERS — Surface waters having quality which exceeds
levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and
recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code Title 25
Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(a).
HOTSPOTS — Areas where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
(noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel, or natural ground specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
A.
(verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment, or
the bottom of an excavation.
B.
§ 245-11 CHARTER § 245-11
C:531
HYDROGRAPH — A graph representing the discharge of water versus time
for a selected point in the drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME — The hydrologic cycle or balance that sustains
quality and quantity of stormwater, baseflow, storage, and ground water
supplies under natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), formerly the Soil Conservation
Service (SCS), into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A
soils, which are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which
are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, streets,
sidewalks, pavements, driveway areas, or roofs. Any surface areas designed
to be gravel or crushed stone shall be regarded as impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILL — Development that occurs on smaller parcels that remain
undeveloped but are within or in very close proximity to urban or densely
developed areas. Infill development usually relies on existing infrastructure
and does not require an extension of water, sewer, or other public utilities.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge ground water.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the underground water (e.g., French drains, seepage pits, or seepage
trenches).
INFLOW — The flow entering the stormwater management facility and/or
BMP.
INLET — The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream that flows only part of the time.
Flow generally occurs for several weeks or months in response to seasonal
precipitation or ground water discharge.
INVERT — The lowest surface, the floor or bottom of a culvert, drain, sewer,
channel, basin, BMP, or orifice.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
A.
§ 245-11 RADNOR CODE § 245-11
C:532
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata that includes one of the following:
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed, or built upon as a
unit.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance used as a reach in watershed-specific hydrologic models.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
flow, and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the
flow is not under pressure.
MAXIMUM DESIGN STORM — The maximum (largest) design storm that is
controlled by the stormwater facility.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for a
municipality, planning agency, or joint planning commission.
MUNICIPALITY — Radnor Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
NATURAL CONDITION — Predevelopment condition.
NATURAL HYDROLOGIC REGIME — See "hydrologic regime."
NATURAL RECHARGE AREA — Undisturbed surface area or depression
where stormwater collects and a portion of which infiltrates and replenishes
the underground and ground water.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features.
(2)
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the PA
Municipalities Planning Code.
C.
A seasonal high-water table, whether perched or regional, determined
by direct observation of the water table or indicated by soil mottling.
A.
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of
loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill
the voids between the fragments.
B.
A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition that is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of water.
C.
§ 245-11 CHARTER § 245-11
C:533
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater
collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a
rainfall event or snowmelt.
NONSTRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMPs) — Methods
of controlling stormwater runoff quantity and quality, such as innovative
site planning, impervious area and grading reduction, protection of natural
depression areas, temporary ponding on site, and other techniques.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,
which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL — A conveyance channel that is not enclosed.
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR § 122.2 at the point
where the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters
of the commonwealth.
OUTFLOW — The flow exiting the stormwater management facility and/or
BMP.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal to a stream, river, lake, tidewater, or
artificial drain.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development or
subdivision originates, determined from the date of municipal adoption of
this chapter.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of parking areas as temporary
impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL — The computer-based hydrologic model
developed at Pennsylvania State University.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Radnor
Township.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit from
which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state regulations
at 25 Pennsylvania Code § 92.1.
POSTCONSTRUCTION — Period after construction during which disturbed
areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and functioning, and
all proposed improvements in the approved land development plan are
completed.
PRECONSTRUCTION — Prior to commencing construction activities.
PREDEVELOPMENT CONDITION — Undeveloped/natural condition.
§ 245-11 RADNOR CODE § 245-11
C:534
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide
storage or filtering to trap coarse materials and other pollutants before they
enter the system, but not necessarily designed to meet the water quality
volume requirements of § 245-23.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak
flow.
REACH — Any stream segment or other runoff conveyance used in the
watershed-specific hydrologic models.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of ground water through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
RECONSTRUCTION — Demolition and subsequent rebuilding of impervious
surface.
RECORD DRAWINGS — Original documents revised to suit the as-built
conditions and subsequently provided by the engineer to the client. The
engineer reviews the contractor's as-builts against his/her own records
for completeness, then either turns these over to the client or transfers
the information to a set of reproducibles, in both cases for the client's
permanent records.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any development that requires demolition or removal
of existing structures or impervious surfaces at a site and replacement
with new impervious surfaces. Maintenance activities such as top-layer
grinding and re-paving are not considered to be redevelopment. Interior
remodeling projects and tenant improvements are also not considered to be
redevelopment.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions that have an
impact on stormwater runoff quality or quantity and that are specified in
§ 245-5 of this chapter.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Defined under NPDES
Phase II regulations as earth disturbance activity of one acre or more with a
point source discharge to surface waters or the municipality's storm sewer
system or five acres or more regardless of the planned runoff. This includes
earth disturbance on any portion of, part, or during any stage of a larger
common plan of development.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions' peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions' peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
REPAVING — Replacement of the impervious surface that does not involve
reconstruction of an existing paved (impervious) surface.
REPLACEMENT PAVING — Reconstruction of and full replacement of an
existing paved (impervious) surface.
§ 245-11 CHARTER § 245-11
C:535
RETENTION BASIN — A structure in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Retention basins are designed for
infiltration purposes and do not have an outlet. The retention basin must
infiltrate stored water in four days or less.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the
twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the
average of once every 25 years.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used
to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing
road cross section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting roadbanks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches, and
other similar activities.
ROOF DRAINS — A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff from
a roof and leads it away from the structure.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — The temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces using controlled-flow roof
drains in building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO — Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.145
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, or retention or detention basin located
and designed in such a way as to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other
material transported by water during construction.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water or air.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the underground water.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in
shallow, defined ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 245-11 RADNOR CODE § 245-11
C:536
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to
a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).
SOURCE WATER PROTECTION AREAS (SWPA) — The zone through which
contaminants, if present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking water
well or surface water intake.
SPECIAL PROTECTION SUBWATERSHEDS — Watersheds that have been
designated by DEP as EV or HQ waters.
SPILLWAY — A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the
maximum design storm that is controlled by the stormwater facility.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations, protection of designated and existing uses (see 25 Pennsylvania
Code Chapters 93 and 96), including:
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and
depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm "event"
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years (see "return
period").
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that conveys
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching
the ground surface.
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use," such
as "cold water fishery" or "potable water supply," which is listed in
Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained under state
regulations.
A.
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
of whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
B.
Water quality involves the chemical, biological, and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by the addition of pollutants such as sediment and changes
in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result
of changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore,
permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed to protect
the streambank, streambed, and structural integrity of the waterway to
prevent these impacts.
C.
§ 245-11 CHARTER § 245-11
C:537
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Those subareas of a
watershed in which some type of detention is required to meet the plan
requirements and the goals of Act 167.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff quality, rate, or quantity. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention
and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The watershed plan known as the
"Darby and Cobbs Creeks Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management
Plan" for managing those land use activities that will influence stormwater
runoff quality and quantity and that would impact the Darby and Cobbs
Creeks watershed, adopted by Delaware County, Chester County,
Montgomery County, and Philadelphia County as required by the Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
applicant or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the particular site of interest according to this chapter.
STREAM — A natural watercourse.
STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a stream
essential to maintaining water quality (see "buffer").
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated
water of the commonwealth.
SUBAREA (SUBWATERSHED) — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria have been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land,
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface waters, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial,
within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
§ 245-11 RADNOR CODE § 245-11
C:538
TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time required for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point
of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOP-OF-BANK — Highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross
section at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the channel
and over the floodplain.
UNDEVELOPED CONDITION — Natural condition (see also
"predevelopment condition").
VERNAL POND — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by
shallow water for variable periods from winter to spring but may be
completely dry for most of the summer and fall.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WELLHEAD — 1) A structure built over a well; 2) the source of water for a
well.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The surface and subsurface area
surrounding a water supply well, well field, or spring supplying a public
water system, through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move
toward and reach the water source.
WET BASIN — Pond for urban runoff management that is designed to detain
urban runoff and always contains water.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
WOODS — A natural ground cover with more than one viable tree of a DBH
of six inches or greater per 1,000 square feet which existed within three
years of application; a cover condition for which SCS curve numbers have
been assigned or to which equivalent rational method runoff coefficients
have been assigned.
§ 245-11 CHARTER § 245-11
C:539

ARTICLE III
Drainage Plan Requirements
§ 245-12. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the preliminary or final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of
any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any earth
disturbance activity may not proceed until the property owner or applicant
or his/her agent has received written approval of a drainage plan from the
municipality and an adequate erosion and sediment control plan review by
the Conservation District.
§ 245-13. Drainage plan contents.
The drainage plan shall consist of a general description of the project
including sequencing items described in § 245-21, calculations, maps, and
plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and
erosion and sediment control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of
the computations and erosion and sediment control plan shall refer to the
associated maps by title and date. All drainage plan materials shall be
submitted to the municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat,
and well organized; otherwise, the drainage plan shall not be accepted for
review and shall be returned to the applicant. The following items shall be
included in the drainage plan:
A. General:
(1) General description of the project including those areas described
in § 245-21B.
(2) General description of proposed permanent stormwater
management techniques, including construction specifications of
the materials to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
(4) An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and
letters of adequacy from the Conservation District if necessary.
(5) A general description of proposed nonpoint source pollution
controls.
(6) The Drainage Plan Application and completed fee schedule form
and associated fee (Appendix C-1146).
(7) The Drainage Plan Checklist (Appendix C-2147).
146. Editor's Note: Appendix C-1 is on file in Township offices.
147. Editor's Note: Appendix C-2 is on file in Township offices.
§ 245-12 CHARTER § 245-13
C:541
B. Maps. Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch
by thirty-six-inch sheets and/or shall be prepared in a form that meets
the requirements for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds
of Delaware County. If the SALDO has more stringent criteria than this
chapter, then the more stringent criteria shall apply. The contents of the
map(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipal
boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet.
(3) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other waters of the
commonwealth within the project area.
(4) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries, stream
buffers, existing drainage courses, areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved, and the total extent of the upstream area draining
through the site.
(5) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
septic systems, wells, and waterlines within 50 feet of property
lines.
(6) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
(7) Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of
impervious area that would be added.
(8) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(9) Final contours at intervals of two feet.
(10) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(11) The date of submission.
(12) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(13) A North arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(17) Location of all open channels.
§ 245-13 RADNOR CODE § 245-13
C:542
(18) Overland drainage patterns and swales.
(19) A twenty-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
management facilities that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(20) The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities.
(21) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(22) A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that any
revision to the approved drainage plan must be approved by the
municipality, and that a revised erosion and sediment control plan
must be submitted to the Conservation District for a determination
of adequacy.
(23) The following signature block for the design engineer:
"I, (Design Engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby
certify that the drainage plan meets all design standards and
criteria of the Radnor Township Stormwater Management
Ordinance."
(24) A statement indicating what has the applicant done to minimize
impervious materials on site.
C. Supplemental information to be submitted to the municipality.
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted by the applicant and shall include:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project
designed in accordance with § 245-21.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this chapter.
(c) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during
and after development.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(e) Development stages or project phases, if so proposed.
(f) An operations and maintenance plan in accordance with
§ 245-32 of this chapter.
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan.
(3) A description of the effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes
and peak flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing
§ 245-13 CHARTER § 245-13
C:543
§ 245-14. Plan submission.
The municipality shall require receipt of a complete drainage plan, as
specified in this chapter.
municipal stormwater collection system that may receive runoff
from the project site.
(4) A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) District
office when utilization of a PennDOT storm drainage system is
proposed.
D. Stormwater management facilities.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When infiltration measures such as seepage pits, beds, or trenches
are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic tank
infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown.
A. Proof of application or documentation of required permit(s) or
approvals for the programs listed below shall be part of the plan if
required:
(1) NPDES Permit for stormwater discharges from construction
activities.
(2) DEP joint permit application.
(3) PennDOT highway occupancy permit.
(4) Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management).
(5) Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management).
(6) Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
B. The plan shall be coordinated with the state and federal permit process
and the municipal SALDO review process. The process implementing
the provisions in this chapter is illustrated in Appendixes D-1 and
D-2.148
C. For projects that require SALDO approval, the drainage plan shall be
submitted by the applicant as part of the preliminary plan submission
where applicable for the regulated activity.
148. Editor's Note: Said appendixes are on file in Township offices.
§ 245-13 RADNOR CODE § 245-14
C:544
§ 245-15. Drainage plan review.
D. For regulated activities that do not require SALDO approval, see
§ 245-12, General requirements.
E. Six copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted and distributed as
follows:
(1) Three copies to the municipality accompanied by the requisite
municipal review fee, as specified in this chapter.
(2) Two copies to the County Conservation District.
(3) One copy to the County Planning Commission/Department.
F. Any submissions to the agencies listed above that are found to be
incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the
applicant with a notification in writing of the specific manner in which
the submission is incomplete.
A. The municipal Engineer shall review the drainage plan for consistency
with this chapter and the respective Act 167 Stormwater Management
Plan. Any found incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall
be returned to the applicant.
B. The municipal Engineer shall review the drainage plan for any
subdivision or land development against the municipal SALDO
provisions not otherwise superseded by this chapter.
C. The Conservation District, in accordance with established criteria and
procedures, shall review the drainage plan for consistency with
stormwater management and erosion and sediment pollution control
requirements and provide comments to the municipality. Such
comments shall be considered by the municipality prior to final
approval of the drainage plan.
D. For activities regulated by this chapter, the municipal Engineer shall
notify the applicant in writing, within 45 calendar days, whether the
drainage plan is consistent with the stormwater management plan.
(1) If the municipal Engineer determines that the drainage plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan, the municipal
Engineer shall forward a letter of consistency to the applicant.
(2) If the municipal Engineer determines that the drainage plan is
inconsistent or noncompliant with the stormwater management
plan, the municipal Engineer shall forward a letter to the applicant
citing the reason(s) and specific ordinance sections for the
inconsistency or noncompliance. Inconsistency or noncompliance
may be due to inadequate information to make a reasonable
judgment as to compliance with the stormwater management plan.
Any drainage plans that are inconsistent or noncompliant may be
§ 245-14 CHARTER § 245-15
C:545
revised by the applicant and resubmitted when consistent with this
chapter.
E. For regulated activities specified in § 245-5 of this chapter that require
a building permit, the Township Engineer shall notify the Director of
Community Development in writing, within a time frame consistent
with the municipal Building Code and/or municipal SALDO, whether the
drainage plan is consistent with the stormwater management plan. Any
drainage plan deemed inconsistent may be revised by the applicant and
resubmitted consistent with this chapter.
F. For regulated activities under this chapter that require an NPDES
permit application, the applicant shall forward a copy of the municipal
Engineer's letter stating that the drainage plan is consistent with the
stormwater management plan to the Conservation District. DEP and the
Conservation District may consider the municipal Engineer's review
comments in determining whether to issue a permit.
G. The municipality shall not grant preliminary or final approval to any
subdivision or land development for regulated activities specified in
§ 245-5 of this chapter if the drainage plan has been found by the
municipal Engineer to be inconsistent with the stormwater
management plan. All required permits from DEP must be obtained
prior to approval of any subdivision or land development.
H. No building permits for any regulated activity specified in § 245-5 of
this chapter shall be approved by the municipality if the drainage plan
has been found to be inconsistent with the stormwater management
plan, as determined by the municipal Engineer and Conservation
District, or without considering the comments of the municipal
Engineer and Conservation District. All required permits from DEP
must be obtained prior to issuance of a building permit.
I. The applicant shall be responsible for completing record drawings of all
stormwater management facilities included in the approved drainage
plan. The record drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with
the design plans shall be submitted to the municipal Engineer for final
approval. In no case shall the municipality approve the record drawings
until the municipality receives a copy of an approved declaration of
adequacy and/or highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT District
office, NPDES permit, and any other applicable permits or approvals
from DEP or the Conservation District. The above permits and
approvals must be based on the record drawings.
J. The municipality's approval of a drainage plan shall be valid for a period
not to exceed five years commencing on the date that the municipality
signs the approved drainage plan. If stormwater management facilities
included in the approved drainage plan have not been constructed, or if
constructed, record drawings of these facilities have not been approved
within this five-year time period, then the municipality may consider the
drainage plan inconsistent or noncompliant and may revoke any and all
§ 245-15 RADNOR CODE § 245-15
C:546
§ 245-16. Modification of plans.
§ 245-17. Resubmission of inconsistent or noncompliant drainage
plans.
An inconsistent or noncompliant drainage plan may be resubmitted with
the revisions addressing the municipal Engineer's concerns documented in
writing. It must be addressed to the Township Engineer in accordance with
§ 245-14 of this chapter, distributed accordingly, and be subject to review
as specified in § 245-15 of this chapter. The applicable municipal review
and inspection fee must accompany a resubmission of an inconsistent or
noncompliant drainage plan.
permits. Drainage plans that are determined to be inconsistent or
noncompliant by the municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance
with § 245-17 of this chapter.
A. A modification to a submitted drainage plan under review by the
municipality for a development site that involves the following shall
require a resubmission to the municipality of a modified drainage plan
consistent with § 245-14 of this chapter and be subject to review as
specified in § 245-15 of this chapter:
(1) Change in stormwater management facilities or techniques;
(2) Relocation or redesign of stormwater management facilities; or
(3) Is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on
the drainage plan as determined by the municipal Engineer.
B. A modification to an already approved or inconsistent or noncompliant
drainage plan shall be submitted to the municipality, accompanied by
the applicable municipal review and inspection fee. A modification to a
drainage plan for which a formal action has not been taken by the
municipality shall be submitted to the municipality accompanied by the
applicable municipal review and inspection fee.
§ 245-15 CHARTER § 245-17
C:547

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management
§ 245-18. General requirements.
A. Applicants proposing regulated activities in the municipality which do
not fall under the exemption criteria shown in § 245-6 shall submit a
drainage plan consistent with this chapter and the respective
stormwater management plan to the municipality for review. The
stormwater management criteria of this chapter shall apply to the total
proposed development even if development is to take place in stages.
B. The applicant is required to find practicable alternatives to the surface
discharge of stormwater, the creation of impervious surfaces, and the
degradation of waters of the commonwealth and must maintain as
much as possible the natural hydrologic regime.
C. The drainage plan must be designed consistent with the sequencing
provisions of § 245-21 to ensure maintenance of the natural hydrologic
regime, to promote ground water recharge, and to protect ground
water and surface water quality and quantity. The drainage plan
designer must proceed sequentially in accordance with Article IV of this
chapter.
D. Stormwater drainage systems shall be designed in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
E. Existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered in any manner which could cause property
damage without permission of the affected property owner(s) and shall
be subject to any applicable discharge criteria specified in this chapter.
F. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge, whether proposed to be
concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage areas, shall be subject
to any applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. If diffused
drainage discharge is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other impacts will result from the
concentrated discharge.
G. Where a development site is traversed by existing streams, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such streams.
The terms of the easement shall conform, at a minimum, to the stream
buffer requirements contained in Radnor Township's Stream Buffer
Ordinance (Article XVIIIA, Riparian Buffer Conservation District).149
§ 245-18 CHARTER § 245-18
C:549
H. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth or
delineated wetlands shall be subject to approval by DEP through the
joint permit application or the environmental assessment approval
process or, where deemed appropriate, by the DEP general permit
process. When there is a question as to whether wetlands may be
involved, it is the responsibility of the applicant or his agent to show
that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands; otherwise,
approval to work in the area must be obtained from DEP.
I. Any proposed stormwater management facilities regulated by this
chapter that would be located on state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by PennDOT.
J. Minimization of impervious surfaces and, where soil conditions permit,
infiltration of runoff through seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc.,
are encouraged in order to reduce the size or eliminate the need for
detention facilities or other structural BMPs.
K. All stormwater runoff shall be pretreated for water quality prior to
discharge to surface or ground water.
L. All regulated activities within the municipality shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes of this
chapter, through these two elements.
(1) Erosion and sediment control during earth disturbance activities
(e.g., during construction); and
(2) Water quality protection measures after completion of earth
disturbance activities (i.e., after construction), including
operations and maintenance.
M. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until the requirements of this chapter are met.
N. Postconstruction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by § 245-23.
O. Operations and maintenance of permanent stormwater BMPs shall be
addressed as required by Article VII.
P. All BMPs used to meet the requirements of this chapter shall conform to
the state water quality requirements and any more stringent
requirements as set forth by the municipality.
Q. Techniques described in Appendix E (Low Impact Development)150 of
this chapter shall be considered because they reduce the costs of
complying with the requirements of this chapter and the state water
quality requirements.
149. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
150. Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file in Township offices.
§ 245-18 RADNOR CODE § 245-18
C:550
§ 245-19. Permit requirements by other governmental entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of regulated
earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
R. In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the
applicant shall consider the following:
(1) Total contributing area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site's soils.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high-water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(8) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(9) Streambank erosion.
(10) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(11) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(12) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
(13) Maintenance requirements.
(14) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(15) Recreational value.
S. Where necessary, the applicant may meet the stormwater management
criteria through off-site stormwater management measures as long as
the proposed measures are in the same subwatershed as shown in
Appendix A151 of this chapter. It is strongly recommended the off-site
area be located upstream of the development site.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pennsylvania Code
Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pennsylvania Code Chapter 105.
151. Editor's Note: Appendix A, Darby-Cobbs Stormwater Management District Watershed Map,
is on file in Township offices.
§ 245-18 CHARTER § 245-19
C:551
§ 245-20. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
§ 245-21. Nonstructural project design (sequencing to minimize
stormwater impacts).
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way or require access from a state highway shall be
subject to approval by PennDOT.
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers, or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pennsylvania Code
Chapter 105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until the municipality receives an approval from the
Conservation District of an erosion and sediment control plan for
construction activities.
B. DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan
for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more, under
25 Pennsylvania Code § 102.4(b).
C. In addition, under 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 92, a DEP "NPDES
construction activities" permit is required for regulated earth
disturbance activities.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the municipality.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available on the project
site at all times.
F. Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and criteria
are recommended to be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed.
They shall include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
maintain maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire drainage area contributory to the infiltration BMP has
achieved final stabilization.
§ 245-19 RADNOR CODE § 245-21
C:552
A. The design of all regulated activities shall include the following to
minimize stormwater impacts.
(1) The applicant shall find practicable alternatives to the surface
discharge of stormwater, such as those listed in Appendix F, Table
F-5,152 the creation of impervious surfaces, and the degradation of
waters of the commonwealth and must maintain as much as
possible the natural hydrologic regime of the site.
(2) An alternative is practicable if it is available and capable of
implementation after taking into consideration existing technology
and logistics in light of overall project purposes and other
municipal requirements.
(3) All practicable alternatives to the discharge of stormwater are
presumed to have less adverse impact on quantity and quality of
waters of the commonwealth unless otherwise demonstrated.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that the regulated activities were
designed in the following sequence. The goal of the sequence is to
minimize the increases in stormwater runoff and impacts to water
quality resulting from the proposed regulated activity:
(1) Prepare an existing resource and site analysis map (ERSAM)
showing environmentally sensitive areas, including but not limited
to steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric soils,
vernal pools, stream buffers, and hydrologic soil groups. Under
land development, any existing recharge areas, and other
requirements outlined in the municipal SALDO shall also be
included.
(2) Establish a stream buffer according to § 245-23G.
(3) Prepare a draft project layout avoiding sensitive areas identified in
§ 245-21B(1).
(4) Identify site-specific existing condition drainage areas, discharge
points, recharge areas, and hydrologic soil groups A and B (areas
conducive to infiltration).
(5) Evaluate nonstructural stormwater management alternatives:
(a) Minimize earth disturbance.
(b) Minimize clearing operations (vegetation removal).
(c) Minimize impervious surfaces.
(d) Break up large impervious surfaces.
(6) Satisfy the ground water recharge (infiltration) objective (§ 245-22)
and provide for stormwater pretreatment prior to infiltration.
152. Editor's Note: Said Appendix F and its tables are on file in Township offices.
§ 245-21 CHARTER § 245-21
C:553
§ 245-22. Groundwater recharge.
Maximizing the ground water recharge capacity of the area being
developed is required. Design of the infiltration facilities shall consider
ground water recharge to compensate for the reduction in the recharge
that occurs when the ground surface is disturbed or impervious surface
is created. It is recommended that roof runoff be directed to infiltration
BMPs that may be designed to compensate for the runoff from parking
areas. These measures are required to be consistent with § 245-3 and to
take advantage of utilizing any existing recharge areas.
Infiltration may not be feasible on every site due to site-specific limitations
such as soil type. If it cannot be physically accomplished, then the design
professional shall be responsible to show that this cannot be physically
accomplished. If it can be physically accomplished, then the volume of
runoff to be infiltrated shall be determined from Subsection A(2) below
depending on demonstrated site conditions and shall be the greater of the
volumes.
(7) Provide for water quality protection in accordance with § 245-23
water quality requirements.
(8) Provide streambank erosion protection in accordance with § 245-24
streambank erosion requirements.
(9) Determine into what management district the site falls (Ordinance
Appendix A)153 and conduct an existing conditions' runoff analysis.
(10) Prepare final project design to maintain existing conditions'
drainage areas and discharge points, to minimize earth disturbance
and impervious surfaces and, to the maximum extent possible, to
ensure that the remaining site development has no surface or point
discharge.
(11) Conduct a proposed conditions' runoff analysis based on the final
design that meets the management district requirements
(§ 245-25).
(12) Manage any remaining runoff prior to discharge through detention,
bioretention, direct discharge, or other structural control.
A. Infiltration BMPs shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas
shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site conditions
and shall be constructed on soils that have the following
characteristics:
(a) A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the BMP
and the top of the limiting zone.
153. Editor's Note: Appendix A, a map of the watershed, is on file in Township offices.
§ 245-21 RADNOR CODE § 245-22
C:554
(b) An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional
stormwater load and dewater completely as determined by
field tests conducted by the applicant's design professional.
(c) The infiltration facility shall be capable of completely
infiltrating the retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) within four
days (96 hours).
(d) Pretreatment shall be provided prior to infiltration.
(2) The size of the infiltration facility shall be based upon the following
volume criteria:
(a) Net two-year volume approach. In areas that involve the
addition of 1,500 square feet of new or replacement
impervious cover the retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) to be
captured and infiltrated shall be the net two-year volume. The
net two-year volume shall be determined by plotting the twoyear
project site post-development hydrograph, drawing a
straight line from the point-of-inflection of the rising limb of the
hydrograph to the peak flow pre-development two-year storm,
and measuring the volume under the curve as shown in Figure
405.1.
§ 245-22 CHARTER § 245-22
C:555
FIGURE 405.1
INFILTRATION HYDROGRAPH
(b) One inch from impervious surface. In all other portions of the
watershed that are adding between 500 and 1,500 square feet
of new or replacement impervious cover, the retention
(infiltration) volume (Rev) will be equal to capturing one inch
of rainfall over all proposed impervious surfaces.
Rev = I x impervious area (square feet) ÷ 12 (inches) = cubic
feet (cf)
Where I = The maximum equivalent infiltration amount
(inches) that the site can physically accept or 1.0 inch,
whichever is greater.
(c) Obtaining the Rev volume in Subsection A(2)(a) (above) may
not be feasible on every site due to site-specific limitations
such as soil type. If it cannot be physically accomplished, then
the design professional shall be responsible for showing that
this cannot be physically accomplished. If it cannot be
physically accomplished, then the retention (infiltration)
volume Rev required shall be as much as can be physically
accomplished with a minimum of 0.50 inch depending on
§ 245-22 RADNOR CODE § 245-22
C:556
demonstrated site conditions. It has been determined that
capturing and infiltrating 0.50 inch of runoff from the
impervious areas will aid in maintaining the hydrologic regime
(baseflow) of the watershed. If the goals of Subsection A(2)(a)
or A(2)(b) cannot be achieved, then 0.50 inch of rainfall shall
be retained and infiltrated from all existing and proposed
impervious areas.
The minimum recharge volume (Rev) required would,
therefore, be computed as:
Rev = I x impervious area (square feet) ÷ 12 (inches) = cubic
feet (cf)
Where I = The maximum equivalent infiltration amount
(inches) that the site can physically accept or 1.0 inch,
whichever is greater.
[1] The retention volume values derived from the methods in
Subsections A(2)(a), A(2)(b) and/or A(2)(c) is the minimum
volume the applicant must control through an infiltration
BMP facility. However, if a site has areas of soils where
additional volume of retention can be achieved, the
applicant is strongly encouraged to infiltrate as much of
the stormwater runoff from the site as possible.
[2] If the minimum of 0.50 inch of infiltration requirement
cannot be achieved, a waiver from § 245-22, Ground water
recharge, would be required from the municipality.
B. Soils. A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be required to
determine the suitability of infiltration facilities. The evaluation shall be
performed by a qualified design professional and at a minimum address
soil permeability, depth to bedrock, and subgrade stability. The
evaluation must be witnessed by the Township. The general process for
designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
(1) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made
features within the site to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices. In areas where development on fill material is
under consideration, conduct geotechnical investigations of
subgrade stability; infiltration may not be ruled out without
conducting these tests.
(2) Provide field tests such as a percolation tests, double ring
infiltrometer, or hydraulic conductivity tests (at the level of the
proposed infiltration surface) to determine the appropriate
hydraulic conductivity rate.
(3) Design the infiltration structure for the required retention (Rev)
volume based on field determined capacity at the level of the
proposed infiltration surface.
§ 245-22 CHARTER § 245-22
C:557
(4) If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed by the applicant's
design professional, it must be demonstrated to the municipality
that the soils are conducive to infiltrate on the lots identified.
C. Stormwater hotspots. Below is a list of examples of designated
hotspots. If a site is designated as a hotspot, it has important
implications for how stormwater is managed. First and foremost,
untreated stormwater runoff from hotspots shall not be allowed to
recharge into ground water where it may contaminate water supplies.
Therefore, the Rev requirement shall NOT be applied to development
sites that fit into the hotspot category (the entire WQv must still be
treated). Second, a greater level of stormwater treatment shall be
considered at hotspot sites to prevent pollutant washoff after
construction. The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) NPDES
stormwater program requires some industrial sites to prepare and
implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan.
(1) Examples of hotspots:
Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities
Vehicle fueling stations
Vehicle service and maintenance facilities
Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities
Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.)
Industrial sites based on standard industrial codes
Marinas (service and maintenance)
Outdoor liquid container storage
Outdoor loading/unloading facilities
Public works storage areas
Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials
Commercial container nursery
Other land uses and activities as designated by an appropriate
review authority
(2) The following land uses and activities are not normally considered
hotspots:
Residential streets and rural highways
Residential development
Institutional development
Office developments
Nonindustrial rooftops
Pervious areas, (i.e.) nurseries (which may need an integrated
pest management (IPM) plan).
§ 245-22 RADNOR CODE § 245-22
C:558
§ 245-23. Water quality requirements.
The applicant shall comply with the following water quality requirements of
this article.
(3) While large highways [average daily traffic volume (ADT) greater
than 30,000] are not designated as stormwater hotspots, it is
important to ensure that highway stormwater management plans
adequately protect ground water.
D. Extreme caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in
source water protection areas (SWPAs) as defined by the local
municipality or water authority.
E. Infiltration facilities shall be used in conjunction with other innovative
or traditional BMPs, stormwater control facilities, and nonstructural
stormwater management alternatives.
F. Extreme caution shall be exercised where salt or chloride (municipal
salt storage) would be a pollutant since soils do little to filter this
pollutant, and it may contaminate the ground water. The qualified
design professional shall evaluate the possibility of ground water
contamination from the proposed infiltration facility and perform a
hydrogeologic justification study if necessary.
G. The infiltration requirement in HQ or EV waters shall be subject to the
Department's Chapter 93 antidegradation regulations.
H. An impermeable liner will be required in detention basins where the
possibility of ground water contamination exists. A detailed
hydrogeologic investigation may be required by the municipality.
I. The municipality shall require the applicant to provide safeguards
against ground water contamination for land uses that may cause
ground water contamination should there be a mishap or spill.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with postconstruction state water quality
requirements.
B. The BMPs shall be designed, implemented, and maintained to meet
state water quality requirements and any other more stringent
requirements as determined by the municipality.
C. To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated earth
disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can be met by
BMPs, including site design, which provide for replication of
preconstruction stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions so that
postconstruction stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical,
chemical, or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. As
described in the DEP Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy
§ 245-22 CHARTER § 245-23
C:559
(No. 392-0300-002, September 28, 2002), this may be achieved by the
following:
(1) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration
conditions.
(2) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure filtering
out of the chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater
runoff.
(3) Streambank and streambed protection: management of volume and
rate of postconstruction stormwater discharges to prevent physical
degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
D. Developed areas shall provide adequate storage and treatment facilities
necessary to capture and treat stormwater runoff. The retention volume
computed under § 245-22 may be a component of the water quality
volume if the applicant chooses to manage both components in a single
facility. If the retention volume is less than the water quality volume,
the remaining water quality volume may be captured and treated by
methods other than infiltration BMPs. The required water quality
volume (WQv) is the storage capacity needed to capture and treat a
portion of stormwater runoff from the developed areas of the site. To
achieve this goal, the following criterion is established:
(1) The following calculation formula is to be used to determine the
water quality storage volume (WQv) in acre-feet of storage
required by this chapter:
WQv = [(P)(Rv)(A)] ? 12
WHERE:
WQv = Water quality volume (acre-feet)
P = 1 inch
A = Area of the project contributing to the water quality
BMP (acres)
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(I) where I is the percent of the area that
is impervious surface [(impervious area/A) x 100]
(2) This volume requirement can be accomplished by the permanent
volume of a wet basin or the detained volume from other BMPs.
Where appropriate, wet basins shall be utilized for water quality
control and shall follow the guidelines of the BMP manuals
referenced in Appendix G.154
(3) Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert
of the water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility). The
design of the facility shall provide for protection from clogging and
unwanted sedimentation.
154. Editor's Note: Appendix G is on file in Township offices.
§ 245-23 RADNOR CODE § 245-23
C:560
§ 245-24. Streambank erosion requirements.
E. The temperature and quality of water and streams shall be maintained
through the use of temperature-sensitive BMPs and stormwater
conveyance systems.
F. To accomplish the above, the applicant shall submit original and
innovative designs to the municipal Engineer for review and approval.
Such designs may achieve the water quality objectives through a
combination of different BMPs.
G. If a perennial or intermittent stream passes through the site, the
applicant shall create a stream buffer agreeing with the Township's
Riparian Buffer Ordinance (Article XVIIIA, Riparian Buffer
Conservation District155 The buffer area shall be maintained with and
encouraged to use appropriate native vegetation (refer to Appendix H
of the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for
Developing Areas for plant lists). If an existing buffer is legally
prescribed (i.e., deed, covenant, easement, etc.) and it exceeds the
requirements of this chapter, the existing buffer shall be maintained.
H. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office must be provided to
the municipality.
A. In addition to the control of water quality volume (in order to minimize
the impact of stormwater runoff on downstream streambank erosion),
the primary requirement is to design a BMP to detain the proposed
conditions' two-year, twenty-four-hour design storm to the existing
conditions' one-year flow using the SCS Type II distribution.
Additionally, provisions shall be made (such as adding a small orifice at
the bottom of the outlet structure) so that the proposed conditions' oneyear
storm takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain from the facility from a
point where the maximum volume of water from the one-year storm is
captured (i.e., the maximum water surface elevation is achieved in the
facility). Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the
invert of the water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility).
B. The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be
three inches in diameter where possible, and a trash rack shall be
installed to prevent clogging. On sites with small drainage areas
contributing to this BMP that do not provide enough runoff volume to
allow a twenty-four-hour attenuation with the three-inch orifice, the
calculations shall be submitted showing this condition. Orifice sizes less
than three inches can be utilized, provided that the design will prevent
clogging of the intake.
C. In conditional direct discharge districts (District C) only (see
§ 245-25A), the objective is not to attenuate the storms greater than the
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.).
§ 245-23 CHARTER § 245-24
C:561
§ 245-25. Stormwater peak rate control and management districts.
two-year recurrence interval. This can be accomplished by configuring
the outlet structure not to control the larger storms or by a bypass
channel that diverts only the two-year stormwater runoff into the basin
or, conversely, diverts flows in excess of the two-year storm away from
the basin.
A. Darby and Cobbs Creeks Watershed.
(1) The Darby and Cobbs Creeks watershed has been divided into
stormwater management districts as shown on the Management
District Map in Appendix A.156
(a) In addition to the requirements specified in Table 408.1 below,
the erosion and sedimentation control (§ 245-20), the
nonstructural project design (§ 245-21), the ground water
recharge (§ 245-22), the water quality (§ 245-23), and the
streambank erosion (§ 245-24) requirements shall be
implemented.
(b) Standards for managing runoff from each subarea in the Darby
and Cobbs Creeks watershed for the two-, five-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty-, and one-hundred-year design storms are shown in
Table 408.1. Development sites located in each of the
management districts must control proposed conditions' runoff
rates to existing conditions' runoff rates for the design storms
in accordance with Table 408.1.
TABLE 408.1
PEAK RATE CONTROL STANDARDS BY
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT
IN THE DARBY-COBBS
CREEK WATERSHED
District
Proposed Condition
Design Storm
Existing Condition Design
Storm
A 2-year 1-year
5-year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
B-1 2-year 1-year
156. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in Township offices.
§ 245-24 RADNOR CODE § 245-25
C:562
District
Proposed Condition
Design Storm
Existing Condition Design
Storm
5-year 1-year
10-year 5 year
25-year 10-year
50-year 25-year
100-year 100-year
B-2 2-year 1-year
5-year 2-year
10-year 5-year
25-year 5-year
50-year 10-year
100-year 100-year
C Conditional Direct Discharge District
(c) In District C, development sites that can discharge directly to
the Darby-Cobbs Creek main channel, major tributaries, or
indirectly to the main channel through an existing stormwater
drainage system (i.e., storm sewer or tributary) may do so
without control of the proposed conditions' peak rate of runoff
greater than the five-year storm. Sites in District C will still
have to comply with the ground water recharge criteria, the
water quality criteria, and streambank erosion criteria. If the
proposed conditions' runoff is intended to be conveyed by an
existing stormwater drainage system to the main channel,
assurance must be provided that such system has adequate
capacity to convey the flows greater than the two-year existing
conditions' peak flow or will be provided with improvements to
furnish the required capacity. When adequate capacity in the
downstream system does not exist and will not be provided
through improvements, the proposed conditions' peak rate of
runoff must be controlled to the existing conditions' peak rate
as required in District A provisions (i.e., ten-year proposed
conditions' flows to ten-year existing conditions' flows) for the
specified design storms.
(2) General. Proposed conditions' rates of runoff from any regulated
activity shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff from
existing conditions for the design storms specified on the
Stormwater Management District Watershed Map (Appendix A)157
and this section of the chapter.
(3) District boundaries. The boundaries of the stormwater
management districts are shown on an official map that is available
157. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in Township offices.
§ 245-25 CHARTER § 245-25
C:563
for inspection at the municipal and county planning offices. A copy
of the official map at a reduced scale is included in Appendix A. The
exact location of the stormwater management district boundaries
as they apply to a given development site shall be determined by
mapping the boundaries using the two-foot topographic contours
(or most accurate data required) provided as part of the drainage
plan.
(4) Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed
development site located within two or more stormwater
management district category subareas, the peak discharge rate
from any subarea shall meet the management district criteria for
which the discharge is located. The calculated peak discharges
shall apply regardless of whether the grading plan changes the
drainage area by subarea. An exception to the above may be
granted if discharges from multiple subareas recombine in
proximity to the discharge site. In this case, peak discharge in any
direction may follow Management District A criteria, provided that
the overall site discharge meets the management district criteria
for which the discharge is located.
(5) Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed
development site are not subject to release rate criteria when
determining allowable peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage
facilities shall be designed to safely convey off-site flows through
the development site.
(6) Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area,
only the proposed impact area utilizing stormwater management
measures shall be subject to the management district criteria. In
other words, unimpacted areas bypassing the stormwater
management facilities would not be subject to the management
district criteria.
(7) Alternate criteria for redevelopment sites. For redevelopment sites,
one of the following minimum design parameters shall be
accomplished, whichever is most appropriate for the given site
conditions as determined by Radnor Township;
(a) Meet the full requirements specified by Table 408.1 and
§ 245-25A(1) through A(10); or
(b) Reduce the total impervious surface on the site by at least 20%
based upon a comparison of existing impervious surface to
proposed impervious surface.
B. Other watersheds.
(1) Within other watersheds, the criteria for peak runoff control are
designed to reduce the postdevelopment peak flow to existing
conditions. Development sites must control proposed conditions'
§ 245-25 RADNOR CODE § 245-25
C:564
runoff rates to existing conditions' runoff rates for the design
storms in accordance with Table 408.2.
TABLE 408.2
PEAK RATE CONTROL STANDARDS IN
OTHER WATERSHED AREAS
Proposed Condition
Design Storm
Reduce
to
Existing Conditions
Design Storm
2-year 1-year
5-year 2-year
10-year 5-year
25-year 10-year
50-year 25-year
100-year 100-year
(2) The calculated peak discharges shall apply regardless of whether
the grading plan changes the drainage area by subarea. An
exception to the above may be granted if discharges from multiple
subareas recombine in proximity to the site. In this case, peak
discharge in any direction may be a 100% release rate, provided
that the overall site discharge meets the weighted average release
rate.
(3) Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed
development site are not subject to release rate criteria when
determining allowable peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage
facilities shall be designed to safely convey off-site flows through
the development site.
(4) Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area,
only the proposed impact area utilizing stormwater management
measures shall be subject to the peak rate control standards noted
above. In other words, unimpacted areas bypassing the stormwater
management facilities would not be subject to the peak rate control
standards.
(5) Alternate criteria for redevelopment sites. For redevelopment sites,
one of the following minimum design parameters shall be
accomplished, whichever is most appropriate for the given site
conditions as determined by Radnor Township:
(a) Meet the full requirements specified by Table 408.2 and
§ 245-25B(1) through B(8); or
§ 245-25 CHARTER § 245-25
C:565
§ 245-26. Calculation methodology.
(b) Reduce the total impervious surface on the site by at least 20%,
based upon a comparison of existing impervious surface to
proposed impervious surface.
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites with a drainage area of
greater than 200 acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted
calculation technique that is based on the NRCS soil cover complex
method. Table 409.1 summarizes acceptable computation methods, and
the method selected by the design professional shall be based on the
individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site. The municipality may allow the use of the rational method to
estimate peak discharges from drainage areas that contain less than
200 acres. The soil cover complex method shall be used for drainage
areas greater than 200 acres.
TABLE 409.1
ACCEPTABLE COMPUTATION METHODOLOGIES
FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS
Method Developed by Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of
full hydrology computer
model is desirable or
necessary
TR-55 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans where
limitations described in
TR-55
HEC-1/ HEC-HMS US Army Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use of a
full hydrologic computer is
desirable or necessary
PSRM Penn State
University
Applicable where use of a
hydrologic model is
desirable or necessary;
simpler than TR-20 or
HEC-1
Rational method (or
commercial computer
(1889) package based
on rational method)
Emil Kuichling
200 acres, or as
For sites less than
approved by the
municipality and/or
municipal Engineer
B. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the soil cover
complex method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return period storms according to the region in which they are
located as presented in Table F-1 in Appendix F of this chapter.158 If a
hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1/HEC-HMS is used
§ 245-25 RADNOR CODE § 245-26
C:566
for stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall shall be
24 hours. The alternating block method shown in Figure F-1 or the SCS
Type II S Curve, Figure F-3 in Appendix F, shall be used for the rainfall
distribution.
C. The following criteria shall be used for runoff calculations:
(1) For development sites not considered redevelopment, the ground
cover used in determining the existing conditions' flow rates shall
be as follows:
(a) Wooded sites shall use a ground cover of "woods in good
condition." Portions of a site having more than one viable tree
of a DBH of six inches or greater per 1,000 square feet shall be
considered wooded where such trees existed within three
years of application.
(b) The undeveloped portion of the site, including agriculture,
bare earth, and fallow ground, shall be considered as "meadow
in good condition," unless the natural ground cover generates
a lower curve (CN) number or Rational "c" value (i.e., woods)
as listed in Tables F-2 or F-3 in Appendix F of this chapter.
(2) For development and redevelopment sites, the ground cover used
in determining the existing conditions' flow rates for the developed
portion of the site shall be based upon actual land cover conditions.
D. All calculations using the rational method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times-of-concentration for overland flow
and return periods presented in the Region 5 Curves from the PennDOT
Storm-Duration-Frequency Chart (Figure F-4).159 Times-ofconcentration
for overland flow shall be calculated using the
methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to time
by NRCS). Times-of-concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be
computed using Manning's equation.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the soil cover complex method shall be obtained from
Table F-2 in Appendix F of this chapter.
F. Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the rational method shall be obtained from Table F-3 in Appendix F of
this chapter.
G. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness
158. Editor's Note: Appendix F is on file in Township offices.
159. Editor's Note: Figure F-4 is included in Appendix F, which is on file in Township offices.
§ 245-26 CHARTER § 245-26
C:567
§ 245-27. Other requirements.
coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table F-4 in Appendix F of the
chapter.
H. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using any
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
I. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the storageindication
method. The design storm hydrograph shall be computed
using a calculation method that produces a full hydrograph. The
municipality may approve the use of any generally accepted full
hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff
volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that produces
a full hydrograph.
A. Any stormwater facility located on state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by PennDOT.
B. All wet basin designs shall incorporate biologic controls consistent with
the West Nile Guidance found in Appendix H.160
C. Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin) required or
regulated by this chapter, designed to store runoff and requiring a berm
or earthen embankment, shall be designed to provide an emergency
spillway to handle flow up to and including the one-hundred-year
proposed conditions. The height of embankment must provide a
minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard above the maximum pool elevation
computed when the facility functions for the one-hundred-year
proposed conditions' inflow. Should any stormwater management
facility require a dam safety permit under DEP Chapter 105, the facility
shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the
regulations of Chapter 105 concerning dam safety. Chapter 105 may be
required to pass storms larger than the one-hundred-year event.
D. Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges,
outfalls, or stream enclosures) and any work involving wetlands
governed by DEP Chapter 105 regulations (as amended or replaced
from time to time by DEP) shall be designed in accordance with Chapter
105 and will require a permit from DEP.
E. Any other drainage conveyance facility that does not fall under Chapter
105 regulations must be able to convey, without damage to the drainage
structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year design storm
with a minimum one foot of freeboard measured below the lowest point
along the top of the roadway. Any facility that constitutes a dam as
160. Editor's Note: Appendix H is on file in Township offices.
§ 245-26 RADNOR CODE § 245-27
C:568
defined in DEP Chapter 105 regulations may require a permit under
dam safety regulations. Any facility located within a PennDOT rightof-
way must meet PennDOT minimum design standards and permit
submission requirements.
F. Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel not governed by
Chapter 105 regulations must be able to convey, without damage to the
drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year design
storm. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater management
facilities (i.e., detention basins) shall be designed to convey the design
flow to or from that structure. Roadway crossings located within
designated floodplain areas must be able to convey runoff from a onehundred-
year design storm. Any facility located within a PennDOT
right-of-way must meet PennDOT minimum design standards and
permit submission requirements.
G. Storm sewers must be able to convey proposed conditions' runoff from
a twenty-five-year design storm without surcharging inlets, where
appropriate.
H. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels
and at all points of discharge.
I. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate
sound engineering principles and practices. The municipality reserves
the right to disapprove any design that would result in construction in
or continuation of a stormwater problem area.
J. Underground stormwater management systems must be designed to
store the two- through one-hundred-year storms within a pipe or other
open system that will permit the inspection and maintenance of the
system. The entire storm must be placed in the pipe (i.e., the stone
bedding around the pipe is not to be included in the volume
calculations).
§ 245-27 CHARTER § 245-27
C:569

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 245-28. Inspections.
A. The municipal Engineer or his municipal designee shall inspect all
phases of the installation of the permanent BMPs and/or stormwater
management facilities as deemed appropriate by the municipal
Engineer.
B. During any stage of the work, if the municipal Engineer or his municipal
designee determines that the permanent BMPs and/or stormwater
management facilities are not being installed in accordance with the
approved stormwater management plan, the municipality shall revoke
any existing permits or other approvals and issue a cease and desist
order until a revised drainage plan is submitted and approved, as
specified in this chapter, and until the deficiencies are corrected.
C. A final inspection of all BMPs and/or stormwater management facilities
shall be conducted by the municipal Engineer or his municipal designee
to confirm compliance with the approved drainage plan prior to the
issuance of any occupancy permit.
§ 245-28 CHARTER § 245-28
C:571

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 245-29. Municipality drainage plan review and inspection fee.
Fees shall be established by the municipality to defray plan review and
construction inspection costs incurred by the municipality. All fees shall be
paid by the applicant at the time of drainage plan submission. A review and
inspection fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the municipal
governing body based on the size of the regulated activity and based
on the municipality's costs for reviewing drainage plans and conducting
inspections pursuant to § 245-28. The municipality shall periodically update
the review and inspection fee schedule to ensure that review costs are
adequately reimbursed.
§ 245-30. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall at a minimum cover:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the drainage plan by the municipality and the municipal
Engineer.
C. The site inspections.
D. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and drainage improvements presented in the drainage plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 245-29 CHARTER § 245-30
C:573

ARTICLE VII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 245-31. Performance guarantee.
§ 245-32. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of
stormwater controls and BMPs.
A. For subdivisions and land developments the applicant shall provide a
financial guarantee to the municipality for the timely installation and
proper construction of all stormwater management controls as:
(1) Required by the approved drainage plan equal to or greater than
the full construction cost of the required controls; or
(2) The amount and method of payment provided for in the SALDO.
B. For other regulated activities, the municipality may require a financial
guarantee from the applicant.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a stormwater control
and BMP operations and maintenance plan that describes how the
permanent (e.g., postconstruction) stormwater controls and BMPs will
be properly operated and maintained.
B. The following items shall be included in the stormwater control and
BMP operations and maintenance plan:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Delaware
County, shall be submitted on thirty-four-inch by twenty-four-inch
sheets. The contents of the maps(s) shall include but not be limited
to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater controls and BMPs;
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks;
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
appropriate;
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project site area;
(e) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved;
§ 245-31 CHARTER § 245-32
C:575
§ 245-33. Municipal review of a stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and waterlines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site;
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added;
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings;
and
(i) A twenty-foot wide access easement around all stormwater
controls and BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(2) A description of how each permanent stormwater control and BMP
will be operated and maintained, and the identity and contact
information associated with the person(s) responsible for
operations and maintenance.
(3) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan.
(4) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater controls and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or
removed only after approval by the municipality.
C. The stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan for
the project site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater controls and
BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers, and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater
controls and BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by the
municipality;
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership or if sewers and other public improvements are to be
privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs shall be the
responsibility of the owner or private management entity.
D. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The municipality reserves
the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater controls and BMPs.
§ 245-32 RADNOR CODE § 245-33
C:576
§ 245-34. Adherence to an approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater control
and BMP required by an approved stormwater control and BMP operations
and maintenance plan or to allow the property to remain in a condition
which does not conform to an approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
§ 245-35. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater controls and BMPs.
§ 245-36. Stormwater management easements.
A. The municipality shall review the stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan for consistency with the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and any permits issued by DEP.
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing whether or not the
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan is
approved.
C. The municipality may require a "record drawing" of all stormwater
controls and BMPs and an explanation of any discrepancies with the
operations and maintenance plan.
A. The applicant shall sign an operations and maintenance agreement with
the municipality covering all stormwater controls and BMPs that are to
be privately owned. The maintenance agreement shall be transferred
with transfer of ownership. The agreement shall be substantially the
same as the agreement in Appendix I161 of this chapter.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of
all permanent stormwater controls and BMPs. The agreement shall be
subject to the review and approval of the municipality.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the municipal
Engineer.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the applicant
or property owner if necessary for access for inspections and
maintenance or the preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance,
infiltration, and detention areas and other stormwater controls and
BMPs by persons other than the property owner. The purpose of the
easement shall be specified in any agreement under § 245-35.
161. Editor's Note: Appendix I is on file in Township offices.
§ 245-33 CHARTER § 245-37
C:577
§ 245-37. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
§ 245-38. Recording of an approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan and related agreements.
§ 245-39. Municipal Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and
Maintenance Fund.
A. Prior to final approval of the site's drainage plan, the applicant shall
sign and record the maintenance agreement contained in Appendix I,
which is attached and made part hereof, covering all stormwater
control facilities that are to be privately owned.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities.
The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the review and approval
of the municipal Solicitor and governing body.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater controls and
BMPs will be placed, constructed, or implemented, as described in the
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan, shall
record the following documents in the office of the Recorder of Deeds
for Delaware County within 15 days of approval of the stormwater
control and BMP operations and maintenance plan by the municipality:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof;
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 245-35; and
(3) Easements under § 245-36.
B. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of failure on the part of the owner to comply
with this section.
A. Persons installing stormwater controls or BMPs shall be required to pay
a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater Control and BMP
Operation and Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of periodic
inspections and maintenance expenses. The amount of the deposit shall
be determined as follows:
(1) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be privately owned and
maintained, the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections
performed by the municipality for a period of 10 years, as
estimated by the municipal Engineer. After that period of time,
inspections will be performed at the expense of the municipality.
(2) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be owned and maintained by
the municipality, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The municipal Engineer
§ 245-37 RADNOR CODE § 245-39
C:578
will establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by
the applicant.
(3) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values. The municipal Engineer shall
determine the present worth equivalents, which shall be subject to
the approval of the governing body.
B. If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreational facility (e.g., ball field or lake), the municipality may
reduce or waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based
upon the value of the land for public recreational purpose.
C. If at some future time, a stormwater control or BMP (whether publicly
or privately owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers
or other storage facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund
deposit will be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and
connecting to the storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount of
the deposit remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid will be
returned to the depositor.
D. If stormwater controls or BMPs are accepted by the municipality for
dedication, the municipality may require persons installing stormwater
controls or BMPs to pay a specified amount to the Municipal
Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to help
defray costs of operations and maintenance activities. The amount may
be determined as follows:
(1) The amount shall cover the estimated costs for operations and
maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the municipality.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
E. If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreational facility (e.g., ball field or lake), the municipality may adjust
the amount due accordingly.
F. The municipality may shall require applicants to pay a fee to the
Municipal Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance
Fund to cover long-term maintenance of stormwater controls and
BMPs.
G. The municipality may require applicants to pay a fee to the Municipal
Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to
cover stormwater-related problems which may arise from the land
development and earth disturbance.
§ 245-39 CHARTER § 245-39
C:579

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 245-40. Prohibited discharges.
A. No person in the municipality shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater
discharges into the municipality's separate storm sewer system which
are not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided in
Subsection B below, and discharges allowed under a state or federal
permit.
B. Discharges that may be allowed based on a finding by the municipality
that the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to pollution of
surface waters of the commonwealth, are:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(5) Air conditioning condensate.
(6) Water from individual residential car washing.
(7) Spring water from crawl space pumps.
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(12) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
C. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of waters
of the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the municipality will
notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the municipality under Subsection C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
municipality, to cease the discharge, consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
§ 245-40 CHARTER § 245-40
C:581
§ 245-41. Prohibited connections.
§ 245-42. Roof drains.
§ 245-43. Alteration of BMPs.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in
§ 245-40B above:
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water to enter the separate storm
sewer system and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks; and
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the separate storm sewer system which has
not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and
approved by the municipality.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers,
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where advantageous to do so.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted on a case-by-case basis as determined by the municipality.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater control or BMP, unless it is part of an approved
maintenance program, without the written approval of the municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater control or BMP or within a drainage easement which
would limit or alter the functioning of the stormwater control or BMP
without the written approval of the municipality.
§ 245-40 RADNOR CODE § 245-43
C:582
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 245-44. Right-of-entry.
§ 245-45. Public nuisance.
§ 245-46. Enforcement generally.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of the stormwater controls or
BMPs in regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Stormwater control and BMP owners and operators shall allow persons
working on behalf of the municipality ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater control or BMP in the
municipality such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/
or sampling of the discharges from such stormwater control or BMP.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a
stormwater control or BMP is a violation of this article.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such
notice may, without limitation, require the following remedies:
(1) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) Elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) Implementation of stormwater controls and BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs.
§ 245-44 CHARTER § 245-46
C:583
§ 245-47. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§ 245-48. Penalties.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the municipality or designee, and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building, land development, or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter; or
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life, health, or
property of others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The municipal Engineer or designee has inspected and approved
the corrections to the stormwater controls and BMPs or the
elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and/or
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation of the Ordinance,
law, or rule and regulation has been corrected.
C. A permit or approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the
procedures outlined in this chapter.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each violation,
recoverable with costs. Each day that the violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense, and the applicable fines are cumulative.
B. In addition, the municipality, through its Solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
§ 245-46 RADNOR CODE § 245-48
C:584
§ 245-49. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the municipality shall provide written notification of the
violation. Such notification shall state the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply
within the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions
of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not
prevent the municipality from pursuing any and all remedies. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated
activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred to comply with
the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 245-50. Enforcement.
The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance
with the drainage plan shall be the responsibility of the municipal Engineer
or other qualified persons designated by the municipality.
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
A. A set of design plans approved by the municipality shall be on file at the
site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the municipality or designee during
construction.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to undertake
any regulated activity under § 245-4 on any property except as provided
for in the approved drainage plan and pursuant to the requirements of
this chapter. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control
structure required by the drainage plan pursuant to this chapter or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to
the approved drainage plan.
C. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor, or other qualified person verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of as-built (record) drawings.
D. After receipt of the certification by the municipality, a final inspection
shall be conducted by the municipal Engineer or designated
representative to certify compliance with this chapter.
§ 245-48 CHARTER § 245-50
C:585
§ 245-51. Appeals.
E. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit and at the request of the
applicant, the governing body will schedule a hearing to discuss the
noncompliance if there is no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property. The expense of a hearing shall be the applicant's
responsibility.
F. Occupancy permit. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the
certification of completion pursuant to Subsection C(1) has been
secured. The occupancy permit shall be required for each lot owner
and/or applicant for all subdivisions and land developments in the
municipality.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of Radnor Township or its designee
may appeal to the Radnor Township Board of Commissioners within 30
days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Radnor Township Board of
Commissioners may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas in
Delaware County within 30 days of the municipal decision.
§ 245-50 RADNOR CODE § 245-51
C:586
Chapter 246
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 162. Stormwater management — See Ch. 245.
§ 246-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Radnor Township
Stormwater Management Fee Ordinance."
§ 246-2. Statement of findings.
Radnor Township makes the following findings:
A. The stormwater management needs of Radnor have been identified
through citizen notifications, field investigations and in studies
conducted by AMEC Environment and Infrastructure, Inc., Chagrin
Valley Engineering and many other engineering studies and findings,
indicating more comprehensive and effective stormwater management
in Radnor would contribute to the protection of the health, safety and
welfare of the residents, and that stormwater facilities, infrastructure
and activities associated with stormwater management provide
services and benefits to all properties, property owners, residents and
citizens of Radnor.
B. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff throughout
a watershed:
(1) Can increase flood flows and velocities;
(2) Contribute to erosion and sedimentation;
(3) Overtax the carrying capacity of existing streams and storm
sewers;
(4) Greatly increase the cost of public facilities to convey and manage
stormwater;
(5) Undermine floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities;
(6) Reduce groundwater recharge;
(7) Impact other related water resource needs; and
(8) Threaten public health and safety.
C. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff throughout
a watershed can harm surface water resources by changing the natural
§ 245-51 CHARTER § 246-2
C:587
hydrologic patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour
and erosion of streambeds and stream banks, thereby elevating
sedimentation), destroying aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic
pollutant concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients,
heavy metals and pathogens. Groundwater resources can also be
impacted through loss of recharge. Stormwater is an important water
resource which supports groundwater recharge for water supplies and
base-flow of streams.
D. A comprehensive program of public stormwater management services
which seeks to avoid and minimize flooding, erosion, and water quality
degradation is fundamental to the public health, safety and welfare of
the residents of Radnor, local property and the environment.
E. In order to establish, operate, enhance and maintain the stormwater
infrastructure of Radnor; insure the continued effective operation of the
system through installation and management of best practices; and to
provide other services such as appropriate inspections, asset
management, and regulatory oversight associated with stormwater and
watershed management, sufficient and stable funding is required to
fund these public services.
F. Federal regulations, including those found at 40 CFR Part 122, and
Pennsylvania state regulations require Radnor to implement a program
of stormwater controls that regulates the discharge from the
Township's regulated stormwater outfalls to local water bodies. In
accordance with those regulations, Radnor is required to obtain a
permit that allows stormwater discharges from its municipal separate
storm sewer system ("MS4") under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System regulations.
G. Radnor intends to establish fair and equitable user fees to assure that
each developed property within Radnor will pay its proportionate share
of the costs of operation, maintenance, repair, administration,
replacement and improvement of all stormwater services provided or
paid for by Radnor based on an impervious surface rate methodology.
H. A proposed program for imposing user fees has received input and
comment by the public through the Radnor Township stormwater
Stakeholder Advisory Committee.
I. A user fee schedule based on land area and impervious surface area
documented by aerial imagery from the Delaware Valley Regional
Planning Commission has been determined to be an appropriate
method to raise revenue that will be dedicated to supporting a more
effective stormwater management program, in accordance with the
following determinations:
(1) A minimum fee per residential unit is reasonable.
(2) Subject to such minimum level, basing the fee upon lot area square
footage tiers, as described in § 246-4 below, was derived from a
§ 246-2 RADNOR CODE § 246-2
C:588
§ 246-3. Definitions.
statistical sampling of impervious surfaces on single-family
residential properties ("SFR") in Radnor.
(3) Under the tiered approach, SFR parcels would be covered by the
square footage tiers.
(4) All other properties would be classified as "other developed
properties."
(5) The operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and improvement
of the Radnor stormwater management system has been and will
be of substantial and direct benefit to users.
A. Words and terms used in this chapter, and not given specific definition,
shall be defined as set forth in the applicable statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or ordinance of Radnor, if any, and shall
otherwise be given their ordinary and common meanings.
B. For purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall be
defined, as set forth below:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Methods, procedures and
analyses specified in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual to reduce flooding potential and control the volume,
flow rate and water quality of stormwater.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents or impedes the
infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces include, but
are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, pavements, driveway areas and
roofs. Any surface areas designed to be gravel or crushed stone shall
be regarded as impervious surfaces.
OTHER DEVELOPED PROPERTIES (ODP) — All developed properties
other than single-family residential properties, including multifamily
properties such as apartment or condominium complexes and common
areas associated with such uses, and commercial, institutional,
governmental and industrial parcels.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation, individual, partnership,
company, association, organization, society or group owning real
property in Radnor.
PROPERTY — Each lot, parcel, building or portion thereof, separately
established by folio number on the tax rolls of Radnor Township or
Delaware County.
RADNOR — Radnor Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, a home
rule municipality.
REPLACEMENT — The associated costs of obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during
the service life of the Radnor stormwater management system so as
to maintain the capacity and performance for which said system was
§ 246-2 CHARTER § 246-3
C:589
§ 246-4. Imposition of user fees.
It is hereby imposed upon each and every developed property that is
connected with, uses, or is benefited by Radnor's stormwater management
system, either directly or indirectly, a user fee for the use, benefit,
operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and improvement of the
designed and constructed, and shall include costs associated with
improvements, including addition of best management practices to the
stormwater management system.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (SFR) — Single-family detached
homes, attached homes, townhouses, duplexes and row homes.
STORMWATER — Includes runoff water from all precipitation events,
snowmelts and springs.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT COSTS — The associated public costs
of equipment and facilities, energy, manpower, materials, property
acquisition, transportation and services required to:
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — The system of runoff
avoidance, infiltration, collection and conveyance, including storm
sewers, pipes, conduits, mains, inlets, culverts, catch basins, gutters,
ditches, channels, detention ponds, streets, curbs, drains and all
devices/appliances and stormwater best management practices and
facilities appurtenant thereto used for collecting, conducting, pumping,
conveying, detaining, infiltrating, reducing, managing, avoiding the
generation of, and treating stormwater.
USER — Any person, firm, corporation, individual, partnership,
company, association, society or group using, benefiting from or being
served by the Radnor stormwater management system.
USER FEES — Sums assessed, imposed and to be collected from each
developed property by Delaware County folio number which uses,
benefits from, or is serviced by the Radnor stormwater management
system, or discharges stormwater, directly or indirectly, into the Radnor
stormwater management system for the use of such system and the
service rendered by, and improvement of, such system.
Avoid reduce, manage, treat, collect, convey, detain, infiltrate,
pump and transport stormwater;
(1)
(2) Provide flood protection;
Keep equipment and facilities including best management
practices functioning satisfactorily and economically;
(3)
Administer the stormwater management program, including
regulatory compliance; and
(4)
(5) Improve Radnor's stormwater management system.
§ 246-3 RADNOR CODE § 246-4
C:590
Radnor Township stormwater management system. Such user fees are to be
imposed on an annual basis.
§ 246-5. Uniform application of user fees.
User fees shall be assessed, liened and collected by folio number as to all
property, owners, lots, parcels, building units and users, unless exempted.
§ 246-6. "User" and "owner" distinguished.
Reference in this chapter to "use," "user," or portion of a property, lot,
parcel or building with respect to the calculation and assessment of user
fees shall not be construed to modify or alter the fact that user fees shall be
assessed and imposed upon the property pursuant to 53 P.S. § 7106 et seq.,
as amended, and the owner of each property against which user fees are
imposed and assessed under this chapter shall remain liable for payment
whether or not such owner occupies the property. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to prohibit or limit an owner's ability to collect by lease
or contract sums due by a tenant or other occupier of the owner's property,
but such lease or contract shall not bind Radnor or limit in any way Radnor's
authority to impose, assess, lien and collect user fees.
§ 246-7. Billing and collection of user fees.
A. Each single-family residential parcel shall be charged based upon lot
square footage at an annual rate of $29 per billing unit in accordance
with the following tiers:
Tier Lot Square
Footage Billing Units Acreage
0 to 7,000 1 0 to 0.16
7,001 to 20,000 2 0.16 to 0.46
20,001 to 43,560 3 0.46 to one acre
Greater than 43,560 4 Greater than one acre
B. All other developed properties shall be billed at the annual rate of $29
per billing unit, with one billing unit equaling 1,500 square feet of
impervious area.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following property shall be exempt
from user fees under this chapter:
(1) "Public street," as defined in the Radnor Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.162
A. The user fees fixed and established by this chapter shall be effective as
to all properties that use, are served, or are benefited by the Radnor
stormwater management system existing as of the effective date of this
162. Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Subdivision of Land.
§ 246-4 CHARTER § 246-7
C:591
§ 246-8. Late payment penalty; interest paid on unpaid user fees.
[Amended 10-8-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-11]
The face amount of all user fee charges shall be payable on or before
May 31 of each year, with a penalty of 10% assessed on June 1. On the
first day of each subsequent month in which the account remains unpaid,
an interest charge of 0.5% of the unpaid user fee shall be added to the
account. All unpaid user fees, penalties, and interest shall be a lien against
the property using, being served by, or benefiting from the stormwater
management system, and the Township Solicitor shall file such liens on or
after January 31 of the following year in which the account remains unpaid.
Any collection, legal, and filing fees shall be borne by the user.
§ 246-9. Stormwater management user fees constitute lien on
property.
In accordance with the Municipal Claims Act, 53 P.S. § 7101, et seq., as
amended, all user fees, penalties, interest, collection fees, lien filing and
satisfaction fees and other charges imposed for failure to pay promptly shall
constitute a lien upon and against the subject property and its owner from
the date of their imposition and assessment.
§ 246-10. Credits.
chapter, and shall be effective to all other properties thereof that use,
are served or benefited by the stormwater management system
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter. User fees imposed by
this chapter shall be assessed and billed by Radnor on an annual basis.
Such assessments shall be payable at their face amount on or before
May 31 next following the date on which said assessment bill was
mailed. The annual billing date shall be on or about April 1. The user
fees assessed and collected will not be subject to proration or refund
by Radnor in the event a property is sold; provided, however, that
this sentence shall not bind a buyer and seller from making their own
proration of any user fees assessed hereunder. [Amended 10-8-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-11]
B. The Board of Commissioners will review and update the user fees fixed
and established by this chapter by resolution every five years or sooner
as deemed necessary.
A. Within six months of the effective date of this chapter, Radnor shall
develop and implement procedures by action of the Board of
Commissioners whereby users of the stormwater management system
may receive credit for on-site activities which reduce and manage
stormwater runoff through detention, retention, infiltration of water
and recharge of the aquifer and thereby avoid or minimize public
construction, operation, repair and maintenance of facilities and
services.
§ 246-7 RADNOR CODE § 246-10
C:592
§ 246-11. Appeal procedures.
Any owner who believes the provisions of this chapter have been applied in
error may appeal in the following manner and sequence:
§ 246-12. Policies and procedures authorized.
B. No credit in user fees shall be granted based on age, race, tax status,
gender, sexual preference, economic status or religion of the property
owner, or any other conditions unrelated to the demand for and cost of
services provided by Radnor.
A. An appeal of user fees must be filed in writing with the Public Works
Director, or his/her designee, within 30 days of the charge being mailed
or delivered to the property owner ("appeal date"). The appeal date may
be extended up to an additional 30 days within the sole discretion of the
Township. Any appeal must state the reasons for the appeal.
B. Using information provided by the appellant, the Public Works Director,
or his/her designee, shall conduct a technical review of the conditions
on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days of
the appeal date. In response to an appeal, the Public Works Director
may adjust the user fees applicable to the property in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
C. A decision of the Public Works Director that is adverse to an appellant
may be further appealed to the Township Manager, or his/her designee,
within 30 days of the adverse decision. The appellant, stating the
grounds for further appeal, shall deliver notice of the appeal to the
Radnor Manager, or his/her designee. The Township Manager, or his/
her designee, shall issue a written decision on the appeal within 30
days. All decisions by the Township Manager, or his/her designee, shall
be personally delivered to the owner or sent to the billing address of the
customer by registered or certified mail.
D. If payment is not made within 30 days of receipt of an adverse decision
by the Township Manager, the appellant's property shall be liened for
all past-due amounts in accordance with the Municipal Claims Act, 53
P.S. 7101 et seq., as amended.
A. The Board of Commissioners may by resolution adopt such policies and
procedures as it deems appropriate to ensure collection of user fees
assessed and imposed pursuant to this chapter. Without limitation,
collection procedures may include referral of delinquent accounts to a
collection agency, filing of liens, scire facias sur municipal lien
proceedings to collect filed liens, and all other measures or combination
thereof which the Board may deem appropriate.
B. All costs of such collection procedures, including, but not limited to,
fees for filing, perpetuation and satisfaction of liens, collection fees,
attorneys' fees, court costs, litigation expenses, and charges for service
§ 246-10 CHARTER § 246-12
C:593
§ 246-13. Stormwater Management Fund.
All user fees and other stormwater-related funds, such as interest or grant
monies, shall be deposited in the Stormwater Management Fund of the
Township. This fund will be a separate enterprise fund dedicated to the
operation, administration, maintenance, repair and improvement of the
stormwater management system, and all related capital costs. Prioritization
and selection of capital projects shall be established by separate resolution
of the Board of Commissioners, and the Board shall establish a citizen
advisory committee to assist in implementation of the program and
education of Township residents.
§ 246-14. Floods and liability.
Floods from stormwater may occur occasionally that exceed the capacity
of the stormwater system maintained and financed with user fees. Nothing
in this chapter shall be deemed to imply that properties subject to charges
shall always be free from flooding or flood damage, or that all flood control
projects to control stormwater can provide complete protection from all
flood and storm events. Nothing whatsoever in this chapter shall deem
Radnor liable for any damages incurred from stormwater or from adverse
water quality. Nothing in this chapter purports to reduce the need or
necessity for flood insurance, and Radnor expressly reserves the right
to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to
impose monetary damages upon Radnor, its officers, employees and agents
arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty with respect to Radnor's
stormwater management system.
of documents shall, upon being incurred by Radnor, be imposed as a
charge for nonpayment and added to the balance due on said owner's
account. Chapter 162 of the Radnor Code of Ordinances contains a
listing of such charges.163
C. No lien shall be satisfied nor shall any collection proceeding be
discontinued until all amounts due on an account, including user fees,
interest, collection fees, attorneys' fees, court costs and other charges
are first paid in full to Radnor.
D. The Township Manager may implement such administrative procedures
necessary to implement the policies and requirements set forth in this
chapter.
163. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Fees.
§ 246-12 RADNOR CODE § 246-14
C:594
Chapter 250
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading, excavations and fills — See Ch. 175.
Skateboards — See Ch. 237.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 255.
Trees — See Ch. 263.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 267.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 270.
§ 246-14 CHARTER § 246-14
C:595

ARTICLE I
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 2-25-1974 by Ord. No. 1564 as Ch. 118, Art. IV, of the
1974 Code]
§ 250-1. Duty to remove.
It shall be the duty of all owners, tenants and occupants of buildings or land
abutting on a paved sidewalk on a public highway to cause such sidewalk to
be kept clear of snow and ice in front of their respective premises.
§ 250-2. Disposition of snow.
Snow and ice removed from sidewalks, driveways and other private
property shall not be deposited or plowed into any public street or highway.
The existence of any such deposit on a street or highway in front of a
sidewalk, driveway or private property shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section by the owner, tenant or occupant thereof.
§ 250-3. Failure to comply; violations and penalties. [Amended
6-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-18; 2-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-04;
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 2-26-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-09]
A. Any person whose duty it is to comply with the provisions of this article
who permits or suffers snow to stay on the sidewalk for more than 24
hours after the snow has ceased to fall or shall permit ice to remain on
the sidewalk and not covered with a material designed to alleviate the
slippery condition shall be subject to a fine of $50, plus costs, for each
offense.
B. Each day or part of a day in which any such snow or ice remains after it
should be removed shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 250-1 CHARTER § 250-3
C:597

ARTICLE II
Parking Restricted for Certain Purposes
[Adopted 2-25-1974 by Ord. No. 1564 as Ch. 118, Art. VI, of the
1974 Code]
§ 250-4. Definitions.
§ 250-5. Prohibited parking.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park any vehicle
on any highway or sidewalk for the purpose of washing, greasing or
repairing the same, except in case of emergency, or for dead storage.
§ 250-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 30 days.
A. The definitions contained in the Vehicle Code164 shall apply to this
article where applicable.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEAD STORAGE — The parking of vehicles in such mechanical or
physical condition that they cannot be moved at any time under their
own power for more than 48 hours.[Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
164. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et. seq.
§ 250-4 CHARTER § 250-6
C:599

ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Construction
[Adopted 11-25-1974 as Section III of Ord. No. 1588 (Ch. 118, Art. I,
of the 1974 Code)]
§ 250-7. Notice to construct sidewalk or set curbing.
Whenever the Board of Township Commissioners shall require the
construction, grading and paving of sidewalks or the setting of curbing,
written notice of this chapter and its requirements shall be given by the
Township Engineer to each and every property owner affected thereby.
§ 250-8. Failure to comply; performance of work by Township; costs
and lien.
If any property owner shall fail to commence performance of the work or fail
to act in compliance with the requirements of this chapter within 45 days
from the date of service of the notice provided for in § 250-7 hereof, the
Township Engineer shall cause such work to be done; and if any property
owner shall fail to complete the work required by the terms of this chapter
within 60 days from the service of such notice, then and in such case the
Township Engineer may cause such work to be completed, and in either
case shall charge the cost of the work, together with a charge not to exceed
25% of the cost for general overhead and administrative expenses, against
the owner of the property abutting the area where the work was performed.
Should any such property owner fail to pay such charge within 60 days
from the completion of the work, the claim shall be placed in the hands
of the Township Solicitor for collection by action of assumpsit against said
property owner or by filing a municipal lien thereof against the property as
provided by law. The claim provided for in this section may be served on the
property owner by leaving a notice at his place of residence or, if he has no
residence in the Township, then by posting the same on the premises and
mailing a copy thereof to the owner at his last known address.
§ 250-7 CHARTER § 250-8
C:601

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 11-25-1974 as Section IV of Ord. No. 1588 (Ch. 118, Art.
II, of the 1974 Code)]
§ 250-9. Duty to maintain. [Amended 4-9-1984 by Ord. No. 84-11]
Whenever a sidewalk has been laid in the Township of Radnor, it shall be
the duty of the owner of the property upon which the sidewalk abuts to keep
the same in good repair and in safe condition for public use. Sidewalks with
a horizontal crack or a difference in elevation of more than 1/2 inch shall
not be in safe condition for public use.
§ 250-10. Permit for sidewalk and curb work.
A. Hereafter, no landowner shall install, remove, change, replace, regrade,
repair or alter existing sidewalks or curbs, whether ordained or not,
without first obtaining a permit from the Township Engineer or his
designated representative.
B. The Township Engineer shall issue a permit for the installation,
removal, change, replacement, regrading, repair or alteration of said
sidewalk or curb, after inspection of the sidewalk or curb with a view
towards its effect upon the adjoining landowner, community and
Township.
C. The landowner or contractor requesting a permit hereunder shall file
with the Township Engineer, the following:
(1) The name and address of the landowner or agent of the property
abutting the proposed work area.
(2) The name and address of the party doing the work.
(3) The location of the work area and the date of completion.
(4) Plans showing details of the proposed work.
(5) Such other information as the Township Engineer may require.
D. A fee determined by resolution of the Board of Commissioners shall
accompany all applications for a permit.
E. Whenever the exigencies of public health or safety require that instant
repairs be made and the procurement of a permit prior to the
commencement of work is impracticable, it shall be lawful for said work
to be begun without a permit, provided that an application for such
permit is filed and the proper payment made within 48 hours from the
time when the emergency arose, which application shall set forth the
nature of the aforesaid emergency.
§ 250-9 CHARTER § 250-11
C:603
§ 250-11. Supervision of work.
All work performed hereunder shall be subject to the supervision and
approval of the Township Engineer.
§ 250-12. Emergency work.
Whenever the exigencies of public health or safety require immediate
remedial action, the Township Engineer shall have full authority to
designate excavation work to be performed as emergency work and to order
that men and adequate equipment be employed by the landowner 24 hours
a day to complete the remedial action.
§ 250-13. Failure to comply; performance of work by Township;
costs and lien.
If the owner of any property which abuts on any public highway in front
of which a sidewalk has been laid shall fail, refuse or neglect to keep
said sidewalk in good condition and repair and in safe condition for public
use, it shall be the duty of the Township Engineer to notify the property
owner, in writing, when the sidewalk in front of said property is in bad
condition or repair and to give said property owner notice to do that which
is necessary to repair the same. If such property owner fails to comply with
the requirements of such notice within 30 days from the date of service of
said notice, the Township Engineer may make the necessary repairs and
charge the cost of the same, together with a charge not to exceed 25%
of the cost for general overhead and administrative expenses, against the
owner of said property. Should the property owner fail to pay such charge
within 60 days, then the same shall be placed in the hands of the Township
Solicitor for collection by action of assumpsit against said property owner
or by filing a municipal lien thereof against the property as provided by law.
The notice provided for in this section may be served on the property owner
by leaving the same at his place of residence or, if he has no residence in
the Township, then by posting the same on the premises and mailing a copy
thereof to the owner at his last known address.
A. Commencement of work. No permit granted under this article shall be
valid unless the operation specified therein shall start within a period of
20 days from the date of its issuance and be completed within 60 days.
A renewal thereof may be had without further payment by filing a new
application, together with a statement, in writing, that the work has not
been completed.
B. Prosecution of work. All work commenced in pursuance of said permits
shall be completed in an expeditious manner, all openings or
excavations shall be immediately refilled by the applicant, and the
permit area shall be restored to its former condition to the satisfaction
of the Township Engineer.
§ 250-11 RADNOR CODE § 250-14
C:604
§ 250-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for
each violation thereof, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 30 days. The continuation of a violation shall constitute, for each
day the violation is continued, a separate and distinct violation hereunder.
§ 250-14 CHARTER § 250-14
C:605

ARTICLE V
Street Improvements and Sewer Construction
[Adopted 9-12-1977 by Ord. No. 77-22 (Ch. 118, Art. VII, of the
1974 Code)]
§ 250-15. Notice of proposed ordinance.
Whenever the Board of Commissioners of the Township shall require by
ordinance, after compliance with § 9.02 of the Home Rule Charter, the
grading, curbing, widening, relaying, paving, macademizing or other
improvement of any street or highway; the construction, grading and paving
of sidewalks; the setting of curbing; or the construction of a sewer, system
of sewers or drains which shall be assessed to the abutting property owners,
written notice of the proposed ordinance shall be mailed by the Township
Secretary to each and every property owner affected thereby not more than
30 days nor less than 10 days before the proposed ordinance will be acted
upon by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 250-15 CHARTER § 250-15
C:607

ARTICLE VI
Right-of-Way Management
[Adopted 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-15165]
§ 250-16. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes an application for a permit.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works, Radnor Township,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstances which call for immediate
action.
PERMIT FEE — A fee paid by the permittee to the Township to cover the
cost of issuing, processing and filing the street opening permit.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has agreed to
fulfill all the terms of this article.
PERSON — Any person and includes any person, partnership, firm,
association, utility or corporation.
STREET — Includes the entire right-of-way of a public street, public
highway, public alley, public way, public road or public easement within the
Township.
STREET OPENING — Any ditch, excavation, tunnel or opening in or under
the surface of any street or within any street right-of-way, except work
performed by any property owner or his agent or contractor within that
portion of the street right-of-way abutting his property and lying behind the
sidewalk or curb if there is no sidewalk.
STREET OPENING PERMIT — The completed form filled out in its entirety
giving the applicant permission to open and/or occupy a Township street in
Radnor Township.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
§ 250-17. Right-of-way construction and facilities.
A. No person, firm, corporation or other entity within the Township shall
construct a driveway or install a utility or telecommunications facility
within a street right-of-way, except as permitted by this section.
B. Permit procedures.
165. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former §§ 250-17 through 250-34 of former
Art. VI, Street Excavations, adopted 5-29-1990 by Ord. No. 90-24 (Ch. 118, Art. V, of the
1974 Code), as amended, and specifically saved from repeal § 250-16, Definitions.
§ 250-16 CHARTER § 250-17
C:609
(1) A permit must be acquired from Radnor Township for any work
within a Township right-of-way and from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT) for any work within a
state right-of-way where such work involves construction or
alteration of a driveway or the installation of a utility,
telecommunications facility or other structure.
(2) An application for a driveway permit shall be submitted in the name
of the owner or equitable owner of the property.
(3) An application for a road opening permit or right-of-way
construction for a utility or telecommunications facility must be
submitted in the name of the owner or operator of the facility.
(4) Forms, plans and fees shall be submitted in accordance with
regulations and procedures adopted by either Radnor Township or
PennDOT for work in Township or state rights-of-way, respectively.
The application fees for work within Township rights-of-way shall
be specified in the schedule of fees by resolution by the Board of
Commissioners.
(5) The Township Engineer may modify the requirements of this article
for residential property owners doing normal maintenance, repair
or construction in the right-of-way.
C. Regulations and standards.
(1) This section represents minimum requirements of certain types of
activities within Township or state rights-of-way. Activities
associated with approved subdivision or land developments shall
be subject to any additional requirements of the final plans as
approved by Radnor Township and/or PennDOT. Any activity not
regulated by the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of
Radnor Township166 shall be regulated by the requirements of this
article.
(2) A drainage control plan and analysis shall be submitted whenever
an increase in flow of water into a street or into existing drainage
facilities will result from the proposed activity. The design of all
drainage facilities shall be based on the Rational Method as
determined by the PennDOT Design Manual, Part 2, as amended,
and the United States Department of Commerce, Hydraulic Design
Series No. 5, Hydraulic Design of Highway Culverts, as amended.
(3) All construction work, structures, paving and facilities shall
conform to the design standards of PennDOT Publications 408 and
72 (Road Construction Standards), as amended. Work shall be done
at such time and in such a manner as shall be consistent with the
safety of the public. Any work within Township or state rights-ofway
shall conform to all requirements and standards of PennDOT,
166. Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Subdivision of Land.
§ 250-17 RADNOR CODE § 250-17
C:610
except as otherwise supplemented or modified by this article. In
the event regulations conflict, the most stringent regulations shall
apply. If at any time it is found the work is not being done or has
not been properly performed, the permittee, upon being notified in
writing by either the Township or PennDOT, must immediately take
the necessary steps, at its own expense, to replace the work in a
condition to conform to such requirements or standards. In case
any dispute arises between the permittee and the representative of
the owner of the right-of-way, the owner's representative shall have
the authority to suspend work until the question at issue can be
decided by the Township and/or state.
(4) The following PennDOT provisions shall regulate the occupancy of
all Township and state rights-of-way, unless otherwise required by
an approved subdivision or land development plan, this article, or
the Township Engineer:
(a) Pennsylvania Code, Title 67 Transportation, Chapter 441
Access and Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and Local
Roads, as amended.
(b) Pennsylvania Code, Title 67 Transportation, Chapter 459
Occupancy of Highways by Utilities, as amended.
(5) A traffic control plan must be submitted to either close any portion
of a travel lane during construction, during the hours of darkness
when no active work is in progress or to detour traffic in order to
perform the permitted work. All plans shall conform with § 6123 of
the Motor Vehicle Code, as amended, and the applicable provisions
of the Pennsylvania Code, Title 67 Transportation, Chapter 203, as
amended.
D. Driveway construction requirements.
(1) Driveways shall be located at least 40 feet from street
intersections, measured from the center line of the driveway to the
point of intersection of the street ultimate right-of-way lines
(extended). When streets of different classifications are involved,
driveways shall provide access to the street of lesser classification.
(2) Driveways shall be provided with a stopping area of 20 feet, at a
maximum grade of 3%, measured from the edge of cartway. In
order to provide access for emergency vehicles, the maximum
center line grade for any portion of the driveway shall not exceed
8%, and the maximum change in grade shall not exceed 6%.
(3) Driveways shall be paved for a minimum of 50 feet from the edge of
the street or to the ultimate right-of-way, whichever is greater. The
pavement construction shall be in accordance with Townshipapproved
construction details.167 In the event additional width or a
167. Construction detail is on file and may be seen at the Township office.
§ 250-17 CHARTER § 250-17
C:611
supplemental thickness is required by other rules and regulations
of the Township or PennDOT, or as may be necessitated by site
conditions, these minimum requirements shall be increased
appropriately.
(4) Driveways shall have a minimum radius of curvature at the street
intersection of 10 feet.
(5) A minimum distance of five feet shall be maintained between the
driveway and the side lot lines.
(6) Driveways shall have a minimum turnaround area of 10 feet by 20
feet.
(7) A clear sight triangle of 50 feet must be provided for all driveways,
measured from the point of intersection of the street right-of-way
line and edge of the driveway. The site plan shall contain a notation
that states that the applicant is required to maintain the area of the
clear sight triangle and the Township has the right to enter and
perform required maintenance in the area if deemed critical to
public welfare.
(8) Sight distances for all driveways shall comply with Pennsylvania
Code, Title 67 Transportation, Chapter 441 Access and Occupancy
of Highways by Driveways and Local Roads, as amended.
(9) When a sidewalk is proposed across a driveway, a concrete apron
shall be installed in accordance with Township-approved
construction details.168 When a curb is proposed along a driveway,
depressed curb shall be installed in accordance with the attached
construction detail.
(10) A fifteen-inch RCP culvert, or equivalent size, shall be provided for
all driveways. The minimum culvert length shall be 24 feet with
flared end sections and end walls. Where an existing roadside
drainage swale is too shallow to permit installation of a driveway
culvert, a concrete trench box with grate may be utilized upon
approval of the Township.
(11) Any associated grading, curb or sidewalk installation located
within the street right-of-way shall be in accordance with the
design standards of the Township's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter 255), as amended.
E. Telecommunications facilities. All proposed telecommunications
facilities within Township or state rights-of-way shall meet the
requirements of the Zoning Code, Chapter 280, of the Township. All
new telecommunications facilities shall utilize existing poles,
streetlights or other structures within the right-of-way or acquire
168. Construction detail is on file and may be seen at the Township office.
§ 250-17 RADNOR CODE § 250-17
C:612
§ 250-18. Standards of service for right-of-way construction.
additional areas adjacent to and outside of the right-of-way, or shall be
placed underground.
F. Maintenance period. Upon completion of the work authorized by the
permit, the Township shall inspect the work and, when necessary,
enforce compliance with the conditions, restrictions and regulations
prescribed by the Township. In addition to such inspection, the
Township may reinspect the work not more than two years after its
completion and if any settlement of any road surface trench or other
defects shall appear in the work contrary to the conditions, restrictions
and regulations of the Township, it may enforce compliance therewith.
If the applicant shall fail to rectify a defect which presents an
immediate or imminent safety or health problem in 48 hours, or any
other defect within 30 days after written notice from the Township
Engineer to do so, the Township, or its agents, may do the work and
impose upon the applicant the costs thereof, together with an additional
20% of the costs, which may be recovered by a civil action in the Court
of Common Pleas of Delaware County.
A. Conditions of street occupancy. Facilities and equipment installed or
erected by the permittee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located
so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public
rights-of-way and with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners who own property that adjoins any of said public
rights-of-way.
B. Restoration of public rights-of-way. If during the course of the
permittee's construction, operation, and/or maintenance of its facilities
and equipment there occurs a disturbance of any public rights-of-way
by the permittee, the permittee shall, at its expense, replace and
restore such public rights-of-way to a condition which existed
immediately prior to such disturbance. If the permittee excavates the
surface of any public rights-of-way, the permittee shall be responsible
for restoration of the public rights-of-way and its surface within the
area affected by the excavation. The Township reserves the right, after
providing notice to the permittee, to remove and/or repair any work
done by the permittee which is inadequate. The reasonable cost
thereof, including the cost of inspection and supervision, shall be paid
by the permittee. All excavations made by the permittee in the public
rights-of-way shall be properly safeguarded for the prevention of
accidents.
C. Trees and shrubbery. The permittee shall notify the Township and all
affected property owners regarding the permittee's need to trim trees
or other natural growth upon and overhanging public rights-of-way so
as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its
facilities or equipment. Trimming shall be limited to the area required
to clear its facilities or equipment.
§ 250-17 CHARTER § 250-18
C:613
§ 250-19. Insurance, indemnification and bonds or other surety for
right-of-way construction.
D. Safety requirements. All such work in the public rights-of-way shall be
performed in accordance with applicable safety codes and technical
requirements.
E. Maps. Prior to beginning any construction of facilities, the permittee
shall provide the Township with a construction schedule for work in the
public rights-of-way which schedule shall be updated as changed. Upon
completion of initial construction and upon completion of construction
of any modification to its facilities, the permittee shall provide the
Township with a map showing the location of its installed facilities in
the public rights-of-way. Such maps shall be provided in both paper
form, as well as in an electronic format for placement on the Township's
GIS system. Annually thereafter, the permittee shall provide a map to
the Township showing the location of the permittee's facilities in the
public rights-of-way on a scale of 150 feet per inch or whatever
standard scale the Township adopts for general use.
F. Excavations. The permittee may make excavations in public rights-ofway
for any facility subject to obtaining excavation permits from the
Township. Prior to doing such work, the permittee must apply for, and
obtain, appropriate permits from the Township, and give appropriate
notices to any other licensees and/or permittees of the Township, and/or
other units of government owning or maintaining facilities which may
be affected by the proposed excavation.
G. Reservation of the Township public rights-of-way. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent the Township or other agency of
government or municipal authority from constructing sewers, grading,
paving, repairing and/or altering any street and/or laying down,
repairing and/or removing water mains and/or constructing and/or
establishing any other public work or improvement. If any of the
permittee's facilities or equipment interferes with the construction or
repair of any street or public improvement, including construction,
repair or removal of a sewer or water main, the permittee's facilities or
equipment shall be removed or replaced in the manner the respective
Township or other agency of government or municipal authority shall
direct. Any and all such removal or replacement shall be at the expense
of the permittee. Should the permittee fail to remove, adjust or relocate
its facilities by the date established by the Township or other agency of
government or municipal authority, the Township or other agency of
government or municipal authority may cause and/or effect such
removal, adjustment or relocation, and the expense thereof shall be
paid by the permittee, including all reasonable costs and expenses
incurred by the Township or other agency of government or municipal
authority due to the permittee's delay.
A. The permittee shall save the Township, its agents, employees and
elected and appointed officials harmless from and against all claims,
§ 250-18 RADNOR CODE § 250-19
C:614
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees,
sustained on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand
whatsoever arising out of the construction, leasing, operation or
maintenance of the permittee's equipment, facilities, and services
specified by this section, whether or not any act or omission complained
of is authorized, allowed and/or prohibited by this section and the rights
granted hereunder.
B. The permittee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect
insurance with an insurance company licensed to do business and doing
business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and acceptable to the
Township. All companies will be required to be rated A-VH or better by
A.M. Best or A or better by Standard and Poor's. The permittee shall
provide the Township with proof of such insurance so required.
C. The permittee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect, at the
permittee's sole expense, insurance coverage in the following types and
minimum amounts:
Type Amount
Workers' compensation and
statutory employers liability
$100,000/$500,000/$100,000
Commercial general (public)
liability to include coverage for the
following where exposure exists:
Premises operations
Independent contractors
Products/completed operations
Personal injury
Contractual liability
Explosion, collapse and
underground property damage
Combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damages
$2,000,000 per occurrence or its
equivalent
Comprehensive vehicle insurance
coverage for loading and unloading
hazards, for:
Owned/leased vehicles
Nonowned vehicles
Hired vehicles
Combined single limit of bodily
injury and property damage
$1,000,000 per occurrence or its
equivalent
D. The Township shall receive without expense copies of certificates of
insurance evidencing coverage stated above.
E. The permittee agrees that with respect to the above-required
insurance, all insurance certificates will contain the following required
provisions:
(1) Name the Township and its officers as additional insureds.
§ 250-19 CHARTER § 250-19
C:615
(2) Provide for 60 days' written notice to the Township for cancellation,
nonrenewal, or material change.
(3) Provide that all provisions of this section concerning liability, duty,
and standard of care, including the indemnity provisions, shall be
underwritten by contractual coverage sufficient to include such
obligations within applicable policies, subject to policy terms and
conditions.
F. Companies issuing the insurance policies shall have no recourse
against the Township for payment of any premiums or assessments
which all are set at the sole risk of the permittee. Insurance policies
obtained by the permittee shall provide that the issuing company
waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the Township
in connection with any damage covered by these policies.
G. The permittee shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense,
and file with the Township, a corporate surety bond with a surety
company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in the amount of 15% of the permittee's estimated costs to
secure the permittee's performance of its obligations and faithful
adherence to all requirements of this section.
(1) No action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such
bond shall affect the Township's rights to demand full and faithful
performance under this section or limit the permittee's liability for
damages.
(2) The bond shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be
canceled by the surety nor any intention not to renew be exercised
by the surety until 60 days after receipt by the Township of Radnor,
by registered mail, of written notice of such intent.
H. All expenses of the above-noted insurance and bond shall be paid by the
permittee.
I. The insurance policies mentioned herein shall contain an endorsement
stating the following:
Should any policies of insurance be canceled or coverages be reduced,
before the expiration date of said policies of insurance, the issuer shall
deliver 60 days' advance written notice to the Township.
J. Neither the provisions of this section nor any insurance accepted by the
Township pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the Township
thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the
permittee and/or limit the liability of the permittee under this section
issued hereunder and/or for damages, either to the full amount of the
bond or otherwise.
§ 250-19 RADNOR CODE § 250-19
C:616
§ 250-20. Visual obstructions. [Added 11-12-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-13]
K. Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, for each day of
violation plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Township.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in the Township of Radnor to plant,
erect, maintain or allow to exist any tree, shrub, hedge, fence, bank or
other obstruction near street intersections which may cause danger by
obstructing the view of the motorist. The existence of such obstruction
will cause said person to be subject to a notice of violation if said
obstruction exceeds a height of 24 inches as measured from the lowest
adjacent street surface and is located within a triangle formed by
joining three points, one point being formed by the intersection of the
abutting street edges and the other two located 30 feet from the abovementioned
intersection measured along each of the abutting street
edges as shown in the attached illustration. This triangular area may be
extended to achieve the purpose of this section where unusual
topographical conditions prevail.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in the Township of Radnor to plant,
erect, maintain or allow to exist any tree, shrub, hedge, fence, post or
other obstruction within the right-of-way of any Township or state
highway within the Township of Radnor which creates an unsafe
condition for persons or vehicles traveling on said highway.
C. The enforcement of this subsection shall be under the direction of the
Township Manager or his designated representative. The Township
Manager is authorized to notify the property owner of the land upon
which the vision or other obstructions prevail to remove the same
within 30 days. If the owner shall neglect or refuse to do so after such
notice, the Township Manager may file a complaint and/or cause the
work to be done at the expense of the property owner. This expense,
together with a penalty of 5% of such cost, shall be charged against the
owner of such property, and in default of payment, the same shall be
collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal
claims or by action of assumpsit without filing of a claim. The notice
provided by this section shall be served upon the property owner by
certified mail or by leaving the same at his place of residence in the
Township or, if he has no residence in the Township, then by leaving the
same with the tenant or occupier of the premises or, if the premises is
vacant, by posting the same on the premises and mailing a copy thereof
to the owner at his last known address.
D. No gasoline pumps, oil tanks, walls, fences, posts, planting, shrubbery
or similar obstructions shall be placed within the right-of-way. Any such
obstruction shall be removed promptly by the property owner whenever
written notice to remove such obstruction is given by the Township
§ 250-19 CHARTER § 250-20
C:617
Engineer. If the owner fails to comply with such notice, the Township
shall remove the obstruction and charge to cost thereof to the owner.
§ 250-20 RADNOR CODE § 250-20
C:618
Chapter 255
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 134.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 142.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 144A.
Contractors — See Ch. 145.
Design review — See Ch. 150.
Fees — See Ch. 162.
Grading, excavations and fills — See Ch. 175.
Historic Districts — See Ch. 178.
Sewers — See Ch. 235.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 245.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 250.
Trees — See Ch. 263.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 250-20 CHARTER § 250-20
C:619

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 255-1. Title.
§ 255-2. Purpose.
This chapter is established to regulate and control the subdivision and
development of land within Radnor Township so as to provide sites suitable
for human habitation, commercial and industrial operations and other uses
for which land may be developed, thereby creating conditions favorable to
the health, safety and welfare of the community and consistent with the
goals of the Comprehensive Plan of Radnor Township.
§ 255-3. Conformance required.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, any subdivision shall be
in conformity with this chapter and all standards and specifications adopted
as a part of such chapter.
§ 255-4. Construal of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held
to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. When provisions of this chapter
and all standards and specifications adopted under it impose greater
restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulations, the
provisions of this chapter and its standards and specifications shall be
controlling unless specified to the contrary. The illustrations in this chapter
are not a part of the chapter, but are included herein for purposes of
explanation and clarification only.
§ 255-5. Notification of public. [Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No.
90-49; 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15; 9-18-1995 by Ord. No. 95-21;
5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-12]
Notices shall be sent by the applicant to the owners of properties located
within a radius of 1,000 feet from all sides of the tract in question, except
within R-5 Zoning Districts, where the distance shall be 500 feet. Notices
A. This chapter shall be entitled "An Ordinance Establishing Rules,
Regulations and Standards Governing the Subdivision of Land Within
the Township of Radnor, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, Pursuant to
the Authority Set Forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Setting Forth the Procedure To Be Followed by the Planning
Commission and the Board of Commissioners in Applying and
Administering These Rules, Regulations and Standards and Providing
Penalties for the Violation Thereof."
B. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance of the Township of Radnor."
§ 255-1 CHARTER § 255-5
C:621
shall be mailed not less than 10 days prior to the Planning Commission
meeting using Radnor Township return address envelopes and labels
provided by the Township. Proof of said mailing on United States Postal
Service Form 3877 shall be delivered to the Township no less than three
days prior to the meeting. Failure by the owner of any neighboring property
to receive notice when sent in compliance with this section shall not
invalidate any action taken by the Planning Commission.
§ 255-6. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and
phrases shall have, for the purpose of these regulations, the meanings
given in the following clauses.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future.
(2) The singular includes the plural.
(3) The word "person" includes a corporation, partnership, association
or other legal entity, as well as an individual.
(4) The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
(5) The term "shall" is mandatory.
(6) The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building,
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or
designed to be occupied."
(7) The word "Commission" and the words "Planning Commission"
shall mean the Radnor Township Planning Commission.
(8) The word "Commissioners" and the words "Board of
Commissioners" shall mean the Radnor Township Board of
Commissioners.
C. Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of
standard usage.
D. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALLEY — A right-of-way which provides only secondary service access
for vehicles to the side or rear of abutting properties.
APPLICANT — A subdivider or agent authorized thereby requesting
the approval of a proposed subdivision or land development under this
chapter.
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT) — The actual or calculated total
vehicular trips that occur or are expected to occur on a specific street
within a typical weekday.
§ 255-5 RADNOR CODE § 255-6
C:622
BERM — A linear earth mound with a maximum slope of 33% with grass
cover or 50% when shrubbery or ground cover is used.
BLOCK — An area bounded by three or more streets.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The rear line of the minimum front yards
as designated for each zoning district, measured from the street line.
CALIPER — The diameter of the main trunk of a tree. "Caliper"
measurement shall be taken at a point on the trunk six inches above
the natural ground line for trees up to four inches in "caliper" and at a
point 12 inches above the natural ground line for trees over four inches
in "caliper."
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a street right-of-way intended for
vehicular use.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area within a triangle bounded by
any two intersecting street lines and a straight line drawn between
points on each such line 30 feet from the intersection of said lines or
extensions thereof.169
CONDOMINIUM — A dwelling unit which is owned and maintained in
accordance with the Uniform Condominium Act of July 2, 1980, P.L.
286, No. 82.170[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
CROSSWALK — A publicly- or privately-owned right-of-way for
pedestrian use which crosses a cartway or cuts across a block so as to
furnish access for pedestrians to adjacent streets or properties.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street intersecting another street at one end and
terminating at the other in a paved vehicular turnaround.
DENSITY — A measure expressed in dwelling units per acre, calculated
by dividing the total number of dwelling units by the site area.171
DESIGN STANDARDS — Regulations, as stated in Article V, imposing
standards in the layout by which a subdivision or land development is
governed.
DEVELOPER — See the definition of "subdivider."
DWELLING — A building containing one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
residential building and forming a single, habitable unit with facilities
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by
one family exclusively.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
169. Editor's Note: A diagram illustrating a clear sight triangle is included at the end of the
chapter.
170. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
171. Editor's Note: A diagram illustrating density is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-6 CHARTER § 255-6
C:623
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying the same dwelling unit and
living and cooking as a single housekeeping unit, said unit consisting
only of individuals who are related by blood, marriage or otherwise
by law, except that such unit may also consist of foster children and
one other individual not related to others in the housekeeping unit. A
"family" as herein defined specifically excludes individuals and groups
occupying a boarding- or rooming house, lodging house, club,
fraternity, dormitory, hotel or other similar living environment.[Added
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
FLOODPLAIN — The low area adjoining and including any water or
drainage course or body of water subject to a one-hundred-yearrecurrence-
interval flood, as delineated by the Flood Insurance Study
for the Township of Radnor, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, as
prepared by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Federal Insurance Administration.
FLOODPLAIN SOILS — Soils in areas subject to periodic overflow
and listed in the Soil Survey of Chester and Delaware Counties,
Pennsylvania, United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, 1959, as amended, as being subject to flooding.
"Floodplain soils" include but are not limited to:
FOREST — Areas, groves or stands of mature or largely mature trees
(i.e. greater than six inches in caliper) covering an area greater than
1/4 acre; or groves of mature trees (greater than 12 inches in caliper)
consisting of more than 10 individual trees.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — That portion of a tract where, due to surface
coverage, the water runoff coefficient is 0.85 or more, as determined by
the Township Engineer.172
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — A measurement calculated by
dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces within the site or lot
by the site area or lot area respectively.
IMPROVEMENTS SPECIFICATIONS — Regulations, as stated in Article
VI, imposing minimum standards for the construction of required
(1) Bowmansville silt loam.
(2) Chewacla silt loam.
(3) Congaree silt loam.
(4) Lindside silt loam.
(5) Melvin silt loam.
(6) Rowland silt loam.
(7) Wehadkee silt loam.
172. Editor's Note: A diagram illustrating an impervious surface is located at the end of this
chapter.
§ 255-6 RADNOR CODE § 255-6
C:624
improvements, including but not limited to streets, curbs, sidewalks
and sewers.
LAKES AND PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain
water year round. Artificial ponds may be created by dams or result
from excavation. The shoreline of such water bodies shall be measured
from the spillway crest elevation rather than the permanent pool, if
there is any difference. "Lakes" are bodies of water two or more acres
in extent. "Ponds" are any water body less than two acres in extent.
LAND DEVELOPMENT[Amended 5-26-1987 by Ord. No. 87-13;
10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49] —
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A professional landscape architect
registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LEVEL OF SERVICE — Level of service as described in the 1965
Highway Capacity Manual, indicating the quality of traffic movement
on a particular street or through a specific intersection.
LOT — A parcel of land used or set aside and available for use as the
site of one or more buildings, and any building thereto, or for any other
purpose, in single ownership.174
The improvements of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure.
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Those activities described in Section 503(1.1) of the Municipalities
Planning Code173 shall not be considered land developments for
purposes of this chapter.
(3)
CORNER LOT — A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135°
at the intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved
street or streets shall be considered a "corner lot" if the tangent to
the curve at the points beginning within the lot or at the points of
intersection of the side lot lines with the street lines intersect at an
angle of less than 135°.
(1)
173. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
174. Editor's Note: A diagram illustrating various kinds of lots is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 255-6 CHARTER § 255-6
C:625
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot
shown on a subdivision plan or required by this chapter less the
following:[Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-20]
LOT CONSOLIDATION — The joining together of two or more
contiguous but separately deeded parcels of land.[Added 5-8-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-10]
MAJOR INTERSECTION — Any intersection of one or more collector or
arterial streets.
MARKER — A metal pipe or pin of at least 1/2 inch in diameter and at
least 24 inches in length.
MONUMENT — A stone or concrete monument with a flat top of at
least four inches square, scored with an X to mark the reference point,
at least 30 inches in length, the bottom sides of which are at least two
inches greater than the top to minimize movements caused by frost.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended and
reenacted by Act 170 of 1988, 53 P.S. 10101 et seq., and any subsequent
amendments thereto.[Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
INTERIOR LOT — A lot containing a narrow projecting segment
which is the sole means of access from a street. Said segment shall
have a minimum width of 20 feet.
(2)
THROUGH LOT — A lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
(3)
REGULAR LOT — A lot rectangular in shape, with a depth
approximately 1 1/2 to 2 1/2 times its width, the width of which
shall front a street.
(4)
DEPTH OF LOT — The mean distance from the street line of the
lot to its opposite rear line measured in the general direction of the
side lines of the lot.
(5)
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured between the side lot lines
at the required building setback line. In a case where there is only
one side lot line, lot width shall be measured between such side lot
line and the opposite rear lot line or street line.
(6)
(1) Seventy-five percent of the calculated one-hundred-year floodplain.
Seventy-five percent of the wetlands as defined by § 255-20B(4)(d)
of the Code not within the calculated one-hundred-year floodplain.
(2)
Seventy-five percent of the slopes equal to or in excess of 20% of
the area not within the one-hundred-year floodplain and wetlands.
(3)
The land area within an existing public right-of-way located within
any R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-6 Residential Zoning
District. [Added 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-15]
(4)
§ 255-6 RADNOR CODE § 255-6
C:626
OPEN SPACE — A portion of a tract available and accessible for use by
the residents of the tract, unless dedicated to the Township, generally
undeveloped. "Open space" may include areas of steep slopes,
floodplains and other significant features to be preserved. "Open space"
shall not include street or street rights-of-way, parking areas, yards and
lots of individual dwelling units or other public improvements nor does
it include required buffer areas. "Open space" uses may include active
and passive recreation.
OPEN SPACE RATIO — The total amount of open space within a site
divided by the site area.175
PARK — A tract of land for ornament and as a place for the resort of the
public for recreation and amusement.
PEAK-HOUR TRAFFIC — The highest number of vehicles found or
expected to be found, during the a.m. and p.m. hours, passing over a
section of street in 60 consecutive minutes.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plan, including all
required supplementary data, prepared for official recording as
required by statute, defining property rights and proposed streets and
other improvements.
PLAN, IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION — A plan or set of plans
and supporting documents prepared by an engineer detailing the
engineering specifications for streets, sanitary sewers, stormwater
drainage facilities and other improvements required by this chapter.
PLANNING MODULE FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT — An application
required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Section 71.15(b)
and (c) of Chapter 71, Administration of the Sewage Facilities Program,
as amended.176
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative, formal subdivision plan, including
all required supplementary data, showing proposed street and lot
layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of the final plan.
PLAN, RECORD — The copy of the final plan which contains the original
required endorsements of the Township and which is intended to be
recorded with the Delaware County Recorder of Deeds.
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan indicating salient existing features
of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of a proposed
subdivision.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. Such "notice" shall state the time and place of any hearing
175. Editor's Note: A diagram illustrating the open space ratio is included at the end of this
chapter.
176. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 255-6 CHARTER § 255-6
C:627
or meeting and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at
the hearing or meeting. The first publication shall not be more than 30
days and the second publication shall not be less than seven days prior
to the date of the hearing or meeting.[Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No.
90-49]
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION — Transportation service for the general
public provided by a common carrier of passengers, generally on a
regular route basis.
RESUBDIVISION — Any replatting or new division of land. Replattings
shall be considered as constituting a new subdivision of land. See the
definition of "subdivision."
REVIEW — An examination of the sketch plan, preliminary plan or final
plan to determine compliance with Chapter 280, Zoning, this chapter
and other pertinent requirements.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land set aside for passage, such as a utility, street,
alley or other means of travel.
SEWER — A public or private sanitary sewer system.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to the driver of a
passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view
is unobstructed by traffic. Sight distance measurement shall be made
from a point 3.75 feet above the center line of the road surface to a
point 0.5 feet above the center line of road surface.177
SITE — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land intended to have one or
more buildings or intended to be subdivided into two or more lots.
SITE AMENITY — A public space improvement, including but not
limited to landscaping, sidewalks, street lighting and parking.[Added
10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-27]
EXISTING RIGHT-OF-WAY — The legal right-of-way as established
by the commonwealth or other appropriate governing authority
and currently in existence.
(1)
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way deemed necessary
by the Radnor Township Comprehensive Plan as appropriate to
provide adequate width for future street improvements.
(2)
PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM — Any system, approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and Radnor
Township, which collects sewage and/or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature from two or more lots and treats and/or disposes such
sewage and/or industrial wastes at a common plant on another site.
(1)
PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEM — A system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving a single lot which collects or disposes of sewage,
in whole or in part, into the soil on the same lot.
(2)
177. Editor's Note: Diagrams illustrating sight distance are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-6 RADNOR CODE § 255-6
C:628
SITE AREA — All land area within the site, calculated from an actual
site survey rather than from a deed description.
SOLICITOR — The solicitor of Radnor Township, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
STEEP SLOPES — Areas subject to regulations by § 280-112 of the
Code of the Township of Radnor, as amended.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare used or intended to be used
for passage or travel by motor vehicles. Streets are further classified
according to the functions they perform.
STREET LINE — The existing or proposed right-of-way line.
STUDY AREA — An area extending 1/2 mile along a street adjacent to
the site in both directions from all proposed or existing access points
or to and including a major intersection with a collector or arterial,
whichever area is greater.
EXPRESSWAYS — Limited access highways, with full grade
separation, serving a large volume of high-speed through traffic
designed for an operating speed of 70 miles per hour.
(1)
ARTERIALS — Major regional highways, with full or partial access
control, designed for a large volume of through traffic. An ADT
count of 10,000 trips or greater and an intended operating speed
of 60 miles per hour is expected.
(2)
MAJOR COLLECTORS — Streets designed to provide access
between local and minor collector streets and arterials and
expressways. Access is controlled by limiting curb cuts. An ADT
count of 3,501 to 10,000 trips and an intended operating speed of
50 miles per hour is expected. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-03]
(3)
MINOR COLLECTORS — Streets which primarily serve to connect
local streets with major collectors and arterials. An ADT count of
651 to 3,500 trips and an intended operating speed of 40 miles per
hour is expected.
(4)
LOCAL STREETS — Streets used primarily to provide access to
more heavily traveled streets for abutting properties in internally
developed areas. An ADT count of up to 650 trips and an intended
operating speed of 30 miles per hour is expected.
(5)
COURTS — Local non-through residential streets which are
typically designed as culs-de-sac or loops. An ADT count of less
than 100 trips and an intended design speed of 20 miles per hour
is expected.178
(6)
178. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (7), marginal access streets, was repealed 1-2-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-03.
§ 255-6 CHARTER § 255-6
C:629
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, partnership, copartnership or
corporation, or agent authorized thereby, which undertakes the
development or subdivision of land as defined by this chapter as the
owner, or agent authorized thereby, of the land being developed or
subdivided.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access of any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No.
90-49]
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — The division of a lot or tract of land or
part thereof into two or more lots or tracts for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or of building
development not defined as a minor subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — The division of a lot or tract of land into five
or less lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or of building development of less than three acres, provided
that the proposed lots thereby created have frontage on an improved
street or streets, and provided further that there is not created by the
subdivision any new street or the extension of an existing street.
SURVEYOR — A surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A registered engineer designated by the
Board of Commissioners to perform the duties of engineer as herein
specified.
TRACT — A lot or parcel of land; an area of real estate.
TRIP GENERATION RATES — The total count of trips expected to and
from a particular land use.
VOLUME/CAPACITY ANALYSIS — A procedure, as described in the
1965 Highway Capacity Manual, Highway Research Board Special
Report 87, which compares the volume of a street or intersection
approach to its capacity (maximum number of vehicles that can pass a
given point during a given time period).
WARRANTS FOR TRAFFIC SIGNAL INSTALLATION — A series of
justifications which detail the minimum traffic or pedestrian volumes
or other criteria necessary for the installation of a traffic signal. These
warrants are contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways, United States Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, 1971, Sections 4C-1
through 4C-10.
§ 255-6 RADNOR CODE § 255-6
C:630
WATER SUPPLY, CENTRAL — Any municipal water supply system or
any private system franchised to serve the public. Such systems shall
include any existing private franchise area and the entire system or
a water supply capable of supporting the entire development or a
standpipe or water-storage system meeting Township specifications.
WATER SUPPLY, PRIVATE — A system for supplying and distributing
water to a single dwelling or other building from a source located on
the same lot.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface
or ground water at a frequency or duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas; or as further
defined by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.[Amended 6-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-28; 10-22-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-49; 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 91-41]
§ 255-6 CHARTER § 255-6
C:631

ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 255-7. Intent; applicability.
It is the intention of the Board of Commissioners to exercise, through
adoption of this chapter, the maximum lawful jurisdiction over subdivision
and land development permitted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, its amendments or successors. Without limitation, in the
exercise of this power, the following are subject to the provisions thereof:
§ 255-8. Enforcement.
A. Any subdivision.
B. Any land development.
C. Any resubdivision.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the person or agency specifically so
directed in any provision hereof or by the Township Manager or by any
person or agency designated by the Board of Commissioners or
Township Manager from time to time.
B. Inspection of actual construction under any approved subdivision plan
shall be the sole responsibility of the Township, which shall undertake
reasonable measures to provide an adequate inspection of all projects.
C. Any action not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a cease-and-desist order and other appropriate measures
necessary to obtain or produce compliance with this chapter.
D. In addition to other remedies, the Board of Commissioners may
institute and maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction,
to recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure or premises. [Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
E. The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
[Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation, without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee has
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
§ 255-7 CHARTER § 255-8
C:633
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation, without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation, without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee has actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
F. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Township may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property. [Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
G. Adjacent lots with the identical zoning classification and owned by the
same person may be consolidated by recording a deed describing the
lots as a single parcel, without subdivision plan approval, where the
only change being made to a lot line is the elimination of one or more of
them, subject to administrative review by the Township Engineer and
the Director of Community Development. This exemption from the
approval procedures set forth in this Chapter shall be subject to the
following: [Added 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-10; amended
5-23-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-14]
(1) A statement must be placed in the deed acknowledging that it is a
deed of consolidation intended to merge the lots and that any
future independent use of the lots would require subdivision
approval.
(2) The land development application to the Engineering Department
shall constitute an application to amend the Township's parcel map
to show the consolidation.
(3) Each deed submitted for consolidation and recording shall have
attached thereto a plan prepared, signed and sealed by a
registered engineer or surveyor in the State of Pennsylvania
showing the metes and bounds, gross and net (after deducting the
rights-of-way of any public or private street) areas and error of
closure of the consolidated lot. The error of closure shall not be
greater than one part in 5,000.
(4) Upon merger by deed, adjacent lots shall lose their separate
identity for all purposes relating to their individual development.
(5) This administrative review exemption shall not apply in any of the
following circumstances:
(a) When more than three parcels are involved in the
consolidation.
§ 255-8 RADNOR CODE § 255-8
C:634
§ 255-9. Fees; escrow account.
§ 255-10. Final plan approval required.
No lot, unit or other section of a subdivision shall be sold, leased or
otherwise transferred, nor shall a building permit be issued unless a final
plan has been approved and recorded.
§ 255-11. Relief from unnecessary hardship. [Amended 10-22-1990
by Ord. No. 90-49]
(b) When the area of the proposed consolidated parcel exceeds
twice the minimum lot size for the zoning district.
(c) When there is a change of use or an expansion of an existing
commercial or industrial use.
A. The Board of Commissioners shall establish a schedule of fees and a
collection procedure for all applications and other matters pertaining to
these regulations.179 The applicant shall be required to submit an
additional fee to the Delaware County Planning Commission to cover
the review process. No action shall be taken until all fees are paid and
the applications are properly signed.
B. The applicant shall furnish an escrow fund sufficient to pay all fees and
costs required by this chapter. The escrow fund shall be paid when
preliminary plans (or final plans) are submitted for review and
approval. Application fees shall be fixed by the Board of Commissioners
from time to time. The escrow fund shall be sufficient to guarantee the
payment of the services of the Township Engineer and Township
Solicitor related to review and consideration of the application and all
other costs for engineering, traffic surveys and professional
certification deemed necessary by the Board of Commissioners in
reviewing plans.
A. The Board of Commissioners may grant a modification of the
requirements of one or more provisions of this chapter, if the literal
enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modification will
not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of
this chapter is observed.
B. Any request for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of the chapter involved
and the minimum modification necessary.
179. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Fees.
§ 255-8 CHARTER § 255-11
C:635
C. The Board of Commissioners may refer the request for modification to
the Township Planning Commission for advisory comments.
D. In granting modifications, the Board of Commissioners may impose
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards and requirements so modified.
E. The Township shall keep a written record of all action on all requests for
modifications.
§ 255-11 RADNOR CODE § 255-11
C:636
ARTICLE III
Procedure
§ 255-12. General provisions. [Amended 6-12-1989 by Ord. No.
89-23]
A. There are three stages in the procedure for approval of subdivision and
land development plans. These stages are necessary to enable the
Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners to have an
adequate opportunity to review the submission and to ensure that their
formal recommendations are reflected in the final plans. The separate
stages of approval include the submission of an optional sketch plan, a
preliminary plan and a a final plan. These plans differ in their purpose
and required level of detail. The table below indicates the
recommended and required plans for the different types of submissions:
Plan Approval
Stage Type of Submission
Plan
Minor
Subdivision
Major
Subdivision
Land
Development
Sketch (§ 255-13) Recommended Recommended Recommended
Preliminary
(§ 255-14)
Not required Required Required
Final (§§ 255-15 and
255-16)
Required Required Required
B. Sketch plans shall require no more than a sixty-day review period. The
review process required for preliminary and final plans shall include no
more than 90 days, starting from the date of the regular meeting of the
Planning Commission next following the date the application is
accepted by the Township Engineer and ending with the applicant
being notified of the decision of the Board of Commissioners.
C. The submission of amended or revised plans, whether in the form of a
sketch, preliminary or final plan, shall constitute a new application
date, and the 60 or 90 days mentioned above for the required review
process shall begin upon the date of resubmission of the amended or
revised plans.
D. The presentation of a preliminary plan and a final plan shall each be
considered a separate submission, and the maximum ninety-day review
period may be required for each. A sixty-day review period may be
required for a sketch plan. No limitations for the action of any public
official or agency set forth in this article shall be construed as
mandatory.
E. The applicant is encouraged to meet informally with the Township
Engineer and the Director of Community Development to obtain
information regarding zoning and subdivision requirements and
development alternatives prior to the initial submission.
§ 255-12 CHARTER § 255-13
C:637
§ 255-13. Sketch plan.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of the sketch plan, which is an optional submission, is
to afford the applicant the opportunity to consult early and
informally with both the Planning Commission, the Director of
Community Development and the Township Engineer before the
preparation of the preliminary plan and formal application for
approval.
(2) During the sketch plan procedure, the applicant can
advantageously make use of the services of the Planning
Commission, the Director of Community Development and the
Township Engineer to help him analyze the problem of the
development and plan more adequately for its sound coordination
with the community. The sketch plan procedure also affords the
opportunity to give informal guidance to the applicant at a stage
when potential points of difference can be more easily resolved. It
can also simplify official action and save unnecessary expense and
delay.
B. Deposit and fees. The Township shall collect and transmit all fees to
applicable agencies.
C. Procedure.180
(1) The applicant shall prepare the sketch plan and application form,
including the data specified in § 255-19.
(2) The applicant shall submit 15 copies of the sketch plan and one
application form to the Township Engineer. [Amended 5-26-1987
by Ord. No. 87-13]
(3) The Township Engineer shall check the submission for
completeness and, if the submission is incomplete, shall notify the
applicant within seven days and indicate the deficiencies. If the
application is complete, the Township Engineer shall accept the
sketch plan and application form.
(4) The Township Engineer shall retain four copies and immediately
distribute copies of the sketch plan and application form in the
following manner:
(a) One copy to the Delaware County Planning Commission.
(b) Nine copies to the Planning Commission. [Amended
5-26-1987 by Ord. No. 87-13]
(c) One copy to the Radnor Township Zoning Officer.
180. Editor's Note: A diagram outlining sketch plan procedure is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 255-13 RADNOR CODE § 255-13
C:638
§ 255-14. Preliminary plan.
(5) The Zoning Officer shall, within 30 days following acceptance of the
sketch plan application, review the zoning considerations in the
applicant's submission and make recommendations to the
Township Engineer.
(6) The Planning Commission may, within 30 days following
acceptance of the sketch plan application, meet with the applicant
to review the submission.
(7) The Township Engineer shall, within 30 days following acceptance
of the sketch plan application:
(a) Review the engineering, design and site planning
considerations in the applicant's submission.
(b) Review the recommendations of the Zoning Officer.
(c) Prepare a report for the Planning Commission and the
applicant.
(8) The Delaware County Planning Commission may review the sketch
plan and prepare a report for the Township Engineer and the
Planning Commission.
(9) The Planning Commission shall, within 60 days following
acceptance of the sketch plan application:
(a) Review the reports on the submission by the Township
Engineer and the Delaware County Planning Commission.
(b) Determine whether the sketch plan meets the objectives and
requirements of this chapter and other pertinent regulations
and ordinances.
(c) Recommend revisions, if any, so that the subsequent
preliminary or final plan will conform to Township regulations
and ordinances.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary plan is to obtain formal
conditional approval in order to minimize changes and revisions before
final plans are submitted.
B. General.
(1) A preliminary plan shall be submitted conforming to the changes
recommended during the sketch plan procedure, if any.
(2) The preliminary plan and all information and procedures relating
thereto shall, in all respects, be in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter, except where variation therefrom may be required
pursuant to § 255-11.
§ 255-13 CHARTER § 255-14
C:639
C. Deposit and fee.
(1) Deposits and fees for the different types of subdivision and land
development submissions are listed in the Radnor Township Fee
Schedule.181 Fees, pursuant to the Delaware County Planning
Commission Fee Schedule, may also be required.
(2) The Township shall collect and immediately deposit all Township
fees in the proper Township bank account, as directed by the Board
of Commissioners, and shall collect and transmit all other fees to
applicable agencies.
D. Procedure.182
(1) The applicant shall prepare the preliminary plan and application
form as specified in §§ 255-18 and 255-20.
(2) The applicant shall submit to the Township Engineer:
(a) Eighteen copies of the preliminary plan. [Amended
5-26-1987 by Ord. No. 87-13]
(b) The Radnor Township subdivision and land development
application form.
(c) The Delaware County Planning Commission application form.
(d) The application for the planning module for land development.
(3) The Township Engineer shall check the submission for
completeness and, if the submission is incomplete, shall notify the
applicant within 14 days and indicate the deficiencies. If the
submission is complete, the Township Engineer shall accept the
preliminary plan and applications.
(4) The Township Engineer shall retain two copies and immediately
distribute the preliminary plan and applications in the following
manner: [Amended 5-26-1987 by Ord. No. 87-13]
(a) Four copies of the plan to the Delaware County Planning
Commission.
(b) One copy of the plan to the Delaware County Conservation
District.
(c) Nine copies of the plan to the Planning Commission.
(d) One copy of the plan to the Radnor Township Public Works
Department.
(e) One copy of the plan to the Radnor Township Zoning Officer.
181. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Fees.
182. Editor's Note: A diagram outlining preliminary plan procedure is located at the end of this
chapter.
§ 255-14 RADNOR CODE § 255-14
C:640
(f) The application for the planning module for land development
to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
(5) The Zoning Officer shall, within 30 days following acceptance of the
preliminary plan application:
(a) Review the proposed zoning considerations in the application's
submission.
(b) Make recommendations to the Township Engineer.
(6) The Public Works Department shall, within 30 days following
acceptance of the preliminary plan application:
(a) Review the proposed public improvements in the applicant's
submission.
(b) Make recommendations to the Township Engineer.
(7) The Township Engineer shall, within 40 days following acceptance
of the preliminary plan application:
(a) Review the engineering, design and site planning
considerations in the applicant's submission.
(b) Review the recommendations of the Zoning Officer and Public
Works Department.
(c) Prepare a report for the Planning Commission, Board of
Commissioners and the applicant.
(8) The Delaware County Planning Commission shall review the
preliminary plan and prepare a report for the Township Engineer,
Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners. The Board of
Commissioners shall not approve or deny any preliminary plan until
it has received the report from the County Planning Commission or
until 30 days have been allowed for receipt of such report.
[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
(9) The Planning Commission shall, within 60 days following
acceptance of the preliminary plan application: [Amended
5-28-1985 by Ord. No. 85-13]
(a) Meet with the applicant at its scheduled meeting to discuss the
plan. Failure of the applicant to appear at this meeting, after
proper notification, may result in the subdivision application
being denied.
(b) Review the reports on the submission by the Township
Engineer and Delaware County Planning Commission and
other pertinent reports. The Planning Commission may also
solicit reviews and reports from adjacent municipalities and
other governmental agencies affected by the plan. [Amended
10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
§ 255-14 CHARTER § 255-14
C:641
(c) Determine whether the preliminary plan meets the objectives
and requirements of this chapter and other pertinent
regulations and ordinances.
(d) Recommend revisions, if any, so the plan will conform to
Township regulations and ordinances.
(e) Recommend approval or disapproval of the preliminary plan in
a written report to the Board of Commissioners.
(10) The Board of Commissioners shall, within 75 days following
acceptance of the preliminary plan application: [Amended
5-28-1985 by Ord. No. 85-13]
(a) Meet with the applicant at its scheduled caucus meeting to
discuss the plan. Failure of the applicant to appear at this
meeting after proper notification may result in the subdivision
application being denied.
(b) Review the reports of the Planning Commission, Delaware
County Planning Commission, Township Engineer and other
pertinent reviewing agencies.
(c) Determine whether the preliminary plan meets the objectives
and requirements of this chapter and other pertinent
regulations and ordinances.
(d) Recommend revisions, if any, so the plan will conform to
Township regulations and ordinances.
(e) Approve or disapprove the preliminary plan. If approved, the
Board of Commissioners shall express its approval and state
the condition of approval, if any, in writing. Whenever approval
is subject to such specified conditions, the written action of the
Board of Commissioners also shall require the written approval
of the applicant to the conditions. If such written approval of
the conditions is not received by the Board of Commissioners
within the time period required by this chapter for a decision,
the plan shall be deemed to have been denied by the Board of
Commissioners. If disapproved, the Board of Commissioners
shall state the reasons for this action. [Amended 10-22-1990
by Ord. No. 90-49]
(11) The decision of the Board of Commissioners shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant (or his agent) personally or
mailed to him at the last known address not later than 15 days
following the decision.
(12) Approval of the preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of
the final plan or authorize the sale of lots or construction of
buildings.
§ 255-14 RADNOR CODE § 255-14
C:642
§ 255-15. Final plan for major subdivision or land development.
(13) If the preliminary plan is disapproved, the applicant may file a
revised preliminary plan with the Township Engineer in order to
secure approval. The normal fee will be charged for this revision.
[Amended 11-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-46]
(14) If the preliminary plan is approved, the Township may submit a
copy of the approved plan to the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the final plan is to require formal approval by
the Board of Commissioners before plans for all subdivisions and land
developments are recorded as by § 255-17.
B. General. The final plan shall conform to the preliminary plan, as
approved. The final plan and all information and procedures relating
thereto shall, in all respects, be in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, except where variation therefrom may be specifically
approved by the Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 255-11.
C. Deposit and fee.
(1) Deposits and fees for the different types of subdivision and land
development submissions are listed in the Radnor Township Fee
Schedule.183 Fees pursuant to the Delaware County Planning
Commission Fee Schedule may also be required.
(2) The Township shall collect and immediately deposit all Township
fees collected in the proper Township bank account, as directed by
the Board of Commissioners, and shall collect and transmit all
other fees to applicable agencies.
D. Procedure.184
(1) The applicant shall prepare the final plan and application form as
specified in §§ 255-18 and 255-21.
(2) The applicant shall prepare planning modules for land development
as required in Chapter 71 of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act.185
(3) The applicant shall submit to the Township Engineer:
(a) Twelve copies of the final plan.
(b) The Radnor Township subdivision and land development
application form.
183. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Fees.
184. Editor's Note: A diagram outlining final plan procedure is included at the end of this
chapter.
185. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 255-14 CHARTER § 255-15
C:643
(c) The Delaware County Planning Commission application form.
(d) Three copies of the planning modules for land development.
(4) The Township Engineer shall check the submission for
completeness and, if the submission is incomplete, shall notify the
applicant within 14 days and indicate the deficiencies. If the
submission is complete, the Township Engineer shall accept the
final plan, applications and planning modules.
(5) The Township Engineer shall retain four copies of the plan and one
copy of the planning module; and immediately distribute copies of
the final plan, applications and planning modules in the following
manner:
(a) Four copies of the plan and one copy of the planning module to
the Delaware County Planning Commission.
(b) One copy of the plan to the Planning Commission.
(c) One copy of the plan to the Radnor Township Public Works
Department.
(d) One copy of the plan to the Radnor Township Zoning Officer.
(e) One copy of the plan and one copy of the planning module to
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
(6) The Zoning Officer shall, within 30 days following acceptance of the
final plan application:
(a) Review the zoning considerations in the applicant's
submission.
(b) Make recommendations to the Township Engineer.
(7) The Public Works Department shall, within 30 days following
acceptance of the final plan application:
(a) Review the proposed public improvements in the applicant's
submission.
(b) Make recommendations to the Township Engineer.
(8) The Planning Commission may, within 30 days following
acceptance of the final plan application, meet with the applicant to
review the submission.
(9) The Township Engineer shall, within 40 days following acceptance
of the final plan application:
(a) Review the engineering, design and site planning
considerations in the applicant's submission.
§ 255-15 RADNOR CODE § 255-15
C:644
(b) Review the recommendations of the Zoning Officer and Public
Works Department.
(c) Prepare a report for the Planning Commission, Board of
Commissioners and the applicant.
(10) The Delaware County Planning Commission shall review the final
plan and prepare a report for the Township Engineer, Planning
Commission and Board of Commissioners. The Board shall not
approve or deny any final plan until it has received the report from
the County Planning Commission or until 30 days have been
allowed for the receipt of said report. [Amended 10-22-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-49]
(11) The Planning Commission shall, within 60 days following
acceptance of the final plan application: [Amended 5-28-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-13]
(a) Meet with the applicant at its scheduled meeting to discuss the
plan. Failure of the applicant to appear at this meeting, after
proper notification, may result in the subdivision application
being denied.
(b) Review the reports on the submission by the Township
Engineer, Delaware County Planning Commission and other
pertinent reports. The Planning Commission also may solicit
reviews and reports from adjacent municipalities and other
governmental agencies affected by the plan. [Amended
10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
(c) Determine whether the final plan meets the objectives and
requirements of this chapter and other pertinent regulations
and ordinances.
(d) Recommend revisions, if any, so that the plan will conform to
Township regulations and ordinances.
(e) Recommend approval or disapproval of the final plan to the
Board of Commissioners.
(12) The Board of Commissioners shall, within 75 days following the
date of the first meeting of the Planning Commission next following
the date of the acceptance of the final plan application: [Amended
5-28-1985 by Ord. No. 85-13]
(a) Meet with the applicant at its scheduled caucus meeting to
discuss the plan. Failure of the applicant to appear at this
meeting, after proper notification, may result in the subdivision
application being denied.
(b) Review the reports of the Planning Commission, Delaware
County Planning Commission, Township Engineer and other
reviewing agencies.
§ 255-15 CHARTER § 255-15
C:645
§ 255-16. Final plan for minor subdivision.
(c) Determine whether the final plan meets the objectives and
requirements of this chapter and other pertinent regulations
and ordinances.
(d) Recommend revisions, if any, so that the plan will conform to
Township regulations and ordinances.
(e) Approve or disapprove the final plan. If approved, the Board of
Commissioners shall express its approval and state the
conditions of approval, if any, in writing. Whenever approval is
subject to such specified conditions, the written action of the
Board shall also require the written approval of the applicant
to the conditions. If such written approval of the conditions is
not received by the Board within the time period required for a
decision, as specified by this chapter, the plan shall be deemed
to have been denied by the Board. If disapproved, the Board of
Commissioners shall state the reasons for this action.
[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
(13) The decision of the Board of Commissioners shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant (or his agent) personally or
mailed to him at the last known address, not later than 15 days
following the decision.
(14) If the final plan is approved:
(a) The Board of Commissioners shall adopt a resolution
approving the final plan.
(b) Approval shall not be final until entry into contract and
production of completion guaranty as set forth in Article VII.
(c) Two exact copies of the approved final plan on linen, with the
signatures of the required agencies as specified in § 255-23,
shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners.
(15) If the final plan is disapproved, the applicant may file a revised final
plan with the Township Engineer in order to secure approval. The
normal fee will be charged for this revision. [Amended
11-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-46]
A. Purpose. In the case of minor subdivisions, it is the purpose of this
section to provide a simplified procedure by which said minor
subdivision may be submitted and approved.
B. General. In the event that the proposed subdivision shall involve a
change in the location of streets, then the provisions of this section on
minor subdivisions shall not be applicable and the owner shall be
required to comply with the requirements of § 255-15.
C. Deposit and fees.
§ 255-15 RADNOR CODE § 255-16
C:646
(1) Deposits and fees for the submission of a minor subdivision plan
are listed in the Radnor Township Fee Schedule.186 Fees, pursuant
to the Delaware County Planning Commission Fee Schedule, may
also be required.
(2) The Township shall immediately deposit all Township fees collected
in the proper Township bank account, as directed by the Board of
Commissioners, and shall transmit all other fees to applicable
agencies.
D. Procedure.
(1) The applicant shall prepare a minor subdivision plan and
application form as specified in §§ 255-18 and 255-22.
(2) The applicant shall prepare planning modules for land development
as required by Chapter 71 of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act,187 if required by the Township Engineer.
(3) The applicant shall submit to the Township Engineer:
(a) Eighteen copies of the final minor subdivision plan. [Amended
5-26-1987 by Ord. No. 87-13]
(b) The Radnor Township subdivision and land development
application form.
(c) The Delaware County Planning Commission application form.
(d) Two copies of the planning modules for land development.
(4) The Township Engineer shall check the submission for
completeness and, if the submission is incomplete, shall notify the
applicant within seven days and indicate the deficiencies. If the
submission is complete, the Township Engineer shall accept the
final minor subdivision plan, application, planning modules and
fees.
(5) The Township Engineer shall retain two copies of the plan and one
copy of the planning module and immediately distribute copies of
the final minor subdivision plan, applications and planning modules
in the following manner: [Amended 5-26-1987 by Ord. No.
87-13]
(a) Four copies of the plan and one copy of the planning module, if
required, to the Delaware County Planning Commission.
(b) Nine copies of the plan to the Planning Commission.
(c) One copy of the plan to the Radnor Township Public Works
Department.
186. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Fees.
187. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 255-16 CHARTER § 255-16
C:647
(d) One copy of the plan to the Radnor Township Zoning Officer.
(e) One copy of the plan and one copy of the planning module to
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, if
required.
(6) The Zoning Officer shall, within 30 days following acceptance of the
final minor subdivision application:
(a) Review the zoning considerations in the applicant's
submission.
(b) Make recommendations to the Township Engineer.
(7) The Public Works Department shall, within 30 days following
acceptance of the final minor subdivision application:
(a) Review the proposed public improvements in the applicant's
submission, if any.
(b) Make recommendations to the Township Engineer.
(8) The Planning Commission may, within 30 days following
acceptance of the final minor subdivision application, meet with the
applicant to review the submission.
(9) The Township Engineer shall, within 40 days following acceptance
of the final minor subdivision plan application:
(a) Review the engineering, design and site planning
considerations in the applicant's submission.
(b) Review the recommendations of the Zoning Officer and Public
Works Department.
(c) Prepare a report for the Planning Commission, Board of
Commissioners and the applicant.
(10) The Delaware County Planning Commission shall review the final
minor subdivision plan and prepare a report for the Township
Engineer, Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners. The
Board shall not approve or deny any final plan until it has received
the report from the County Planning Commission or until 30 days
have been allowed for the receipt of said report. [Amended
10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
(11) The Planning Commission shall, within 60 days following
acceptance of the final plan application: [Amended 5-28-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-13]
(a) Meet with the applicant at its scheduled meeting to discuss the
plan. Failure of the applicant to appear at this meeting, after
proper notification, may result in the subdivision application
being denied.
§ 255-16 RADNOR CODE § 255-16
C:648
(b) Review the reports on the submission by the Township
Engineer, Delaware County Planning Commission and other
pertinent reports. The Planning Commission also may solicit
reviews and reports from adjacent municipalities and other
governmental agencies affected by the plan. [Amended
10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
(c) Determine whether the final minor subdivision plan meets the
objectives and requirements of this chapter and other
pertinent regulations and ordinances.
(d) Recommend revisions, if any, so the plan will conform to
Township regulations and ordinances.
(e) Recommend approval or disapproval of the final minor
subdivision to the Board of Commissioners.
(12) The Board of Commissioners shall, within 75 days following the
date of the first meeting of the Planning Commission next following
the date of the acceptance of the final minor subdivision plan
application: [Amended 5-28-1985 by Ord. No. 85-13]
(a) Meet with the applicant at its scheduled caucus meeting to
discuss the plan. Failure of the applicant to appear at this
meeting, after proper notification, may result in the subdivision
application being denied.
(b) Review the reports of the Planning Commission, Delaware
County Planning Commission, Township Engineer and other
reviewing agencies.
(c) Determine whether the final minor subdivision plan meets the
objectives and requirements of other pertinent regulations and
ordinances.
(d) Recommend revisions, if any, so the plan will conform to
Township regulations and ordinances.
(e) Approve or disapprove the final minor subdivision plan. If
approved, the Board of Commissioners shall express its
approval and state the conditions of approval, if any, in writing.
Whenever approval is subject to such specified conditions, the
written action of the Board also shall require the written
approval of the applicant to the conditions. If such written
approval of the conditions is not received by the Board within
the time period required for a decision, as specified by this
chapter, the plan shall be deemed to have been denied by the
Board. If disapproved, the Board of Commissioners shall state
the reasons for this action. [Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-49]
§ 255-16 CHARTER § 255-16
C:649
§ 255-17. Recording of final plan.
(13) The decision of the Board of Commissioners shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant (or his agent) personally or
mailed to him at the last known address not later than 15 days
following the decision.
(14) If the final minor subdivision plan is approved, two exact copies of
the approved final minor subdivision plan on linen, with the
signatures required in § 255-23, shall be submitted to the Board of
Commissioners.
(15) If the final minor subdivision plan is disapproved, the applicant may
file a revised final minor subdivision plan with the Township
Engineer in order to secure approval. The normal fee will be
charged for this revision. [Amended 11-11-1991 by Ord. No.
91-46]
A. Copies of the approved final plan shall, within 90 days of the date of
approval, be recorded by the applicant in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Delaware County. No such plan shall be accepted for
recording without official notification of approval by the Board of
Commissioners and of review by the Delaware County Planning
Commission. [Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
B. Effect of recording.
(1) Streets, open space, parks and other public improvements shown
on the subdivision or land development plan to be recorded may be
offered for dedication to the Township by formal notation thereof
on the plan, or the owner may note on the plan that such
improvements have not been offered for dedication to the
Township.
(2) Every street, open space, park or other improvement shown on a
subdivision or land development plan that is recorded, as provided
therein, shall be deemed to be a private street, open space, park or
improvement until such time as the same has been offered for
dedication to the Township and accepted, by ordinance, and
recorded in the office of the Clerk of Common Pleas of Delaware
County or until it has been condemned for use as a public street,
park or improvement.
C. Recorded plan. All plans recorded shall contain the information
specified in § 255-23.
§ 255-16 RADNOR CODE § 255-17
C:650
ARTICLE IV
Application and Plan Requirements
§ 255-18. General application requirements.
For the purpose of having a subdivision or land development considered
and approved by the Planning Commission or Board of Commissioners, the
applicant shall file with the Township Engineer the following items as the
initial submission, in addition to the required number of plans:
§ 255-19. Sketch plan.
A sketch plan may be submitted by the applicant as a basis for informal
discussion with the Planning Commission. Data furnished at this stage shall
include the following information:
A. A signed subdivision and land development application.
B. A title report, including but not limited to a list of all encumbrances
and, if appearing on record, the book and page numbers.
C. A statement setting forth in detail the character of the improvements
the applicant proposes to make on the property to be developed, if
known.
D. A development schedule indicating the approximate date when
construction can be expected to begin and be completed, if known.
E. A copy of all restrictions, covenants and limitations, if any, under which
lots are to be sold.
F. Appropriate evidence that the applicant is the owner or has an
equitable interest in the property.
G. A statement concerning ownership of the applicant.
A. Site plan, showing:
(1) The name of the subdivision or land development.
(2) The name and address of the owner/applicant.
(3) The name and address of the engineer, surveyor, architect,
landscape architect or planner responsible for the plan.
(4) Zoning requirements,188 including:
(a) Applicable district and district boundaries.
(b) Maximum density permitted and proposed density, if
applicable.
(c) Lot size and yard requirements.
188. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 255-18 CHARTER § 255-19
C:651
(d) Required and/or proposed open space and impervious surface
coverage ratios.
(e) Average slope.
(f) Any variances or special exceptions granted.
(5) A location map showing the relation of the site to adjoining
properties and streets, within 500 feet (scale: one inch equals 600
feet). [Amended 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15]
(6) The North point.
(7) Written and graphic scales, including scale of location map.
(8) The total acreage of the site.
(9) The site boundaries.
(10) Boundaries of all adjoining properties (with names and addresses
of landowners in the case of unplatted land). [Amended
6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15]
(11) Existing streets on and adjacent to the site with rights-of-way.
(12) Existing principal buildings, and their respective uses, and
driveways on the adjacent peripheral strip; sewer lines, storm
drains, culverts, bridges, utility easements, quarries, railroads and
other significant man-made features within 500 feet of and within
the site (this includes properties across streets).
(13) The proposed general street layout.
(14) The proposed general lot layout.
(15) The types of buildings proposed.
(16) The number of dwelling units proposed.
(17) Parking areas, with dimensions and number of parking spaces.
(18) Open space areas.
(19) Recreation areas.
B. Natural features map. This plan is required for all major subdivision
and land development submissions. For minor subdivisions, the
information below may be included on the site plan. The following
information shall be indicated:
(1) Contour lines measured at intervals of two feet. Slopes may be
determined by interpretation of United States Geological Survey
maps at this stage.
(2) Floodplain areas.
§ 255-19 RADNOR CODE § 255-19
C:652
§ 255-20. Preliminary plan.
(3) Floodplain soil areas.
(4) Steep slope areas.
(5) Forest areas.
(6) Streams.
(7) Lakes and ponds.
(8) Wetlands, where their potential presence is indicated by any one or
more of the following: the National Wetlands Inventory Maps, as
prepared by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service or any
other governmental agency having jurisdiction; hydric soils or soils
with hydric inclusions, as depicted in the Soil Survey of Chester
and Delaware Counties and/or in the United States Department of
Agriculture Soil Conservation Service (USDA SCS) Hydric Soils
Lists; and the existence of hydrophytic vegetation or hydrologic
conditions, as determined by on-site investigations. Upon review of
the information submitted or the applicant's conclusion that no
wetlands appear to exist on the site, the Township may indicate
whether it concurs in these preliminary findings and whether it
feels the applicant should undertake a wetlands delineation as part
of the preliminary plan submission. [Amended 6-26-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-28; 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 91-41]
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of no less than one inch equals
100 feet.
(2) Dimensions shall be set in feet and decimal parts thereof; and
bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(3) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the
total number of sheets.
(4) Where any revision is made or when the plan is a revision of a
previously approved plan, dotted lines shall be used to show
features or locations to be abandoned and solid lines to show the
currently proposed features. Notations of revisions shall be dated.
(5) The plan shall be so prepared and bear an adequate legend to
indicate clearly which features are existing and which are
proposed.
(6) The boundary line of the subdivision shall be shown as a solid heavy
line.
(7) All plans and surveys shall be prepared in accordance with the Act
of May 23, 1945 (P.L. 913, No. 367), known as the "Professional
§ 255-19 CHARTER § 255-20
C:653
Engineers Registration Law."189 [Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No.
90-49]
B. The preliminary plan shall show or be accompanied by the following
information on individual sheets:
(1) Site plan, showing:
(a) The name of subdivision or land development.
(b) The name and address of owner/applicant.
(c) The name and address of the engineer, surveyor, architect or
landscape architect responsible for the plan.
(d) Zoning requirements,190 including:
[1] Applicable district and district boundaries.
[2] Maximum density permitted, if applicable.
[3] Lot size and yard requirements.
[4] Open space and impervious surface ratios, if applicable.
[5] Any variances or special exceptions granted.
(e) Proposed standards:
[1] Density.
[2] Open space ratio.
[3] Impervious surfaces.
[4] Dwelling unit mix, if known.
[5] Size of units (in bedrooms), if known.
(f) Location map showing the relation of the site to adjoining
properties and streets, within 500 feet (scale: one inch equals
600 feet). [Amended 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15]
(g) The North point.
(h) Written and graphic scales, including a scale of location map.
(i) The total acreage of the site.
(j) A complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided or
developed, showing all courses, distances, tie-ins to all
adjacent intersections, and areas.
189. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
190. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 255-20 RADNOR CODE § 255-20
C:654
(k) The location of all existing monuments.
(l) Boundaries of all adjoining properties (with names and
addresses of landowners in the case of unplatted land).
[Amended 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15]
(m) Existing streets and alleys on and adjacent to the site with
rights-of-way.
(n) Existing principal buildings, and their respective uses, and
driveways on the adjacent peripheral strip; sewer lines, storm
drains, culverts, bridges, utility easements, quarries, railroads
and other significant man-made features within 500 feet of and
within the site (this includes properties across streets).
(o) The proposed layout:
[1] The layout and names of streets, including widths of
cartways and rights-of-way; and recommended
improvements pursuant to Subsection B(5)(d)[6] below.
[2] The layout and approximate dimensions, areas and uses of
lots; buildings setback lines and rear and side yard lines.
[3] The arrangement and use of buildings and parking areas in
nonresidential developments and multifamily residential
developments with all necessary dimensions and number
of parking spaces. Elevations and perspective sketches of
proposed buildings are encouraged.
[4] Open space areas and indication as to whether offered for
dedication.
[5] Recreational facilities.
[6] Rights-of-way and/or easements for all drainage facilities,
utilities or other purposes.
[7] Sidewalks and pedestrian paths.
[8] Streetlights.
[9] Fire hydrants.
[10] Monuments.
[11]Water mains.
[12] Driveway locations.
[13] Locations of private sewer systems, if applicable.
(2) Soil map, showing:
§ 255-20 CHARTER § 255-20
C:655
(a) Soil types within the site, based on maps contained in the Soil
Survey of Chester and Delaware Counties, Pennsylvania,
United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service, 1959, as amended. An attached table shall indicate
each soil's limitations for community development.
(b) Contour lines measured at vertical intervals of two feet. Such
elevations shall be determined by on-site survey, not
interpretation of United States Geological Survey maps.
(c) Datum to which contour lines refer. Where practicable, data
shall refer to established elevations.
(d) Floodplain areas.
(e) Base flood elevation data as defined in Chapter 280, Zoning, if
available. If unavailable, the base flood elevation shall be
established as a point on the boundary of the Floodplain
Conservation District, as defined and delineated in Chapter
280, Zoning.
(f) Floodplain soil areas.
(g) Steep slope areas.
(3) Vegetation map, showing:
(a) Forest areas.
(b) Large trees over six inches in caliper. [Amended 6-28-1993
by Ord. No. 93-15]
(c) Other significant vegetation.
(4) Water resources map, showing:
(a) Streams.
(b) Swales.
(c) Lakes and ponds.
(d) Wetlands, where their potential presence is indicated by any
one or more of the following: the National Wetlands Inventory
Maps, as prepared by the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service or any other governmental agency having jurisdiction;
hydric soils or soils with hydric inclusions, as depicted in the
soil survey of Chester and Delaware Counties and/or in the
USDA SCS Hydric Soils Lists; and the existence of hydrophytic
vegetation or hydrologic conditions, as determined by on-site
investigations performed in accordance with the Federal
Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands,
dated January 10, 1989, as later amended. [Amended
10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 91-41]
§ 255-20 RADNOR CODE § 255-20
C:656
[1] If, after examination of the site, a qualified professional
selected by the applicant determines that wetlands are not
located on the site, the following note must appear on the
plan: "This site has been examined by a qualified
professional in accordance with the Federal Manual for
Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, dated
January 10, 1989, as later amended, and no wetlands were
found to exist." In addition, a written statement of the
qualifications of the professional who examined the site
shall accompany the submission.
[2] Should the existence of wetlands be shown by one or more
of the indicators cited above, a wetlands delineation in
accordance with theFederal Manual for Identifying and
Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, dated January 10,
1989, as later amended, shall be performed by a licensed
professional engineer, hydrogeologist, soil scientist or
similarly qualified professional experienced in wetlands
ecology, selected by the applicant. Plans shall be
submitted to the Township for review; such plans shall
show the delineation and any disturbance of wetlands
anticipated. The qualifications of the consultant
performing the delineation shall be submitted with such
plans.
[3] Should the Township Engineer dispute the delineation
submitted by the applicant:
[a] The applicant and the Township may select a mutually
acceptable, qualified professional to reexamine the
site for boundary confirmation or readjustment. All
costs for such work shall be borne by the applicant.
The Township shall, at no time, be held accountable
for any additional boundary modifications imposed by
state or federal agencies. If either party is dissatisfied
with the wetlands boundary as confirmed or adjusted
through this procedure, it shall have the right to
appeal those findings to the appropriate regulatory
agency, including the United States Army Corps of
Engineers, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources or the United States Fish
and Wildlife Service, for final determination.
[b] As an alternative to the procedure described in
Subsection B(4)(d)[3][a] above, the applicant may
appeal the Township Engineer's findings directly to
the appropriate regulatory agency, including the
United States Army Corps of Engineers, the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
or the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, for
boundary confirmation.
§ 255-20 CHARTER § 255-20
C:657
[4] Should the Township conclude, on the basis of the criteria
cited above, that wetlands exist on the site, contrary to the
applicant's findings:
[a] The Township and the applicant may select a mutually
acceptable, qualified professional to reexamine the
site, using the above criteria, to determine if wetlands
exist. All costs for such work shall be borne by the
applicant. The Township shall, at no time, be held
accountable for any wetlands found to exist by any
state or federal agencies.
[b] As an alternative to the procedure described in
Subsection B(4)(d)[4][a] above, the Township may, at
its discretion, request that either the United States
Army Corps of Engineers, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources or the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service verify the
existence of wetlands. In the event that such agency
or agencies verify the existence of wetlands, the
applicant shall be required to perform a delineation in
accordance with the requirements of Subsection
B(4)(d)[2] above and secure any required wetlands
permits or waivers pursuant thereto in accordance
with the requirements of Subsection B(4)(d)[5] below.
[5] Unless it is clearly evident in the plans submitted by the
applicant and/or through any field review by the Township
Engineer that no disturbance to the designated wetlands is
anticipated, the accepted delineation shall be submitted to
the appropriate regulatory agencies, including but not
limited to the United States Army Corps of Engineers and
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources,
for requisite wetlands permits or waivers pursuant
thereto. All potential impacts on wetlands shall conform to
applicable regulations, as amended.
(5) 191Transportation impact study.
(a) A transportation impact study shall be undertaken for all major
subdivisions and land developments as defined in Subsection
B(5)(c) below. This study will enable the Township to assess the
impact of a proposed development on the local transportation
system. Its purpose is to ensure that proposed developments
do not adversely affect the transportation network and to
identify any traffic problems associated with access from the
site to the existing transportation network. The study's
purpose is also to delineate solutions to potential problems and
191. Editor's Note: Former § 120-20B(5), (6), (7) and (8), which immediately preceded this
section, was repealed 5-28-1985 by Ord. No. 85-13.
§ 255-20 RADNOR CODE § 255-20
C:658
to present improvements to be incorporated into the proposed
development. The study shall assist in the protection of air
quality, the conservation of energy and the encouragement of
public transportation.
(b) In accordance with the requirements of the Township, the
traffic impact study shall be prepared by a qualified traffic
engineer with previous traffic study experience. The
procedures and standards for the traffic impact study are set
forth in Subsection B(5)(d) below.
(c) Subdivisions and land developments that require a
transportation impact study.
[1] A transportation impact study shall be required for all
subdivisions and land developments that meet one or more
of the following criteria:
[a] Residential: a development consisting of 50 or more
dwelling units. [Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No.
90-49]
[b] Commercial: a commercial building or buildings
consisting of 50,000 square feet or more of gross
leasable floor space.
[c] Office: a development consisting of 50,000 square feet
or more of gross leasable floor space.
[d] Industrial: a development consisting of 50,000 square
feet or more of gross leasable floor space.
[e] Institutional: all developments.
[2] The Board of Commissioners, at its discretion, may request
the preparation of a traffic impact study for any other
subdivision or land development.
(d) The transportation impact study shall contain, but not be
limited to, the following information:
[1] General site description. The site description shall include
the size, location, proposed land uses, construction
staging and completion date of the proposed land
development. If the development is residential, types of
dwelling units and number of bedrooms shall also be
included. A brief description of other major existing and
proposed land developments within the study area shall be
provided. The general site description shall also include
probable socioeconomic characteristics of potential site
users to the extent that they may affect the transportation
needs of the site (i.e., the number of senior citizens).
§ 255-20 CHARTER § 255-20
C:659
[2] Transportation facilities description.
[a] The description shall contain a full documentation of
the proposed internal and existing external
transportation system. This description shall include
proposed internal vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian
circulation, all proposed ingress and egress locations,
all internal roadway width and rights-of-way, parking
conditions, traffic channelizations and any traffic
signals or other intersection control devices within the
site. The site design shall be shown to maximize
potential public transportation usage to and from the
development, such as providing adequate turning
radii at all access points to allow a bus to enter the
development. Bus shelter and sign locations shall be
designated where appropriate.
[b] The report shall describe the entire external roadway
system within the study area. Major intersections in
the study area shall be identified and sketched. All
existing and proposed public transportation services
and facilities within a one-mile radius of the site shall
also be documented. All future highway
improvements, including proposed construction and
traffic signalization, shall be noted. This information
shall be obtained from the 12-Year Highway Capital
Program for the Delaware Valley Region, the Radnor
Township Comprehensive Plan and from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Any
proposed roadway improvements resulting from
proposed surrounding developments shall also be
recorded.
[3] Existing traffic conditions. Existing traffic conditions shall
be measured and documented for all streets and
intersections in the study area. Traffic volumes shall be
recorded for existing average daily traffic, existing peakhour
traffic and for the subdivision's peak-hour traffic.
Complete traffic counts at all major intersections in the
study area shall be conducted, encompassing the peak
highway and development-generated hour(s), and
documentation shall be included in the report. A volume
capacity analysis based upon existing volumes shall be
performed during the peak hour(s) and the peak
development-generated hour(s) for all roadways and major
intersections in the study area. Levels of service shall be
determined for each location. This analysis will determine
the adequacy of the existing roadway system to serve the
current traffic demand. Roadways and/or intersections
§ 255-20 RADNOR CODE § 255-20
C:660
experiencing Levels of Service E or F shall be noted as
congestion locations.
[4] Transportation impact of the development. Estimation of
vehicular trips to result from the proposal shall be
completed for both the street system and the developmentgenerated
peak hours(s). Vehicular trip generation rates to
be used for this calculation shall be obtained from the Trip
Generation Rates Table, below.192 These developmentgenerated
traffic volumes shall be provided for the
inbound and outbound traffic movements as estimated.
The reference source(s) and methodology followed shall be
cited. These generated volumes shall be distributed to the
study area and assigned to the existing streets and
intersections throughout the study area. Documentation of
all assumptions used in the distribution and assignment
phase shall be provided. Traffic volumes shall be assigned
to all access points. Pedestrian volumes shall also be
calculated, if applicable. If school crossings are to be used,
pedestrian volumes shall be assigned to each crossing. Any
characteristics of the site that will cause unusual trip
generation rates and/or traffic flows shall be noted.
[5] Analysis of transportation impact. The total future traffic
demand based on full occupancy of the proposed
subdivision or land development shall be calculated. This
demand shall consist of the combination of the existing
traffic expanded to the completion year, the development
generated traffic and the traffic generated by other
proposed developments in the study area. A volume/
capacity analysis shall also be conducted using the total
future demand and the future roadway capacity. If staging
of the proposed development is anticipated, calculations
for each stage of completion shall be made. This analysis
shall be performed using the peak highway hour(s) and
peak development-generated hour(s) for all streets and
major intersections in the study area. Volume/capacity
calculations shall be completed for all major intersections.
All access points and pedestrian crossings shall be
examined as to the feasibility of installing traffic signals.
This evaluation shall compare the projected traffic and
pedestrian volumes to the warrants for traffic signal
installation. Levels of service for all streets and
intersections shall be listed.
[6] Conclusions and recommended improvements.
[a] All streets and/or intersections showing a Level of
Service below C shall be considered deficient, and
192. Editor's Note: The Trip Generation Rate Table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-20 CHARTER § 255-20
C:661
§ 255-21. Final plan for major subdivision.
specific recommendations for the elimination of these
problems shall be listed. This listing of recommended
improvements shall include, but not be limited to, the
following elements: internal circulation design, site
access location and design, external street and
intersection design and improvements and traffic
signal installation and operation, including signal
timing and transit-design improvements.
[b] Existing and/or future public transportation service
shall also be addressed. A listing of all actions to be
undertaken to increase present public transportation
usage and improve service, if applicable, shall be
included.
[c] The listing of recommended improvements for both
streets and transit shall include, for each
improvement, the party responsible for the
improvement, the cost and funding of the
improvement and the completion date for the
improvement.
[d] The Planning Commission shall review the
transportation impact study to analyze its adequacy in
solving any traffic problems that will occur due to the
land development or subdivision and make
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners.
[e] The Board of Commissioners may decide that certain
improvements contained in the study on or adjacent to
the site are required for preliminary plan approval
and, if acceptable to the applicant, may attach these
conditions to the preliminary approval.
[f] The improvement plans shall not be submitted to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation until such
plans are approved by the Board of Commissioners.
This submittal to the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation shall be accompanied by comments of
the Planning Commission and the Delaware County
Planning Commission.
(6) Acknowledgments.
(a) A letter indicating the availability of public sanitary sewer
facilities from the appropriate utility, if applicable.
(b) A letter indicating the availability of central water supply from
the appropriate utility, if applicable.
§ 255-20 RADNOR CODE § 255-21
C:662
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of no less than one inch equals
100 feet.
(2) Dimensions shall be set in feet and decimal parts thereof; and
bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(3) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the
total number of sheets.
(4) Where any revision is made or when the plan is a revision of a
previously approved plan, notations of revisions shall be dated.
(5) The boundary line of the subdivision or land development shall be
shown as a solid heavy line.
(6) Final plans shall be on a sheet having a minimum size of 18 inches
by 30 inches and a maximum size of 24 inches by 34 inches, and all
lettering shall be so drawn as to be legible if the plan should be
reduced to half size.
(7) All plans and surveys shall be prepared in accordance with the Act
of May 23, 1945 (P.L. 913, No. 367), known as the "Professional
Engineers Registration Law."193 [Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No.
90-49]
B. The final plan shall show or be accompanied by the following
information on individual sheets:
(1) Site plan showing:
(a) The name of the subdivision or land development, including the
address, if available. [Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No.
90-49]
(b) The name and address of the owner/applicant.
(c) The name, address and seal of the engineer or surveyor
responsible for the plan.
(d) Zoning requirements,194 including:
[1] Applicable district and district boundaries.
[2] Maximum density permitted, if applicable.
[3] Lot size and setback requirements.
[4] Applicable open space and impervious surface ratios.
[5] Any variances or special exceptions granted.
193. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
194. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 255-21 CHARTER § 255-21
C:663
(e) Proposed standards:
[1] Density.
[2] Open space ratio.
[3] Impervious surfaces.
[4] Dwelling unit mix, if known.
[5] Size of units (in bedrooms), if known.
(f) A location map showing the relation of the site to adjoining
properties and streets within 500 feet (scale: one inch equals
600 feet). [Amended 5-27-1997 by Ord. No. 97-13]
(g) The North point.
(h) Written and graphic scales (including the scale of location
map).
(i) The total acreage of the site.
(j) A complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided or
developed, showing all courses, distances, tie-ins to all
adjacent intersections and areas.
(k) The location of all existing monuments.
(l) Boundaries in all adjoining properties (with names and
addresses of landowners in the case of unplatted land).
[Amended 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15]
(m) Existing streets and alleys on and adjacent to the site with
ultimate rights-of-way.
(n) Existing principal buildings (and their respective uses) and
driveways on the adjacent peripheral strip; sewer lines, storm
drains, culverts, bridges, utility easements, quarries, railroads
and other significant man-made features within 500 feet of and
within the site. (This includes properties across streets.)
(o) The proposed layout:
[1] The layout and names of streets, including widths of
cartways and rights-of-ways; and recommended
improvements pursuant to § 255-20B(5)(d)[6].
[2] The lot layout with exact dimensions, areas and uses of
lots; building setback lines and rear and side yard lines.
[3] The arrangement and use of buildings and parking areas in
nonresidential developments and multifamily
developments with all necessary dimensions and number
§ 255-21 RADNOR CODE § 255-21
C:664
of parking spaces. Elevations and perspective sketches of
proposed buildings are encouraged.
[4] Open space areas and indication as to whether offered for
dedication.
[5] Recreational facilities.
[6] Rights-of-way and/or easements for all drainage facilities,
utilities or other purposes.
[7] Sidewalks and pedestrian paths.
[8] Streetlights, in accordance with a streetlight plan,
approved by the Philadelphia Electric Company.
[9] Fire hydrants.
[10] Monuments.
[11]Water mains.
[12] Driveway locations.
[13] Locations of private sewer systems, if applicable.
(p) Where the final plan covers only a portion of the applicant's
entire tract, a sketch plan shall be submitted of the prospective
street layout for the remainder of the site.
(2) Sedimentation and erosion control plan pursuant to Chapter 175,
Grading, Excavations and Fills.
(3) Sewer plan, showing:
(a) Public sanitary sewer facilities, if applicable.
(b) Central water supply facilities, if applicable.
(4) Landscaping and grading plan, showing:
(a) Existing and proposed grades for the entire site.
(b) Existing vegetation to be removed.
(c) Existing vegetation to be preserved.
(d) Proposed planting schedule indicating the locations, species
and sizes of plantings as required by §§ 255-29B, 255-38 and
255-42.
(e) Wetlands, as delineated in accordance with the requirements
of § 255-20B(4)(d) above. [Added 10-15-1991 by Ord. No.
91-41]
§ 255-21 CHARTER § 255-21
C:665
[1] Where it is determined, in accordance with the terms of
that subsection, that no wetlands exist on the site, a note
to that effect shall appear on the site plan.
[2] Where wetlands exist and disturbance permits and/or
mitigation activities are required, final plan approval or
granting of applicable permits from the Township shall be
conditioned upon the applicant receiving all necessary
wetlands permits or waivers pursuant thereto and/or the
approval of the Township Engineer.
(5) Improvement construction plan (drainage and construction)
prepared by an engineer. The improvement construction plan shall
be at a horizontal scale on the plan and profile of 40 feet to the inch
and at a vertical scale on the profile of four feet to the inch. It shall
show the following:
(a) Horizontal plan (streets):
[1] Center line with bearings, distances, curve data and
stations corresponding to the profile.
[2] Right-of-way and curblines with radii at intersections.
[3] Beginning and end of proposed construction.
[4] Tie-ins by courses and distances to intersections of all
public streets, with their names and widths.
[5] Location of all proposed monuments with reference to
them.
[6] Property lines and ownership of abutting properties.
[7] Location and size of all drainage structures, sidewalks,
public utilities, lighting standards, street trees and street
name signs.
(b) Profile (streets):
[1] Profile of existing ground surface along center line and
both right-of-way lines of streets.
[2] Proposed center-line grade, with percent on tangents and
elevations at fifty-foot intervals, grade intersections and
either end of curb radii.
[3] Vertical curve data, including length, tangent, elevations
and minimum sight distance, as required in Article V.
(c) Cross-section (streets):
[1] Right-of-way width and location and width of paving.
[2] Type, thickness and crown of paving.
§ 255-21 RADNOR CODE § 255-21
C:666
[3] Type and size of curb and size of concrete chair under
joints.
[4] Grading of sidewalk area.
[5] Location, width, type and thickness of sidewalks.
[6] Typical location of sewers and utilities with sizes.
(d) Horizontal plan (storm drains and sanitary sewers):
[1] Location and size of line with stations corresponding to the
profile.
[2] Location of manholes or inlets with grade between and
elevation of flow line and top of each manhole or inlet.
[3] Property lines and ownership, with details of easements
where required.
[4] Beginning and end of proposed construction.
[5] Location of laterals and Y's.
[6] Location of all other drainage facilities and public utilities
in the vicinity of storm and/or sanitary sewer lines.
[7] Hydraulic design data for culverts and/or bridge
structures.
(e) Profile (storm drains and sanitary sewers):
[1] Profile of existing ground surface with elevations at top of
manholes or inlets.
[2] Profile of storm drain or sewer showing type and size of
pipe, grade, cradle, manhole and inlet locations.
(6) Management information: a formal contract for maintenance of
open space and/or private streets and method of management and
maintenance, if applicable.
(7) Planning modules for land development, as required by Chapter 71
of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as amended.195
(8) Acknowledgments:
(a) All offers of dedication and covenants governing the
reservation and maintenance of undedicated open space,
bearing certificate of approval of the Township Solicitor.
(b) Such private deed restrictions, including building setback
lines, as may be imposed upon the property as a condition of
195. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 255-21 CHARTER § 255-21
C:667
§ 255-22. Final plan for minor subdivision.
sale, together with a statement of any restrictions previously
imposed which may affect the title to the land being
subdivided.
(c) Agreement for any street not offered for dedication.
(d) All required permits and related documentation from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources where
any alteration or relocation of a stream or watercourse is
proposed.
(e) Highways occupancy permits or documentation indicating that
such permits are available to the applicant from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, if applicable.
(f) A written agreement, pursuant to § 255-66.
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of no less than one inch equals
100 feet.
(2) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimal parts thereof; and bearings
in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(3) The boundary line of the subdivision shall be shown as a solid heavy
line.
(4) Plans shall be on sheets having a minimum size of 18 inches by 30
inches and a maximum size of 24 inches by 34 inches, and all
lettering shall be so drawn as to be legible if the plans should be
reduced to half size.
(5) All plans and surveys shall be prepared in accordance with the Act
of May 23, 1945 (P.L. 913, No. 367), known as the "Professional
Engineers Registration Law."196 [Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No.
90-49]
(6) Each sheet shall be numbered. [Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No.
93-15]
B. The minor subdivision plan shall show or be accompanied by the
following information:
(1) Site plan, showing: [Amended 4-9-1984 by Ord. No. 84-09]
(a) The name of the subdivision or land development, including the
address if available. [Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No.
90-49]
196. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
§ 255-21 RADNOR CODE § 255-22
C:668
(b) The name and address of the owner/applicant.
(c) The name, address and seal of the engineer or surveyor
responsible for the plan.
(d) Zoning requirements,197 including:
[1] Applicable district and district boundaries.
[2] Maximum density permitted and proposed density, if
applicable.
[3] Lot size and yard requirements.
[4] Required and proposed open space and impervious
surface ratios, if applicable.
[5] Any variances or special exceptions granted.
[6] Any calculated floodplain areas.
[7] Any steep slope areas.
(e) A location map showing relation of site to adjoining properties
and streets within 500 feet (scale: one inch equals 600 feet).
[Amended 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15]
(f) The North point.
(g) Written and graphic scales (including scale of location map).
(h) Wetlands delineated by an accredited consultant, and said
delineation, unless waived by the Radnor Township Board of
Commissioners, shall be approved by the Army Corps of
Engineers. [Amended 6-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-28]
(i) Site boundaries.
(j) Boundaries of all adjoining properties (with names and
addresses of landowners in the case of unplatted land).
[Amended 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15]
(k) Existing principal buildings (and their respective uses) and
driveways on the adjacent peripheral strip. Sewer lines, storm
drains, culverts, bridges, utility easements, quarries, railroads
and other significant man-made features within 500 feet of and
within the site (this includes properties across streets).
(l) A lot layout, with exact dimensions, areas and uses of lots,
building setback lines and rear and side yard lines.
(m) The types of buildings proposed, if any.
197. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 255-22 CHARTER § 255-22
C:669
(n) The number of units proposed.
(o) Open space areas, if any.
(p) Contour lines measured at vertical intervals of two feet. Such
elevations shall be determined by on-site survey, not
interpolation of United States Government Survey maps. In the
case of relatively flat or level areas, a lesser interval may be
required.
(q) Datum to which contour lines refer. Where practicable, data
shall refer to established elevations.
(r) Large trees over six inches in caliper. [Added 6-28-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-15]
(2) Management information: A formal contract for maintenance of
open space and/or private streets and method of management and
maintenance, if applicable.
(3) Planning modules for land development as required by Chapter 71
of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as amended.198
(4) Acknowledgments.
(a) All offers of dedication and covenants governing the
reservation and maintenance of undedicated open space,
bearing certificate of approval of the Township Solicitor.
(b) Such private deed restrictions, including building setback
lines, as may be imposed upon the property as a condition of
sale, together with a statement of any restrictions previously
imposed which may affect the title to the land being
subdivided.
(c) All required permits and related documentation from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources where
any alteration or relocation of a stream or watercourse is
proposed.
(d) Highway occupancy permits or documentation indicating that
such permits are available to the applicant from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, if applicable.
(e) A written agreement pursuant to § 255-66.
(5) Wetlands, as delineated in accordance with the requirements of
§ 255-20B(4)(d) above. [Added 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 91-41]
(a) Where it is determined, in accordance with the terms of that
subsection, that no wetlands exist on the site, a note to that
effect shall appear on the site plan.
198. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 255-22 RADNOR CODE § 255-22
C:670
§ 255-23. Record plan.
(b) Where wetlands exist and disturbance permits and/or
mitigation activities are required, final plan approval or
granting of applicable permits from the Township shall be
conditioned upon the applicant receiving all necessary
wetlands permits or waivers pursuant thereto and/or the
approval of the Township Engineer.
(6) Improvement construction plan in accordance with § 255-21B(5).
[Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15]
A. The record plan shall be a clear and legible blue or black line print and
shall be an exact copy of the approved plan on a sheet of the size
required for final plans.
B. The following information shall appear on the record plan, in addition to
the information required in §§ 255-21 and 255-22 for the final plan:
(1) Seals:
(a) The impressed seal of the engineer or surveyor who prepared
the plan.
(b) The impressed corporate seal, if the subdivider is a
corporation.
(c) The impressed seal of a notary public or other qualified officer
acknowledging the owner's statement of intent.
(d) The impressed seal of the Delaware County Planning
Commission.
(2) Acknowledgments.
(a) A statement to the effect that the applicant is the owner of the
land proposed to be subdivided and that the subdivision shown
on the final plan is made with his or their free consent and that
it is desired to record the same.
(b) An acknowledgment of said statement before an officer
authorized to take acknowledgments.
(c) A signed title block, if private sanitary sewer systems are
proposed, as follows:
§ 255-22 CHARTER § 255-23
C:671
Observations of deep test holes as described in the planning
module for land development and percolation tests on all lots
have been performed by an approved sewage enforcement
officer and it has been determined that all lots are suitable for
_______________________ type sewage disposal system(s) under
current rules and regulations. Permits for the construction of
each individual sewage disposal system on each lot must be
obtained prior to the commencement of construction of the
system and/or buildings.
Date
Signature, Sewage Enforcement Officer
(3) The following signatures shall be placed on the plan in ink:
(a) The signatures of the owner or owners of the land. If the owner
of the land is a corporation, the signatures of the president and
secretary of the corporation shall appear.
(b) The signature of the notary public or other qualified officer,
acknowledging the owner's statement of intent.
(c) The signature of the engineer or surveyor who prepared the
plan.
(d) The signature of the Director of Public Works.
(e) The signature of the Zoning Officer.
(f) The signature of the Township Engineer.
(g) The signatures of the President and the Secretary of the Board
of Commissioners.
§ 255-23 RADNOR CODE § 255-23
C:672
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 255-24. Applicability of standards.
§ 255-25. General standards.
§ 255-26. Community facilities.
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 280, Zoning, and other
ordinances and regulations of the Township:
A. The following subdivision and land development principles, standards
and requirements will be applied in evaluating plans for proposed
subdivisions and land developments.
B. The standards and requirements outlined herein shall be considered
minimum standards and requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety and general welfare.
C. Where literal compliance with the standards specified herein is clearly
impractical, the Board of Commissioners may modify or adjust the
standards to permit reasonable utilization of property while securing
substantial conformance with the objectives of this chapter.
A. All portions of a site being subdivided shall be taken up in lots, streets,
public lands or other proposed uses so that remnants and locked areas
shall not be created.
B. In general, lot lines shall follow Township boundary lines rather than
cross them.
C. The developer shall conform to all applicable performance standards,
including but not limited to those contained in Chapter 175, Grading,
Excavations and Fills; Chapter 280, Zoning; and Chapter 263, Trees.
[Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 6-28-1993 by Ord. No.
93-15]
D. Subdivisions and land developments shall be laid out so as to avoid the
necessity for excessive cut or fill.
E. Land subject to subsidence and land deemed to be topographically
unsuitable may not be platted for residential use or for such other uses
as may increase danger to health, life or property until all such hazards
have been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against such
hazards are provided by the subdivision plans. Such land within the
subdivision or land development shall be set aside on the plan for uses
which shall not endanger life or property or further aggravate or
increase the existing menace.
§ 255-24 CHARTER § 255-26
C:673
§ 255-27. Streets.
A. In reviewing subdivision plans, the Board of Commissioners shall
consider the adequacy of existing or proposed community facilities to
serve the additional buildings proposed by the subdivision.
B. Where deemed essential by the Board of Commissioners, upon
consideration of the particular type of development proposed and
especially in large-scale residential developments, the Board of
Commissioners may require the dedication or reservation of such areas
or sites of an extent and locationsuitable to the needs created by the
development for schools, open space, parks and other purposes.
C. Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities shall be
adequate to provide for building sites, landscaping and off-street
parking as appropriate to the use proposed.
D. Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown
in the Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision
or land development, the Board of Commissioners may require the
dedication or reservation of such area within the subdivision or land
development, in those cases in which the Board of Commissioners
deems such requirements to be necessary.
A. General standards for streets.
(1) Proposed streets shall conform to such county and state street and
highway plans as have been prepared, adopted and/or filed as
prescribed by law.
(2) Streets shall be logically related to topography so as to produce
reasonable grades, satisfactory drainage and suitable building
sites.
(3) Residential streets shall be so laid out as to discourage through
traffic; however, the arrangement of streets shall provide for
continuation of existing or platted streets and for proper access to
adjoining undeveloped tracts suitable for future subdivision.
(4) If lots resulting from original subdivision are large enough to
permit resubdivision or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided,
adequate street rights-of-way to permit further subdivision shall be
provided as necessary.
(5) Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit
future street extension into adjoining tracts or when designed as
culs-de-sac. Stub streets shall be properly closed to through traffic
until such time as the street is extended.
(6) Stub streets greater in length than one lot width shall be provided
with a turnaround designed to meet the standards required for
§ 255-26 RADNOR CODE § 255-27
C:674
culs-de-sac and shall be provided with sufficient rights-of-way to
permit the future extension of the street into the adjacent property.
(7) Streets that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with
existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street
names shall not be repeated within the Township, and all street
names shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Commissioners.
(8) Any applicant who encroaches within the legal right-of-way of a
state highway is required to obtain a highway occupancy permit
from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
B. Classification of streets.
(1) Pursuant to the table below, new streets will be classified according
to the average daily traffic (ADT) which will be expected to use the
street. If a new street will serve as a stub or connector street, its
classification must be determined in accordance with its ultimate
traffic, given full development.
Class ADT
Expressways 10,001 and greater
Arterials 10,001 and greater
Major collectors 3,501 to 10,000
Minor collectors 651 to 3,500
Local streets 101 to 650
Courts 1 to 100
(2) ADT's may be based upon actual vehicle counts or calculated by
using the Trip Generation Rates Table in § 255-20B(5).
(3) Existing streets are classified as follows:
(a) Expressway: Mid-County Expressway (U.S. Interstate 476).
(b) Arterials: Lancaster Pike (U.S. Route 30), North Spring Mill
Road (Pa. Route 320) and Sproul Road (Pa. Route 320).
(c) Major collectors: Bryn Mawr Avenue, Conestoga Road, County
Line Road, Darby and Paoli Road, Eagle Road, King of Prussia
Road, Matsonford Road, North Wayne Avenue, Radnor and
Chester Road, South Wayne Avenue and Upper Gulph Road.
(d) Minor collectors: Brooke Road, Clyde Road, Godfrey Road
(Darby and Paoli Road to Sproul Road), Goshen Road, Gulph
Creek Road, Iven Avenue, Lowrey's Lane, Malin Road,
Maplewood Road, Newtown Road, North Ithan Avenue, Pine
Tree Road (King of Prussia Road to Upper Gulph Road), Radnor
Street, Roberts Road (South Ithan Avenue to County Line
Road), St. David's Road (southwest of Darby and Paoli Road),
§ 255-27 CHARTER § 255-27
C:675
Sinkler Drive, South Aberdeen Avenue, South Devon Avenue,
South Ithan Avenue, Valley Forge Road, West Wayne Avenue
and Wyldhaven Road.
(e) Local streets: All other existing streets shall be classified as
local streets.
(4) New streets shall be classified on the basis of a traffic impact study
and/or a classification approved by the Board of Commissioners.
C. Specific standards for streets.
(1) The following chart indicates the required dimensional standards
for the various classifications of streets as defined in § 255-6:
Basic Dimensions
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Cartway
(feet) Curbs Sidewalks
Expressways * * * no
Arterials * * * *
Major
collectors
80 48 * *
Minor
collectors
60 36 yes yes
Local streets 60 28 yes yes***
Culs-de-sac 60 28** yes yes***
NOTES:
*As recommended by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
**Twenty-four feet in R-1 and AC Districts.
***Not required in the R-1 and AC Districts.
(2) Additional right-of-way and/or cartway widths may be required by
the Board of Commissioners in order to lessen traffic congestion, to
secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to facilitate the
adequate provision for transportation and other public
requirements and to promote the general welfare.
(3) Short extensions of existing streets with lesser rights-of-way and/or
cartway widths than prescribed above may be permitted; provided,
however, that no section of new right-of-way is less than 40 feet in
width and such extensions shall be less than 100 feet in length.
(4) Where a subdivision abut or contains an existing street of
inadequate right-of-way width, the Board of Commissioners may
require the reservation or dedication of rights-of-way to conform to
§ 255-27 RADNOR CODE § 255-27
C:676
the above standards. The center line of the ultimate right-of-way
shall be the same center line as the existing right-of-way.
(5) New half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where
essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with
the other requirements and standards of these regulations and
where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the
remaining part of the street can be secured.
(6) Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or
partial street, the other part of the street shall be plotted within
such tract.
D. Cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Permanent or temporary culs-de-sac shall have a minimum length
of 250 feet but shall neither exceed 800 feet in length nor furnish
access to more than 20 dwelling units.
(2) Culs-de-sac shall have at the closed end a turnaround with a rightof-
way having a minimum outside radius of not less than 60 feet
and shall be paved to a radius of not less than 40 feet.
(3) Grades across culs-de-sac shall not exceed 3%.
E. Private streets. Private residential streets will be approved only if they
meet the following requirements:
(1) No more than five lots may be permitted to front on a private street.
(2) The private street shall have a right-of-way width and a horizontal
and vertical alignment consistent with the requirements for public
streets.
(3) The private street shall meet minimum pavement structure
requirements.
(4) The private street shall be owned and maintained by all abutting
property owners. A homeowner's association or other legal entity
approved by the Board of Commissioners shall be formed in order
to properly administer such maintenance responsibilities.
(5) The Board of Commissioners shall reserve the right to order the
reconstruction of the private street up to Township standards and
subsequent dedication as a public street, if such private street is
deemed to be a safety or health hazard. Costs of such
reconstruction shall be assessed against all abutting property
owners and shall be borne by said property owners.
(6) Private streets shall be indicated as such on the record plan and
shall be subject to contract and guaranty requirements as
described in Article VII.
F. Street alignment.
§ 255-27 CHARTER § 255-27
C:677
(1) Whenever local street lines are deflected in excess of five degrees,
connection shall be made by horizontal curves. All other streets
shall not have angle points in the alignment.
(2) Minimum center-line radii for horizontal curves shall be as follows:
(a) Local streets and courts: 150 feet.
(b) Minor collectors: 300 feet.
(c) Major collectors and arterials: 500 feet.
(3) Except on local streets, a minimum tangent of 100 feet shall be
required between curves.
(4) A long radius curve shall be preferred to a series of curves and
tangents.
(5) The approaches to an intersection shall follow a straight course for
at least 100 feet for local streets and courts. Approaches for other
street types shall be designed in accordance with accepted
engineering standards.
G. Street grades.
(1) Center-line grades shall not be less than 1.5%.
(2) The maximum street grades shall be as follows:
(a) Courts and local streets: 10%.
(b) Arterials and all collector streets: 6%.
(3) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding 1%.
(4) Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection
exceeds 7%, a leveling area of 4% grade or less shall be provided
for a minimum distance of 100 feet for local streets. Approaches for
other street types shall be designed in accordance with accepted
engineering standards.
H. Street intersections.
(1) Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than
70°.
§ 255-27 RADNOR CODE § 255-27
C:678
(2) Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets shall be prohibited.
(3) In all districts, no structure, fence, planting or other structure shall
be maintained between a plane two feet above curb level and a
plane seven feet above curb level so as to interfere with traffic
visibility across the corner within that part of the required front,
side or rear yard which is within the clear sight triangle.
(4) Minor collectors and local streets shall not intersect on the same
side of a major collector or arterial at an interval of less than 600
feet.
(5) Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out
either directly opposite one another or with a minimum offset of
200 feet between their center line.
(6) Minimum curb radii at street intersections shall be 25 feet for local
streets; 30 feet for collectors; 35 feet for arterials; and 10 feet for
driveways.
(7) Right-of-way radii shall be concentric with the curb radii.
I. Street access.
(1) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial or collector street, the Township may require reversefrontage
lots or such other treatment as will provide protection for
abutting properties, reduce the number of intersections with the
§ 255-27 CHARTER § 255-27
C:679
§ 255-28. Sight distance.
major street and separate local and through traffic. [Amended
1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-03]
(2) Access to parking areas on commercial, institutional, planned
business and industrial sites shall be controlled and shall be so
located as to provide a minimum of 200 feet between points of
access.
(3) Private driveways, where provided, shall be located not less than
40 feet from the intersection and shall provide access to the street
of lower classification when a corner lot is bounded by streets of
two different classifications as defined herein.
(4) Driveway grades shall not exceed 16%.
(5) In general, no private driveway shall take access to an arterial or
major collector street. Driveways shall be so located and designed
as to provide a reasonable sight distance at street intersections.
(6) No common driveways shall be permitted between two or more
single-family dwellings.
(7) No common driveway shall provide access to more than three lots
or three single-family dwellings. [Added 6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
90-28]
A. The control of grades, curvature and obstructions at intersections is
required to ensure adequate sight distance for safe and efficient
vehicular operation. There are three types of sight distance:
(1) For stopping.
(2) For passing overtaken vehicles on two- and three-lane streets.
(3) For intersections to ensure safe crossing or entering of an
intersecting street.
B. The following table indicates the minimum sight distance required for
the three forms of sight distance on the various street types:
Street Classification
Sight
Distance
Arterial
(feet)
Major
Collector
(feet)
Minor
Collector
(feet)
Court or
Local
(feet)
Stopping 350 275 275 200
Passing To be determined by Township Engineer, in accordance
with accepted engineering standards.
Intersections 750 600 550 400
§ 255-27 RADNOR CODE § 255-29
C:680
§ 255-29. Parking facilities.
A. The design standards specified below shall be required for all off-street
parking facilities with a capacity of three or more vehicles.
(1) The minimum dimensions of stalls and aisles shall be as follows:
Parking Stall Aisle
Angle of
Parking
(degrees)
Width
(feet)
Depth
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
90 9 1/2 20 * 22
60 9 1/2 21 18 21
45 9 1/2 20 15 18
30 9 1/2 18 12 15
Parallel 8 22 12 18
*NOTE: Not permitted.
(2) Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to
proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without
requiring the moving of any other motor vehicles.
(3) All parking spaces shall be marked so as to provide for orderly and
safe parking.
(4) At no time shall angle or perpendicular parking be permitted along
public streets.
(5) Except at entrance and exit drives, all parking areas shall be set
back from the right-of-way line and all property lines pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 280, Zoning. The distance between this
required setback and the cartway shall be maintained as a planting
strip or planting strip and sidewalk.
(6) No more than 10 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous
row without being interrupted by landscaping and concrete curb.
[Amended 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15]
(7) No one area for off-street parking of motor vehicles shall exceed 30
cars in capacity. Separate areas on a parcel shall be physically
separated from one another by ten-foot-wide planting strips and
concrete curb. [Amended 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15]
(8) Parking lots with less than 30 spaces shall not have a grade
exceeding 5%. Parking lots with more than 30 spaces shall not have
a grade exceeding 3%. No grade cut, fill or height difference
between terraced parking areas shall exceed four feet unless
approved by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 255-29 CHARTER § 255-29
C:681
(9) In no case shall parking areas for three or more vehicles be
designed to require or encourage cars to back into a public street
in order to leave the lot.
(10) Entrances and exits to and from off-street parking areas shall be
located so as to minimize interference with street traffic.
(11) For the purpose of servicing any property held under single and
separate ownership, entrance and exit drives crossing the street
line shall be limited to two along the frontage of any single street
and their center lines shall be spaced at least 80 feet apart. On all
corner properties, there shall be a minimum spacing of 60 feet,
measured at the street line, between the center line of any
entrance or exit drive and the street line of the street parallel to
said access drive.
(12) The width of entrance and exit drives shall be:
(a) A minimum of 12 feet for one-way use only.
(b) A minimum of 25 feet for two-way use.
(c) A maximum of 25 feet at the street line and 35 feet at the
curbline.
(13) Tire bumpers shall be installed so as to prevent vehicle overhang
on any sidewalk area.
(14)No less than a five-foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for
all curblines in parking areas.
(15) All dead-end parking areas shall be designed to provide sufficient
backup area for the end stalls of a parking area.
(16)Raised pedestrian crosswalks and refuse islands shall be provided
at intervals not exceeding 200 feet along the length of each parking
area.
(17) Pedestrian crosswalks in parking areas shall not be subject to
passage or concentration of surface runoff.
(18) All common parking areas shall be adequately lighted during afterdark
operating hours. All lighted standards shall be located on
raised parking islands and not on the parking surface.
(19) All artificial lighting used to illuminate any parking space or spaces
shall be so arranged that no direct rays from such lighting shall fall
upon any neighboring property or streets, nor shall any highbrightness
surface of the luminaries be visible from neighboring
residential properties or from a public street.
(20) Where semi-attached, attached or multiple dwellings are proposed
and where private garages or driveways are proposed to be used to
meet the off-street parking requirements, one parking space per
§ 255-29 RADNOR CODE § 255-29
C:682
§ 255-30. Off-street loading facilities.
Off-street loading facilities shall be designed to conform to the following
specifications.
§ 255-31. Grading and drainage.199
four dwelling units of overflow off-street parking shall be provided.
Such parking may be located either in a public parking facility or
on individual lots.
(21) Concrete curb shall be required along the perimeter of all parking
areas exceeding a ten-car capacity. [Added 6-28-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-15]
B. Landscaping for parking facilities.
(1) All parking areas shall have at least one tree 2 1/2 inches minimum
in caliper for every five parking spaces in single bays and one tree
2 1/2 inches minimum in caliper for every 10 parking spaces in
double bays. Trees shall be planted in such a manner to afford
maximum protection from the sun for parked vehicles. A minimum
of 10% of any parking lot facility over 2,000 square feet in gross
area shall be devoted to landscaping, inclusive of required trees.
[Amended 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
(2) Plantings shall be able to survive soot and gas fumes. Trees which
have low-growing branches, gum or moisture which may drop on
vehicles, blossoms, thorns, seeds or pods which may clog drainage
facilities shall be avoided.
A. Each space shall be no less than 14 feet wide, 60 feet long and 17 feet
high, exclusive of drives and maneuvering space, and located entirely
on the lot being served.
B. There shall be appropriate means of access to a street or alley as well as
adequate maneuvering space.
C. The maximum width of driveways and sidewalk openings measured at
the street lot line shall be 35 feet; the minimum width shall be 20 feet.
D. All accessory driveways and entranceways shall be graded, have a
bituminous surface and be drained to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer to the extent necessary to prevent nuisances of dust, erosion
or excessive water flow across public streets or sidewalks.
E. Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as to at no
time constitute a nuisance, a hazard or an unreasonable impediment to
traffic.
F. The lighting requirements of § 255-29A(19) shall be met, if applicable.
199. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 175, Grading, Excavations and Fills.
§ 255-29 CHARTER § 255-31
C:683
A. Provisions for the control of surface water should, if possible, be
constructed to encourage percolation of the water into the ground to
aid in the recharge of groundwaters.
B. Blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away from
buildings and to prevent the collection of stormwater in pools.
C. All drainage provisions shall be of such design as to carry surface
waters to the nearest practical and adequate street storm drain,
retention basin, natural watercourse or other drainage facility.
D. The subdivider or developer shall construct and/or install such drainage
structures and/or pipes as are necessary to prevent erosion damage and
to satisfactorily carry off or retain and release surface waters.
E. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope
than two horizontal to one vertical, except under one or more of the
following conditions:
(1) The fill is located so that settlement, sliding or erosion will not
result in property damage or be a hazard to adjoining property,
streets, alleys or buildings.
(2) A written statement from an engineer experienced in erosion
control, certifying that he has inspected the site and that the
proposed deviation from the slope specified above will not
endanger any property or result in property damage, is submitted
to and approved by the Township Engineer.
(3) A concrete or stone masonry wall constructed in accordance with
approved standards is provided to support the face of the
excavation.
F. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a minimum of three feet from
property or right-of-way lines of streets or alleys in order to permit the
normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting
property.
G. Storm drains and appurtenances shall be required to be constructed by
the owner to take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades, to
lead water away from springs and to avoid excessive use of cross
gutters at street intersections and elsewhere.
H. Unless otherwise directed by the Board of Commissioners and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, watercourses
shall remain open and shall not be piped or incorporated into a storm
sewer system.
I. Detention and retention basins shall be designed to utilize the natural
contours of the land whenever possible. When such design is
impracticable, the construction of the basin shall utilize slopes as
shallow as possible to blend the structures into the terrain.
§ 255-31 RADNOR CODE § 255-32
C:684
§ 255-32. Erosion and sediment controls.
§ 255-33. Blocks.
A. No changes shall be made in the contour of the land and no grading,
excavation, removal or destruction of the topsoil, trees or other
vegetation cover of the land shall be commenced until such time that a
plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been processed and
reviewed by the Township Engineer and the Delaware County
Conservation District. The Board of Commissioners may waive this
requirement for minor subdivisions.
B. No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved unless:
(1) There has been an erosion and sedimentation plan approved by the
Township Engineer that provides for minimizing erosion and
sedimentation, consistent with Chapter 175, Grading, Excavations
and Fills, and an improvement bond or other acceptable security is
deposited with the Township in the form of an escrow guaranty
which will ensure installation and completion of the required
improvements; or
(2) There has been a determination by the Board of Commissioners
that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation is not
necessary.
C. Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall, as a
minimum, meet the standards and specifications of the Delaware
County Conservation District. The Township Engineer shall ensure
compliance with the appropriate specifications, copies of which are
available from the district.
D. The Board of Commissioners, in its consideration of all preliminary
plans of subdivision and land development, shall condition its approval
upon the execution of erosion and sediment control measures as
contained in Chapter 175, Grading, Excavations and Fills.
E. Final approval of plans and specifications for the control of erosion and
sedimentation shall be concurrent with the approval of the final
subdivision or land development plans and become a part thereof.
F. The Township Engineer shall review stream channel construction on
watersheds with a drainage area in excess of 320 acres or in those
cases where downstream hazards exist and shall submit a review of
said construction to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources. Said construction shall be approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources prior to final plan approval.
G. Final plans for minimizing erosion and sedimentation, as approved, will
be incorporated into the agreement and bond requirements as required
by the Township. (See Article VII.)
§ 255-32 CHARTER § 255-33
C:685
§ 255-34. Lots. [Amended 10-11-1983 by Ord. No. 83-28; 7-17-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-20; 10-15-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-26]
§ 255-35. Easements.
A. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to the following:
(1) Provision of adequate sites for types of buildings proposed.
(2) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes, dimensions and minimum lot
areas per dwelling unit.
(3) The limitations and opportunities of the topography.
(4) Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation and access.
B. Blocks shall have a maximum length of 1,600 feet and a minimum
length of 300 feet. In the design of blocks longer than 1,100 feet,
special consideration shall be given to the requirements of satisfactory
fire protection.
A. Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than specified by Chapter
280, Zoning.
B. Residential lots shall front on an existing or proposed street.
C. Through lots are prohibited, except where employed to prevent
vehicular access to arterial or collector streets.
D. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
lines or radial to curved street lines. Acute angles or small projections
shall be avoided. However, different lot shapes will be permitted if they
can be shown to be necessary or desirable to relate building sites to the
terrain or to provide better site utilization and building relationships.
E. The depth of lots shall generally not exceed their width by more than
2.5 times. All lots shall be serviced by a street designed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
F. The subdivision of a tract which creates nonconforming side and rear
yards for existing buildings will not be approved unless variances have
been granted by the Zoning Hearing Board prior to final-plan
submission.
A. Easements with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be provided as
necessary for utilities.
B. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be adjacent to rear or
side lot lines.
C. No structure requiring a building permit or plantings, except for lawn
and/or paving shall be set or put within the area of a utility easement.
§ 255-33 RADNOR CODE § 255-35
C:686
§ 255-36. Curbs.
Curbs shall be provided along streets when required by the Township.
§ 255-37. Sidewalks and pedestrian paths.
D. Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse,
there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming
substantially to the line of such watercourse and of such width as will
be adequate to preserve natural drainage but not less than 50 feet or as
may be required or directed by the Township and/or the Department of
Environmental Resources. The owner shall properly grade and seed
slopes and fence any open ditches when it is deemed necessary by the
Township.
E. Where stormwater or surface water will be gathered within the
subdivision or land development and discharged or drained without
being detained over lands within or beyond the boundaries of the
subdivision or land development, the applicant or owner shall reserve
or obtain easements over all lands affected thereby, which easements
shall be adequate for discharge or drainage; and for carrying off of such
water; and for the maintenance, repair and reconstruction of the same,
including the right of passage over and upon the same by vehicles,
machinery and other equipment for such purposes; and which shall be
of sufficient width for such passage and work. The owner shall convey,
free of charge or cost, such easements to the Township upon demand.
A. Sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall minimize pedestrian-vehicle
conflict and shall be provided when required by the Board of
Commissioners.
B. The minimum width of all sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be four
feet.
C. Sidewalks and public paths shall be located within a public right-of-way,
a public easement or a common open space area.
D. Curb cuts shall be provided at all street crossings.
E. Sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be adequately lighted, if required
by the Board of Commissioners.
F. The grades and paving of sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be
continuous across driveways. Where heavy traffic volume is expected, a
special paving treatment may be required by the Board of
Commissioners.
G. Sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be laterally pitched at a slope of
not less than 1/4 inch per foot to provide for adequate surface drainage.
H. Sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall not exceed a seven-percent grade.
Steps or a combination of steps and ramps shall be utilized to maintain
§ 255-35 CHARTER § 255-37
C:687
§ 255-38. Shade trees.200
the maximum grades, where necessary. Where sidewalk grades exceed
5%, a nonslip surface texture shall be used.
I. Sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be of a hard surface composition
if heavy pedestrian or bicycle traffic will be served and shall be
constructed according to Township specifications. An occasionally
utilized footpath may utilize gravel, pine bark chips or other material
approved by the Board of Commissioners.
J. Sidewalks adjacent to angle parking areas shall be set back a minimum
of five feet to prevent car overhang from restricting pedestrian
movement along the sidewalk.
K. Sidewalks shall be required in developments where lot areas are 20,000
square feet or less. [Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15]
A. Within any land development or major subdivision, street trees shall be
planted along all streets where suitable street trees do not exist.
B. Street trees 2 1/2 inches dbh at intervals of not more than 30 feet along
both sides of new streets and along one or both sides of an existing
street within the proposed subdivision or land development. An
equivalent number may be planted in an informal arrangement, subject
to the approval of the Board of Commissioners. [Amended
10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49; 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15;
3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
C. Street trees shall not be planted opposite each other, but shall
alternate.
D. At intersections, trees shall be located no closer than 50 feet from the
intersection of the street rights-of-way.
E. Street trees shall be planted on lots rather than within the right-of-way,
unless otherwise approved by the Board of Commissioners.
F. Street trees shall be of nursery stock. They shall be of symmetrical
growth, free of insects, pests and disease, suitable for street use and in
conformity with the standards of the American Association of
Nurserymen.
G. The minimum caliper measured at a height of six inches above the
finished grade level shall be 2 1/2 inches.
H. Approved trees.
(1) In particular, approved trees including the following:
(a) Acer ginnala: Amur maple.
200. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 263, Trees.
§ 255-37 RADNOR CODE § 255-38
C:688
§ 255-39. Crosswalks.
§ 255-40. Multifamily and attached-dwelling residential
development.
(b) Acer saccharum: sugar maple.
(c) Acer saccharum columnaris: columnar sugar maple.
(d) Acer rubra columnaris: columnar red maple.
(e) Crataegus phaenopyrum: Washington hawthorn.
(f) Fraxinus americana: white ash.
(g) Fraxinus pennsylvanica lanceolata: green ash.
(h) Ginkgo biloba: ginkgo (male).
(i) Gleditsia tricanthos inermis: moraine locust.
(j) Koelreuteria paniculata: goldenrain tree.
(k) Liquidambar styraciflua: sweet gum.
(l) Phellodendron amurense: Amur cork tree.
(m) Plantanus acerifolia: London plane tree.
(n) Prunus kwansan: kwansan cherry (upright form).
(o) Pyrus calleryana bradford: Bradford pear.
(p) Quercus borealis: red oak.
(q) Quercus coccinea: scarlet oak.
(r) Quercus phellos: willow oak.
(s) Tilia cordata: European linden.
(t) Zelkova serrata: Japanese zelkova.
(2) Upon the approval of the Board of Commissioners, other species
may be utilized.
A. Interior crosswalks may be required whenever necessary to facilitate
pedestrian circulation and to give access to community facilities in
blocks of over 1,000 feet in length.
B. Such crosswalks shall have an easement width of not less than 20 feet
and a paved walk of not less than four feet. They shall be clearly marked
by bollards, paving material, signing, lights or similar provisions to
ensure their visibility to motorists.
§ 255-38 CHARTER § 255-40
C:689
A. Approval of the preliminary plan must be obtained for the entire
proposed development. Final approval may be obtained section by
section, but such sections shall be specified on the preliminary plan and
must be numbered in the proposed order that they are to be developed.
Such order of development must be adhered to, and if changes are
required, plans must be resubmitted and processed pursuant to Article
III.
B. Attached-dwelling types should incorporate varied designs,
architectural modes and setbacks.
C. Access and circulation.
(1) Access to the dwellings and circulation between buildings and
other important project facilities for vehicular and pedestrian
traffic shall be comfortable and convenient for the occupants.
(2) Access and circulation for fire-fighting and other emergency
equipment, moving vans, fuel trucks, garbage collection, deliveries
and snow removal shall be planned for efficient operation and
convenience.
(3) Walking distance from the main entrance of a building or singlefamily
dwelling unit to a parking area shall be less than 100 feet.
Exceptions to this standard shall be reasonably justified by
compensating advantages, such as desirable views and site
preservation through adaption to topography. In no case shall the
distance exceed 250 feet.
D. Grading.
(1) Grading shall be designed for buildings, lawns, paved areas and
other facilities to assure adequate surface drainage, safe and
convenient access to and around the buildings, screening of
parking and other service areas and conservation of desirable
existing vegetation and natural ground forms.
(2) Grading around buildings shall be designated to be in harmony
with natural topography.
E. Driveways.
(1) Driveways shall be provided on the site where necessary for
convenient access to dwelling units, garage compounds, parking
areas, service entrances of buildings, collection of refuse and all
other necessary services. Driveways shall enter public streets at
safe locations.
(2) Driveways shall be planned for convenient circulation, suitable for
traffic needs and safety.
(3) All driveways shall be paved and constructed in accordance with
Township standards.
§ 255-40 RADNOR CODE § 255-40
C:690
§ 255-40.1. Town center residential. [Added 10-12-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-37]
§ 255-41. Nonresidential development.
F. Refuse collection stations.
(1) Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash
removal when individual collection is not made and indoor storage
is not provided.
(2) Collection stations shall be located so as to be separated
adequately from habitable buildings to avoid being offensive, but at
the same time be convenient for both collectors and residents and
shall be adequately screened and landscaped.
(3) If public collection is anticipated, the containers and the placement
thereof shall be subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
G. Planting. The appeal and character of the site shall be preserved and
enhanced by retaining and protecting existing trees and desirable
topographic features. Additional plant material shall be added for
privacy, shade, beauty of buildings and grounds and to screen out
objectionable features.
A. All regulations in § 255-40 shall apply unless otherwise expressly
superseded in this section.
B. Plant material shall be added if it adds privacy, shade, or beauty to the
buildings and grounds where possible, but not required as to force a
setback or yard in a lot.
C. Perpendicular and angle parking may be permitted along public streets.
D. Parking and driveway design shall allow vehicles to back out of a lot on
to a local street.
E. Buildings in this district developed for town center residential use will
be exempt from buffer, screen and setback requirements.
F. Shade trees shall only be required when that they are physically
possible within the lot and whose placement shall comply with § 255-38.
G. Encroachment on or above the second floor of a structure shall be
allowed over the public right-of-way so long as it does not project more
than 36 inches into the right-of-way. An encroachment shall not present
a hazard to public safety as determined by the Township Engineer.
A. The platting of individual lots for nonresidential uses shall be avoided in
favor of a comprehensive design of the land to be used for such
purposes.
§ 255-40 CHARTER § 255-41
C:691
§ 255-42. Buffer screens. [Amended 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
B. Additional width of streets adjacent to areas proposed for
nonresidential use may be required as deemed necessary by the Board
of Commissioners to assure the free flow of through traffic from
vehicles entering or leaving parking and loading areas.
C. When two adjacent lots proposed for nonresidential uses front on an
arterial or major collector street, the applicant may be required to
provide common ingress and egress as well as common parking
facilities. When three or more adjacent lots are proposed for
nonresidential uses, the applicant may be required to provide a service
road for common ingress and egress.
D. Alleys or service streets shall be required in commercial and industrial
land developments, except where adequate provisions are made for offstreet
loading.
E. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided; but where this proves impossible,
they shall be terminated with a paved turnaround of adequate
dimensions as approved by the Board of Commissioners.
F. Streets shall not be connected to local streets intended for
predominantly residential traffic.
G. Parking areas shall be located and designed in such a manner that they
are visibly secluded from eye level in the surrounding area. Grading to
depress the parking area, raised berms, landscaping or fencing are
satisfactory methods to create such seclusion.
H. Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash
removal when indoor collection is not provided. Collection stations shall
be screened from view and landscaped.
A. Buffer screens are required between subdivisions and land
developments and along existing streets to soften visual impact, to
screen glare and to create a visual barrier between conflicting land
uses. The extent of screening required shall be determined by the type
of use proposed and the adjacent uses or streets surrounding the
proposed development. The impact of the proposed use on adjoining
properties is the basis for establishing buffer screen standards.
B. To determine the required buffer screen and planting schedule, the
following three-step procedure shall be adhered to:
(1) Step 1: site analysis and determination of buffer screen class. For
each property boundary, the applicant shall determine the adjacent
land use or street classification for each property boundary. The
letter indicates the buffer yard class.201
201. Editor's Note: Table 1: Determination of Buffer Yard Class is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 255-41 RADNOR CODE § 255-42
C:692
(2) Step 2: selection of the planting option for the buffer screen class.
After determining the buffer screening class, the applicant shall
select a planting option from Table 2. For each buffer screening
class, several planting options are available, one of which the
applicant shall select to meet the buffer screens requirement for
each boundary. The Board of Commissioners may permit an
alternative planting option which shall have a screening capability
equal to or greater than any of the available options.
Table 2: Planting Options
The options below indicate the amount of plant material
that is required per linear foot of property line. Unless
stated below, plantings are required to be aligned on
property or right-of-way boundaries but may be sited on
any portion of the property for buffering, if permitted by
the Board of Commissioners. Plant materials shall be so
arranged to allow for proper growth and to provide the
buffering intended herein. All buffers shall have a
minimum width of 10 feet, unless otherwise specified in
Chapter 280, Zoning.
Class Option
A 1 canopy tree per 40 feet along boundary line, plus
1 flowering tree per 60 feet (informally arranged),
plus
1 evergreen per 60 feet (informally arranged)
1 canopy tree per 40 feet (informally arranged), plus
1 evergreen per 30 feet (informally arranged)
B 1 evergreen per 8 feet (informally arranged)
1 evergreen per 15 feet with 4-foot-high berm
1 evergreen per 15 feet (informally arranged), plus
1 evergreen shrub per 8 feet (informally arranged)
1 evergreen per 10 feet (informally arranged), plus
1 shrub per 4 feet (informally arranged)
Buffer screening on property line (3-foot centers)
(3) Step 3: selection of plant materials from the plant materials list.
Each planting option may utilize any of the plant materials outlined
in Appendix A.202 Minimum plant size given either in height or in
caliper is indicated on this table. The Board of Commissioners may
permit other planting types if they are hardy to the area, are not
subject to blight or disease and are of the same general character
and growth habit as those listed in Appendix A.203 All planting
202. Editor's Note: Said appendix is located at the end of this chapter.
203. Editor's Note: Said appendix is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-42 CHARTER § 255-42
C:693
§ 255-43. Recreation areas and open space.
material shall meet the standards of the American Association
of Nurserymen. The applicant shall not be required to provide
buffer screens should existing planting, topography or man-made
structures on the subject property be deemed acceptable for
screening purposes by the Board of Commissioners.
A. Plotting of recreation areas. Recreation areas shall be laid out in
accordance with the best principals of site design. The recreation areas
shall form part of an interconnecting open space system which extends
throughout the development. The following criteria shall be utilized to
determine whether the recreation areas have been properly designed:
(1) Recreation areas shall be readily accessible to all development
residents or, in the case of recreation areas dedicated to the
Township, shall be easily and safely accessible to the general
public. At least one side of the recreation area shall abut a street
for a minimum distance of 50 feet for access of emergency and
maintenance vehicles.
(2) Recreation areas shall have a suitable topography, drainage and
soils for use and development of recreational activities.
(3) When active recreation activities are proposed, which entail the
construction and installation of equipment or playing surfaces, a
Class B type buffer, as described in § 255-42, shall be provided
when such activities abut residential uses.
(4) Recreational areas shall not be traversed by streets or utility
easements unless said utilities are placed underground and no part
of them or their supportive equipment protrudes above ground
level.
(5) The shape shall be suitable to accommodate those recreation and
open-space activities appropriate to the location and needs of
future residents.
B. Open space designation. All land held for open space shall be so
designated on the plans. The plans shall contain the following
statement for lands in Subsection B(1), (2) or (3) below: "Open space
land may not be separately sold, nor shall such land be further
developed or subdivided." All subdivision plans shall further designate
the use of open space, the type of maintenance to be provided and a
planting plan or schedule. In designating use and maintenance, the
following classes may be used: [Amended 6-28-1993 by Ord. No.
93-15]
(1) Lawn: a grass area with or without trees which may be used by the
residents for a variety of purposes and which shall be mowed
regularly to ensure a neat and tidy appearance.
§ 255-42 RADNOR CODE § 255-43
C:694
(2) Natural area: an area of natural vegetation undisturbed during
construction or replanted. Such areas may contain pathways.
Meadows shall be maintained as such and not let to become weedinfested.
Maintenance may be minimal, but shall prevent the
proliferation of weeds and undesirable plants, such as honeysuckle
and poison ivy.Litter, dead trees and brush shall be removed, and
streams shall be kept in free-flowing condition.
(3) Recreation area: an area designated for a specific recreation use,
including but not limited to tennis, swimming, shuffleboard,
playfield and tot lot. Such areas shall be maintained so as to avoid
creating a hazard or nuisance and shall perpetuate the proposed
use.
C. Conveyance and maintenance of open space.
(1) All open space shown on the final plan as filed in the office of the
Township Engineer and subsequently recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County must be conveyed in
accordance with one or more of the following methods:
(a) Dedication in fee-simple to the Township of Radnor. The
Township may, but shall not be required to, accept any portion
or portions of the open space, provided that such land is freely
accessible to and of benefit to the general public of Radnor
Township, there are no acquisition costs involved and the
Township agrees to and has access to maintain such land; and
it must be acceptable with regard to size, shape, location and
improvement.
(b) By conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a
corporation, association, funded community trust,
condominium or other legal entity.
[1] The terms of such instrument of conveyance must include
provisions suitable to the Township for guaranteeing:
[a] The continued use of such land for the intended
purpose.
[b] Continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of
the open space requiring maintenance.
[c] The availability of funds required for such
maintenance.
[d] Adequate insurance protection.
[e] Provisions for payment of applicable taxes.
[f] Recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation
or otherwise.
§ 255-43 CHARTER § 255-43
C:695
§ 255-43.1. Park and recreational land and fee requirements.
[Added 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01]
[g] Such other covenants and/or easements that the
Township shall deem desirable to fulfill the purposes
and intent of these regulations.
[2] The following are prerequisites for such a corporation or
association:
[a] It must be set up before any homes or dwelling units
are sold or leased or otherwise conveyed.
[b] Membership must be mandatory for each buyer and/or
lessee and any successive buyer and/or lessee.
[c] It must be responsible for liability, insurance, taxes,
recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation
or otherwise and the maintenance of recreational and
other facilities.
[d] Members or beneficiaries must pay their pro rata
share of the costs, and the assessment levied can
become a lien on the property.
[e] It must be able to adjust the assessment to meet
future conditions.
[f] Such corporation or association shall not be dissolved
nor shall it dispose of the open space, by sale or
otherwise, except to an organization conceived and
established to own and maintain the open space. The
corporation or association must first offer to dedicate
the open space to the Township before any such sale
or disposition of the open space.
(2) The dedication of open space, streets or other lands in common
ownership of the corporation, association or other legal entity or
the Township shall be absolute and not subject to reversion for
possible future use for further development.
(3) All documents pertaining to the conveyance and maintenance of
the open space shall meet the approval of the Solicitor as to legal
form and effect and to the Board of Commissioners as to suitability
for the proposed use of the open space.
A. Purpose. All residential subdivisions of four or more lots/dwelling units
and nonresidential subdivisions or land development plans regulated
under this section shall provide for suitable and adequate recreation
land and/or fees in order to:
(1) Insure adequate park and recreational areas and facilities to serve
the future residents of the Township.
§ 255-43 RADNOR CODE § 255-43.1
C:696
(2) Maintain compliance with recreational standards as recommended
by the Radnor Township Comprehensive Plan, and Radnor
Township Parks, Recreation and Open Space Plan of 1991, or as
may be amended.
(3) Allow for orderly acquisition and development of park and
recreation areas needed to serve new residents.
(4) Ensure that dedicated park and recreation land is suitable for the
intended use.
B. Park and recreational land dedication requirements. [Amended
10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-11]
(1) For all residential subdivisions or land developments involving a
total of four or more lots and/or dwelling units, a minimum of 1,440
square feet of suitable park and recreation land shall be provided
per dwelling unit within such subdivision/land development, unless
the developer agrees to a fee in lieu of $3,307 per dwelling unit
(existing or proposed).
(2) For all nonresidential or institutional subdivisions and/or land
developments involving more than 5,000 square feet of floor area,
the amount of land to be dedicated for park and recreational area
shall be 2,500 square feet per 6,400 square feet of floor area
(existing or proposed), or portion thereof, unless the developer
agrees to a fee in lieu of $3,307 per 6,400 square feet of floor area
(existing or proposed).
(3) For the purpose of this section, "floor area" is defined as the sum of
all horizontal floor area(s) of a building or group of buildings on a
lot, measured from the exterior faces of the building or from the
center line of party walls separating two buildings.
(4) This recreation land dedication requirement shall in no way
diminish, supersede, or be satisfied by any other requirement for
recreation lands, open space, or buffers set forth in this chapter or
any other chapter of the Township Code, including, but not limited
to, Chapter 280, the Township Zoning Ordinance.
C. Criteria for location and suitability of park and recreation land
dedication.
(1) The Radnor Township Planning Commission and Park and
Recreation Board will advise the Board of Commissioners on land
offered for dedication for park and recreational purposes.
(2) The intended use must meet the goals and objectives as outlined in
the Radnor Township Parks, Recreation and Open Space Plan of
1991, or as may be amended.
(3) Factors to be considered in determining park and recreation land
locations and suitability shall include but not be limited to:
§ 255-43.1 CHARTER § 255-43.1
C:697
(a) Site(s) should be easily and safely accessible, have good
ingress and egress and have access to a public road or to a
road to be dedicated as a public road, or to a road which the
residents of the development in which the site is located can
use to reach the park and recreation site.
(b) Site(s) should have suitable topography for the development as
a particular type of active or passive recreation area.
Suitability shall be determined upon recommendation by the
Township Engineer and shall be judged on the basis of the type
of recreation area proposed.
(c) Size and shape of the site(s) should be suitable for the
development as a recreation area. The configuration of the
recreation area must be able to accommodate recreation
activities proposed by the development plans. The required
area shall not include narrow or irregular pieces which are
remnants from lotting or left over after street and parking
areas have been laid out.
(d) Site(s) should meet the minimum size with respect to usable
acreage as recommended by the Radnor Township Parks,
Recreation and Open Space Plan of 1991 for Radnor Township.
(e) Sites designated for active recreation land shall not contain
lands with natural resource restrictions, as defined by the
Township Zoning Ordinance,204 stormwater detention facilities,
or lands designated for any other purpose. Site(s) designated
for passive recreation may contain lands with natural resource
restrictions, provided that the site(s) can be used by residents
of the Township for passive recreational activities.
(f) The recreational activities and/or facilities for which the area is
intended must be specified on the approved record plan.
(g) Recreation areas shall not be traversed by utility easements
unless said utilities are placed underground. Recreational
areas shall not contain or be traversed by any underground gas
pipelines.
(h) On-site improvements on the dedicated park and recreation
land shall be commensurate with the adjacent on-site
development improvements, including but not limited to,
grading, curbing and utilities.
(i) Land shall comply with any other applicable requirements of
the Township Zoning and Subdivision/Land Development
Ordinances.
D. Ownership and dedication to the Township.
204. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 255-43.1 RADNOR CODE § 255-43.1
C:698
(1) If the Board of Commissioners determines that a park and
recreation land dedication would be in the public interest, such
park and recreation land shall first be offered for dedication to
Radnor Township. If the Township does not accept dedication, the
land may be owned and maintained by an entity that the Board of
Commissioners determines is acceptable to ensure proper longterm
oversight and maintenance of the land and which agrees to
accept such land for permanent park and recreation purposes:
(a) Retention by the owner of the development, if the dwellings
are to be rented, with proper documentation to ensure that the
land will be used in perpetuity for park and recreational
purposes.
(b) Dedication to a formal homeowners' or condominium
association, with such agreement subject to approval of the
Board of Commissioners. If any entity responsible for such
park and recreation land should dissolve or become inactive or
decide that it no longer wishes to be responsible for such land,
it shall offer such land at no cost to the Township.
(c) Dedication to a state or county government, or other approved
entity.
(2) If the Board of Commissioners deems it to be in the public interest
to accept dedicated land for park and recreational purposes, such
acceptance shall be by adoption of a resolution of the Board of
Commissioners and acceptance of a deed of dedication from the
developer.
(3) Park and recreation land shall include deed restrictions to
permanently restrict its use for park and recreation and to prohibit
the construction of buildings on the land, except buildings for
noncommercial recreation or to support maintenance of the land.
E. Fee in lieu of dedication. Where the Township determines that the
dedication of the land required for recreation purposes is not feasible
under the criteria set forth in this section, and upon agreement with the
applicant or developer, the applicant or developer shall pay a fee in lieu
of dedication of any such land to the Township in compliance with the
following: [Amended 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-11]
(1) The fee for residential subdivisions or land developments shall be
$3,307 per dwelling unit (existing or proposed), which is based
upon the estimated value of the land that would have to be
dedicated for each dwelling unit.
(2) The fee for nonresidential subdivisions or land developments shall
be $3,307 per 6,400 square feet of floor area (existing or
proposed), or portion thereof, which is based upon the estimated
value of the land that would have to be dedicated for that amount of
floor area.
§ 255-43.1 CHARTER § 255-43.1
C:699
(3) Limitations on use of fees.
(a) Any recreation fees collected under this section shall be placed
within an interest-bearing Recreation Fee Account which shall
function as a capital reserve fund and shall be accounted for
separately from other Township funds. The funds may be used
for the purpose of providing, acquiring, operating, or
maintaining park or recreational facilities reasonably
accessible to the contributing development.
(b) The amount and location of land to be dedicated or the fees to
be paid shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the
park and recreational facilities by future inhabitants of the
residential, nonresidential or institutional development or
subdivision.
(c) Fees required under this section shall be paid prior to the
recording of the applicable final plan or as determined by the
Commissioners.
(4) Upon request by the party who paid the fee, the Township shall
refund such fee, plus interest accumulated thereon, from the date
of payment if the Township has utilized the fee paid for purposes
other than as set forth in this section.
(5) The above-listed fees in lieu of dedication may be revised from time
to time by separate resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 255-43.1 RADNOR CODE § 255-43.1
C:700
ARTICLE VI
Required Improvements
§ 255-44. Purpose; conformance required.
§ 255-45. Revision of plans during construction.
When changes from the accepted drawings and specifications become
necessary during construction, written acceptance by the Township, upon
the advice of the Township Engineer, shall be secured before the execution
of such change.
§ 255-46. Maintenance of streets.
Adequate provisions for the satisfactory maintenance of all streets shall be
made by dedication to and acceptance for maintenance by the Township or
by other acceptable means.
§ 255-47. Streets.205
A. The purpose of this article is to establish and define the public
improvements which will be required by the Township to be constructed
or cause to be constructed by the applicant.
B. All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications of the Township.
C. The improvements included in this article are minimum requirements.
However, the Board of Commissioners reserves the right, in any case, to
increase the same if conditions so warrant.
A. The construction of streets and driveways as shown upon final plans
and as contained in contract agreements shall in every respect conform
to such requirements as the Township may, by resolution, require for
the construction of streets.
B. All streets shall be graded to:
(1) The grades shown on the street profiles and cross-section plan
submitted and approved with the final plan.
(2) The full width of the right-of-way; in wooded areas this may be
modified to preserve existing trees.
C. Along the existing street on which a subdivision or land development
abuts (hereinafter called a "boundary street"), improvements shall be
made to the street. The improvements to the boundary street shall be
determined by the width of the required cartway and built to the
specifications established by the Township.
205. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 250, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 255-44 CHARTER § 255-48
C:701
§ 255-48. Street signs.
§ 255-49. Streetlights.
Where appropriate, the developer shall install or cause to be installed,
at the developer's expense, metal or fiberglass pole streetlights serviced
by underground conduit in accordance with a plan to be prepared by
the developer's engineer and approved by the Board of Commissioners
and by the Philadelphia Electric Company. The equipment of metal or
fiberglass poles may be waived in such instances as approved by the Board
of Commissioners due to the existence of wooden poles already in place.
Provisions shall be made for energizing said lighting after 50% or more
of the dwellings in a given subdivision or land development or section
of a subdivision or land development have been occupied. The developer
shall be responsible for all costs involved in lighting the streets until such
time that the streets are accepted or condemned as public streets by the
Township.
§ 255-50. Monuments.
§ 255-51. Sidewalks.
A. The Township shall erect, at the developer's expense, at every street
intersection a street sign or street signs meeting Township approval,
having thereon the names of the intersecting streets. At intersections
where streets cross, there shall be at least two such street signs; and at
the intersections where one street ends or joins with another street,
there shall be at least one such street sign.
B. Street signs are to be erected when the first dwelling on the street is
occupied. Temporary street signs may be erected on the approval of the
Township, but shall be made permanent before final offer for the
dedication of roads is made.
C. Warning and regulatory signs shall be erected along streets as required
by the Board of Commissioners.
A. Monuments shall be placed in each change in direction of street-line
boundary; two to be placed at each street intersection and one on each
side of any street at angle points and at the beginning and end of
curves. Areas to be conveyed for public use shall be fully monumented
at their external boundaries.
B. Monuments shall be placed in the ground after final grading is
completed, at a time specified by the Township Engineer.
C. All monuments may be checked for accuracy by the Township Engineer
or their accuracy certified by the owner's engineer or surveyor.
Accuracy of monuments shall be within 3/100 of a foot.
A. Sidewalks shall be constructed as required by § 255-27C. These
standards shall apply on all new streets and on existing streets, unless
§ 255-48 RADNOR CODE § 255-51
C:702
§ 255-52. Curbs.
§ 255-53. Storm sewerage system.
The developer shall construct stormwater drainage facilities, including
curbs, catch basins, inlets, storm sewers, culverts, road swales, open
channels and other structures in order to prevent erosion, flooding and
other hazards to life and property. All such facilities are to be of adequate
size and grade to hydraulically accommodate maximum potential volumes
of flow; and size, type and installation of all storm drains and sewers shall
be constructed in accordance with approved plans. The Township shall have
the option of requiring that those areas set aside as retention or catch
basins shall be dedicated to the Township.
§ 255-54. Central water supply; fire hydrants. [Amended 6-11-1990
by Ord. No. 90-27]
in the opinion of the Board of Commissioners they are unnecessary for
public safety and convenience.
B. All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with § 255-37 of this
chapter.
C. The alignment and gradient of walks shall be coordinated with the
grading plan to prevent the passage of concentrated surface water on
or across the sidewalk and to prevent the pocketing of surface water by
sidewalks.
A. Curbs shall be provided as required in § 255-27C, unless in the opinion
of the Board of Commissioners they are unnecessary.
B. Curbs, where required, shall be the vertical type and constructed in
accordance with Township specifications.
A. The developer shall construct water mains in such a manner as to make
adequate water service available to each lot or dwelling unit within the
subdivision or land development. A minimum pressure of 20 pounds per
square inch shall be provided at each house or other building to be
connected to the water supply main. The water supply must comply
with the regulations and the standards of the Department of
Environmental Resources. Said supply shall be located and constructed
so as to eliminate the possibility of flood damage.
B. The system shall also be designed with adequate capacity and
appropriately spaced fire hydrants for fire-fighting purposes pursuant
to the specifications of the National Fire Protection Association. Review
and approval by the Township Engineer and the Township Fire Marshal
shall be required in order to ensure that adequate fire protection is
provided. Therefore, any and all subdivision and land development
plans submitted to this Township shall indicate, according to scale, the
§ 255-51 CHARTER § 255-54
C:703
§ 255-55. Private water supply.
Where no public water is accessible, water shall be furnished by the
developer on an individual lot basis. If wells are installed on each lot
and the lot also contains its own sewage disposal facilities, the well shall
be of the drilled type, cased and grout-sealed into the bedrock. The well
will be required to have a production of not less than six gallons per
minute as established by bailor tests and certified by the well driller. Before
being placed in consumer use, it shall be disinfected by the use of sodium
hypochlorite or other acceptable solutions and a sample bacteriological
examination collected by a licensed water analyst.
§ 255-56. Public sewer systems.
closest existing fire hydrant to the proposed subdivision and land
development.
C. Where water is to be provided by means other than by private wells
owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, the applicant shall present evidence to the
Board of Commissioners that the subdivision or development is to be
supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association
of lot owners or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy
of a certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utilities Commission or an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the
area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable
evidence. [Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
A. Wherever practical, sanitary sewers shall be installed and connected to
an appropriate public sewer system. Where a sanitary sewer is not yet
accessible but is planned for extension to the subdivision within 10
years, the developer shall install sewer lines, including lateral
connections, as may be necessary to provide adequate service to each
lot when connection with the public sewer system is made. The sewer
lines shall be suitably capped at the limits of the subdivision, and the
laterals shall be capped at the right-of-way line. The sewer installation
shall include construction within rights-of-way or easements to bring
the sewer to the future connection with the public sewer system.
(1) A sewer shall be considered to be planned for extension to a given
area any time after preliminary engineering and related studies
have been completed by the Township and the construction of
facilities adequate to serve the area containing the subdivision or
land development have been programmed for completion within a
reasonable time.
(2) When capped sewers are provided, approved on-site disposal
facilities shall also be provided.
§ 255-54 RADNOR CODE § 255-56
C:704
§ 255-57. Lot area requirements when public sewer and/or water is
unavailable. [Added 3-10-1986 by Ord. No. 86-09; amended
10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
§ 255-58. Private sewer systems.
§ 255-59. Electric, telephone and communication facilities.
B. All public sanitary sewers shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with Township specifications. Such sewers shall be located
or constructed so as to eliminate the possibility of flood damage.
C. No public sewer system or treatment plant shall be constructed until
plans and specifications have been submitted to the Department of
Environmental Resources and the Township and approved in
accordance with existing laws.
A. When either public sewer or public water is unavailable, the minimum
lot size shall be 43,560 square feet and the minimum width at the
building line shall be 120 feet.
B. When both public sewer and water are unavailable, the minimum lot
size shall be 60,000 square feet and the minimum width of the building
line shall be 150 feet.
A. If public facilities are not available, as determined by the Township, the
developer shall provide for sewage disposal on an individual lot basis.
B. On-lot sewage disposal facilities must comply with the provisions of
Chapters 71 and 73, Administration of Sewage Facilities Program and
Standards for Sewage Disposal Facilities, Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act (Act of January 24, 1966), P.L. 1535, No. 537, as amended
(35 P.S. § 750.1). Prior to the granting of final approval by the Township,
the proposed facilities shall be deemed satisfactory by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, and a notation to this effect
shall be placed on the record plan. [See § 255-23B(2)(c).]
C. The construction of on-lot systems shall be inspected by the Township
Engineer and/or a registered Sewage Enforcement Officer, as follows:
(1) Upon completion of the excavation.
(2) Upon installation of the major equipment, such as septic tanks,
distribution boxes and drain tiles, before any backfilling.
A. All electric-, telephone- and communication-service facilities, both main
and service lines, shall be provided by underground cables installed in
accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of the utility
and other companies providing such services. Such facilities shall be
located or constructed so as to eliminate the possibility of flood
damage.
§ 255-56 CHARTER § 255-59
C:705
§ 255-60. Grading.
Grading shall conform in all respects to the final plan.
§ 255-61. Planting.
§ 255-62. Community facilities.
Additional community facilities, as set forth in § 255-26, may be required to
serve the proposed lots or dwellings in a subdivision or land development.
Where a proposed park, playground or other public facility shown in the
Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision or
land development or when additional facilities are made necessary by the
development, the dedication or reservation of such areas or financial
contribution for the construction of such facilities may be required by
the Township in those cases in which it deems such requirements to be
reasonable.
§ 255-63. Inspection of streets and improvements.
B. Where practicable, all utilities shall be located within the street rightof-
way; otherwise, easements or rights-of-way of sufficient width for
installation and maintenance shall be provided.
C. Final plans shall show locations of all utilities and shall be coordinated
with required street tree planting.
A. Street trees and other required planting shall be in accordance with
§§ 255-29B, 255-38 and 255-42.
B. Street trees and other required plant material shall not be planted until
the finished grading of the subdivision or land development has been
completed.
C. The developer shall replace, in accordance with landscaping plans, any
plantings that die or, in the opinion of the landscape architect, are in an
unhealthy or unsightly condition and/or have lost their natural shape
due to dead branches, excessive pruning, inadequate or improper
maintenance or any other causes due to the developer's negligence,
prior to an offer of dedication. The developer shall not be held
responsible for acts of vandalism occurring after the commencement of
the guaranty period.
A. Preliminary inspection.
(1) Prior to commencing construction, the applicant shall notify the
Township Engineer of the proposed construction schedule.
Pursuant to notification by the applicant, the Township Engineer
shall inspect required improvements during the initial construction
phase and on a periodic basis thereafter, as may be required to
ensure proper adherence to this chapter. The Township Engineer
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of those items of construction,
§ 255-59 RADNOR CODE § 255-63
C:706
§ 255-64. Acceptance of streets and improvements.
material and workmanship which do not comply with Township
specifications or the approved final plan.
(2) The applicant, upon notification from the Township Engineer, shall
proceed, at his own cost, to make such corrections as shall be
required to comply with the Township specifications and approved
final plans and shall notify the Township Engineer upon completion
requesting final inspection.
B. Final inspection. The Township Engineer shall make a final inspection,
with the applicant, of all required improvements.
C. As-built plan. An as-built plan prepared and certified by a land surveyor
registered in the State of Pennsylvania shall be submitted to the
Township Engineer for review and approval. This plan shall accurately
indicate the location of all improvements, both public and private, on
the site and whatever other information the Township Engineer or
Director of Public Works feels necessary.206 [Added 2-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-02]
A. The Board of Commissioners shall notify the applicant of acceptance of
the required improvements, if satisfied that the applicant has complied
with all specifications and ordinances of the Township.
B. The applicant shall furnish the Township with two paper prints of the
completed required improvements, including drainage, profiles and
utilities, and pay all costs for the Clerk of the Delaware County Court of
Common Pleas on the petition and resolution of the Board of
Commissioners to said Court for its approval of the acceptance of the
required improvements.
C. No streets or other improvements will be accepted by the Township if
such improvements were constructed during the period from October
15 to April 15 of each year, unless otherwise recommended by the
Township Engineer.
206. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Maintenance inspection of private stormwater
management systems, added 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 96-08, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-11.
§ 255-63 CHARTER § 255-64
C:707

ARTICLE VII
Guaranties and Contracts
§ 255-65. Guaranty required.
Before approving any subdivision or land development plan for recording,
the Board of Commissioners shall either require that the necessary grading,
paving and other improvements as herein specified shall have been installed
in strict accordance with the standards and specifications of the Township
or that the Township is assured, by means of a proper contract containing,
among other items, performance and maintenance guaranty, that the
improvements will subsequently be installed by the owner and/or applicant,
hereinafter referred to as the "developer."
§ 255-66. Written agreements; dedication of improvements.
A. In all cases where the necessary grading, paving and other subdivision
improvements (including both public and private improvements)
required herein shall not have been installed in strict accordance with
the standards and specifications of the Township prior to the Township
approving any subdivision or land development plan for recording, the
developer shall enter into a written agreement with the Township in the
manner and form approved by the Solicitor, wherein the developer shall
agree, to the extent applicable:
(1) To construct or cause to be constructed, at his own expense, all
streets; roadways; cartways; driveways; monuments; street signs
and street names; off-street parking/parking lots; curbs; sidewalks;
street tree and buffer plantings; lighting; fire hydrants; water
mains; sanitary sewer, including capped sewers; storm sewers;
drainage and erosion control improvements, including but not
limited to stormwater detention and/or retention basins and other
related facilities; recreation facilities; open space improvements;
tree protection and preservation; and other improvements shown
on the approved subdivision or land development plan, all in strict
accordance with the standards and specifications of the Township
and within the time specified in said agreement. [Amended
9-19-1994 by Ord. No. 94-21]
(2) To deposit, with the Township, financial security in an amount
sufficient to cover the cost of all subdivision improvements
(including both public and private improvements). The financial
security shall be posted contemporaneously with the execution of
the agreement, in the form of either an irrevocable letter of credit
with a federal- or a commonwealth-chartered lending institution, a
restrictive/escrow account in the name of the Township with a
federal or commonwealth lending institution, a corporate surety
bond from a bonding company authorized to do business within the
commonwealth or such other type of financial security which the
Board of Commissioners may approve in an amount to be approved
§ 255-65 CHARTER § 255-66
C:709
by the Township Engineer. The bonding company may be chosen by
the developer, provided that the bonding company shall stipulate
that it submits to Pennsylvania jurisdiction and Delaware County
venue in the event of legal action. The financial security shall
provide for and secure to the public the completion of all
subdivision improvements for which the security is being posted
within one year of the date fixed in the subdivision plan or
subdivision agreement for completion of the improvements. The
amount of financial security shall be equal to 110% of the cost
of the required improvements for which financial security is to
be posted. The cost of the improvements shall be established by
submission to the Township Engineer of a bona fide bid or bids
from the contractor or contractors chosen by the developer to
complete the improvements or, in the absence of such bona fide
bids, the cost shall be established by an estimate prepared by the
applicant's engineer and approved by the Township Engineer. If the
developer requires more than one year from the date of the posting
of the financial security to complete the required improvements,
the amount of financial security shall be increased by an additional
10% for each one-year period beyond the first anniversary date
from posting of financial security or to an amount not exceeding
110% of the cost of completing the required improvements as
reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year
period by using the above bidding procedure.
(3) In the case where a development is projected over a period of
years, the Board of Commissioners may authorize submission of
final plans by sections or stages of development subject to such
requirements or guaranties as to improvements in future sections
or stages of development as it finds essential for the protection of
any finally approved section of the development.
(4) If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with
apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the
jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public
utility or municipal authority separate and distinct from the
municipality, financial security to assure proper completion and
maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the
regulations of the controlling public utility or municipal authority
and shall not be included within the financial security as otherwise
required by this section.
(5) As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
developer may request the Township Engineer to release or
authorize the release, from time to time of such portions of the
financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Any such request shall be in
writing addressed to the Township Engineer, and the Township
Engineer shall have 45 days from receipt of such request within
which to certify, in writing, that such portion of the work upon the
§ 255-66 RADNOR CODE § 255-66
C:710
improvements has been completed in accordance with the
approved plans. Upon such certification, the Township Engineer
shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending
institution of an amount, as estimated by the Township Engineer,
fairly representing the value of the improvements completed. The
Township Engineer may, prior to final release at the time of
completion and certification, require retention of 10% of the
estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements. The Township
Engineer, in certifying the completion of work for a partial release,
shall not be bound to the amount requested by the applicant, but
shall certify his independent evaluation of the proper amount of
partial releases.
(6) To make adequate provisions with the Township Engineer for the
inspection of the construction of the aforesaid improvements to
assure strict compliance with Township standards and
specifications.
(7) To pay all costs, charges or rates of the utility furnishing fire
hydrant and electric service for the fire hydrants and streetlighting
facilities installed by the developer, until such time as the streets
shown on the subdivision and/or land development plans shall have
been accepted or condemned by the Township for public use, and to
indemnify and save harmless the Township from and against all
suits, actions, claims and demands for electric service and fire
hydrant service as aforesaid, or any part thereof, to the time that
said streets shall be accepted or condemned as public streets in the
manner hereinabove set forth.
(8) To reimburse the Township promptly for reasonable attorneys' and
engineers' inspection fees and fees for other professionals
employed by the Township to review, inspect or process subdivision
and land development plans.
B. The developer shall, when the improvements are completed to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer, dedicate said streets and/or
other parcels, together with any improvements thereunder or
thereupon, to the Township by an agreement in a form approved by the
Township Solicitor, which agreements shall include a reference to a
plan of the streets and/or other parcels dedicated. The financial
security shall provide for and secure to the public the completion of all
required improvements for which the security is being posted on or
before the date fixed in the Board's formal action of approval or
accompanying agreement for completion of improvements. The amount
of financial security shall be equal to 110% of the cost of the required
improvements for which financial security is to be posted. The amount
of such cost shall be that estimated as of 90 days following the date
scheduled for completion by the developer. The Township may adjust
annually the amount of the financial security by comparing the actual
cost of the improvements which have been completed and the
estimated cost for the completion of the remaining improvements as of
§ 255-66 CHARTER § 255-66
C:711
the expiration of the 90th day after either the original date scheduled
for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said
adjustment, the Township may require the developer to post additional
security in order to assure that the financial security equals said 110%.
Any additional security shall be posted by the developer in accordance
with the terms of this section. The amount of financial security required
shall be based upon an estimate of the cost of completion of the
required improvements, submitted by the applicant or developer and
prepared by a professional engineer, licensed as such in Pennsylvania,
and certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of
such cost. The Board, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer,
may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the
applicant or developer and the Township are unable to agree upon an
estimate, then the estimate shall be determined in accordance with
the terms of Section 509(g) of the Municipalities Planning Code.207 If
the developer requires more than one year from the date. [Amended
10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
C. Where the Board of Commissioners accepts dedication of all or some of
the required improvements following completion (whether such
dedication is of the fee or of an easement), the developer shall post
financial security to secure the structural integrity of the improvements
and the functioning of the improvements in accordance with the design
and specifications as depicted on the final plan. The security shall be in
the form as authorized in Subsection A(2) above and shall be for a term
of 18 months from the date of the acceptance of dedication and shall be
in an amount equal to 15% of the actual cost of installation of the
improvements so dedicated.
D. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, he shall notify the Board of Commissioners, in writing,
by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer.
The Board shall, within 10 days following receipt of such notice, direct
and authorize the Township Engineer or his designate to inspect all of
the aforesaid improvements. The Township Engineer shall, thereupon,
file a report, in writing, with the Board and shall promptly file a copy of
the same to the developer by certified mail. The report shall be made
and mailed within 30 days following receipt by the Township Engineer
of the aforesaid authorization from the Board; said report shall be
detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said improvements,
either in whole or in part. If said improvements or any portion thereof
shall be approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, said
report shall contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or
rejection. Approval of improvements shall not be given until all
construction debris has been removed from the site; no such debris
shall be buried, burned or otherwise disposed of on the site. The Board
shall notify the developer, within 15 days of receipt of the Township
207. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509(g).
§ 255-66 RADNOR CODE § 255-66
C:712
Engineer's report, in writing, by certified mail of the action of the Board
with regard to approval, nonapproval or rejection of the improvements.
If any portion of said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Board, the developer shall proceed to complete
those improvements and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification as outlined herein shall be followed. [Added 10-22-1990
by Ord. No. 90-49]
§ 255-66 CHARTER § 255-66
C:713

ARTICLE VIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 255-67. Amendments. [Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-49]
§ 255-68. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-49]
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of
not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
A. The Board may, from time to time, revise, modify or amend the terms of
this chapter. The Board shall submit any proposed amendment to the
Township Planning Commission and, at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on the proposed amendment, to the Delaware County Planning
Commission, for review and recommendation. The Board shall take no
action to approve or deny any proposed amendment until it has
received a report on the proposed amendment from the County
Planning Commission or until 30 days have been allowed for the receipt
of such report.
B. The Board of Commissioners shall, during a public meeting, fix the time
and place of a public hearing on a proposed subdivision amendment and
cause notice thereof to be given as follows:
(1) By publishing a legal notice once a week for two successive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation within the Township as
provided for in § 9.02 of the Home Rule Charter. Such notice shall
state the date, place, time and particular nature to be considered at
the public hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30
days and the second publication shall not be less than seven days
from the date of the hearing.
(2) By mailing a notice thereof to contiguous municipalities, the
Township School District and residents or associations of residents
within the Township who shall have registered their names and
addresses with the Township. The Board of Commissioners may fix
an annual fee of provisions of notices to such registered persons or
associations.
C. In the event that substantial amendments are made in the proposed
ordinance or amendment, before voting on enactment, the Board, at
least 10 days prior to enactment, shall readvertise a brief summary
setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail together with a
summary of the amendments.
D. Within 30 days following adoption, the Township shall forward a
certified copy of any amendment to this chapter to the Delaware County
Planning Commission.
§ 255-67 CHARTER § 255-68
C:715
incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence
or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination of
a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice, determining
that there has been a violation, further determines that there was a good
faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter
to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall
be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following
the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice, and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 255-69. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that:
A. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provisions of this
chapter to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such
decision shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly stated
in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions of
this chapter shall continue to be separately and fully effective.
B. If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision
or provisions of this chapter to a lot, building or other structure or tract
of land to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such
decision shall be limited to the person, property or situation
immediately involved in the controversy and the application of any such
provision to other persons, property or situations shall not be affected.
§ 255-68 RADNOR CODE § 255-69
C:716
ARTICLE IX
Wayne Business Overlay District
[Added 7-16-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-28]
§ 255-70. Legal basis.
The adoption of a new Article IX creating provisions for the Wayne Business
Overlay District within Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land, of the Township
Code is enabled through provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Code, PL 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended (MPC).208
§ 255-71. Purpose; intent of regulations.
Article IX of the Zoning Code is enacted to provide and promote
opportunities for development and redevelopment within the Wayne
Business Overlay District (hereinafter WBOD) as set forth in the Master
Plan adopted by the Board of Commissioners on September 11, 2006. These
regulations are intended to provide opportunities for an appropriate mix of
residential and nonresidential uses within the WBOD, establish regulations
for special use districts within the boundaries of the Master Plan, promote
the use of mass transportation, and provide for enhanced vibrancy through
building, site, and streetscape design. Where there is a conflict between
these regulations and regulations set in Chapter 255, the provisions of this
article shall apply.
§ 255-72. Designation of district boundaries.
The WBOD shall be the boundaries designated within the Master Plan,
adopted September 11, 2006 by the Board of Commissioners, as set forth in
Exhibit A.209
§ 255-73. Conflict with other code sections.
The definitions and regulations set forth in this article shall apply to the
WBOD. Wherever there is a conflict or inconsistency between the WBOD
regulations and other definitions and regulations of the Chapter 255, those
regulations set forth in this article shall govern development and
redevelopment within the WBOD.
§ 255-74. Site amenity requirements.
As a part of every application for development or redevelopment of a
property, site amenities shall be provided and installed by the applicant
where applicable. The maintenance of these amenities shall be provided
by the property owner where applicable. Each application will be reviewed
individually. Required amenities, or any deviation therefrom, shall be at the
discretion of the Township.
208. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., the Municipalities Planning Code.
209. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 255-70 CHARTER § 255-75
C:717
§ 255-75. Tree design standards.
Street trees shall be installed and maintained as follows:
§ 255-76. Streetlight and parking lot light standards.
A. Street trees, 2 1/2 to three inches in caliper, shall be planted along both
sides of streets at an interval of 40 feet on center, but they shall not
block visibility of store windows.
B. Street trees shall be deep-rooted and stress-tolerant. Street tree
species shall comply with the following list:
(1) Street trees.
Acer rubrum Red Maple
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple
Fraxinus pennsylvanic Seedless
Variety
Green Ash
Quercus acutissima Sawtooth Oak
Quercus coccinea Scarlet Oak
Zelkova serrata Japanese Zelkova
(2) Street trees adjacent to power lines.
Acer campestre Hedge Maple
Crataegus viridis
Winter King Green Hawthorn
Maackia amurensis Prunus
seerrulata
Amur Maackia
Kwanzan Syringa reticulata Kwanzan Cherry
Ivory Silk Japanese Tree Lilac
(3) Parking lot trees.
(a) All parking areas shall have at least one tree for every five
parking spaces in single bays and one tree for every 10 parking
spaces in double bays.
(b) Trees shall be planted in such a manner as to afford even shade
distribution across paved areas.
C. Street trees shall be installed and maintained in a four-foot by four-foot
planting bed, and shall be coordinated with the stormwater
management improvements set forth in the Master Plan.
D. Tree grates shall be manufactured by Neenah Foundry or an equal
approved by the Zoning Officer.
A. Streetlights shall be installed as follows (see Figure 1210):
§ 255-75 RADNOR CODE § 255-76
C:718
§ 255-77. Sidewalk design standards.
Sidewalks shall be provided and consistent with Figure 2211 and as follows:
(1) Madison-style streetlight black fluted poles, shall be 15 feet in
height, and shall be installed and maintained, along with the "Acorn
ACN-1" post-top luminaire and "modern finial."
(2) Streetlights shall be spaced 60 feet to 90 feet apart in an
alternating arrangement along both sides of streets.
B. Parking lot lights shall be installed as follows:
(1) Shoebox light fixtures shall be used to direct light downwards.
Fixture height shall not reach higher than 15 feet.
(2) For lighting that abuts a residential property, a shield shall be used
to deflect light away from the property.
C. Exterior lights attached to buildings. External lighting is restricted to
that which is necessary for minimum safety and security levels. Light
standards shall be low profile and shall have a sharp cutoff shield and
directed downward to reduce dispersal of ambient light to the night sky.
Sodium vapor lights shall not be allowed.
A. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of six feet in width.
B. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of eight feet in width (excluding twentyfour
and one-fourth-inch brick herringbone and six-inch curb) if same
are used for outdoor dining or a sidewalk cafe.
C. Whenever a sidewalk is interrupted by a curb cut/driveway apron, a
pedestrian-oriented crosswalk shall be constructed with a minimum
width of six feet.
D. Whenever any parking abuts a sidewalk, wheel stops shall be installed
to prevent car overhang.
E. Sidewalks shall be made of concrete or brick.
F. Concrete shall have no exposed aggregate or color additive.
G. Concrete sidewalks shall be designed using a minimum twenty-fourinch
by twenty-four-inch squares to a maximum thirty-inch by thirtyinch
squares and match the adjoining property throughout the WBOD.
H. Sidewalks shall have a twenty-four and one-fourth-inch brick
herringbone border with a six-inch curb.
I. Sidewalks shall comply with the Township's specifications.
210. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
211. Editor's Note: Figure 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-76 CHARTER § 255-78
C:719
§ 255-78. Curb standards.
Curbs shall be installed and maintained as follows (see Figure 3212):
§ 255-79. Curb cut design standards.
§ 255-80. Parking standards.
Parking shall be as follows:
A. Curbs shall be provided along all streets and access drives.
B. Curbs shall be of the vertical concrete type with a six-inch reveal.
C. Curbs shall comply with Article V of the Township's Administrative
Code.213
D. Curbs shall be made to promote barrier-free access and to
accommodate pedestrians with disabilities, in accordance with ADA
requirements.
E. All low points along curbs shall be adequately drained to prevent
flooding and ponding of water.
A. New driveways shall be discouraged.
B. Existing driveways shall be narrowed to the maximum extent possible.
C. Existing curb cuts that are no longer needed shall be sealed-off and
replaced with six-inch curbing and sidewalks that match surrounding
properties.
D. Whenever there is an existing curb cut, the sidewalk material
(concrete, brick, etc.) shall be extended to promote pedestrian
continuity along the sidewalk.
E. Shared driveways through partnership agreements shall be encouraged
and shall be subject to Township approval.
A. On-street parking shall be provided to the maximum extent possible
and as follows:
(1) Curbside, parallel on-street parking spaces shall be eight feet in
width and 22 feet in length.
(2) Angled parking spaces shall be 9.5 feet in width and 20 feet in
depth.
B. Off-street parking shall be as follows:
(1) Parking spaces shall be nine feet wide and 18 feet in depth.
212. Editor's Note: Figure 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
213. Editor's Note: See also Art. V, Design Standards, of this chapter.
§ 255-78 RADNOR CODE § 255-80
C:720
§ 255-81. Crosswalk standards.
Crosswalks at street intersections shall be consistent with the Master Plan
and as follows:
(2) No more than five spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row
without the incorporation of landscaping or trees.
C. Parking surfaces shall be installed and maintained and shall be
streetprint asphalt, or approved equal, or stamped, color-coated
asphalt.
D. Off-street parking shall comply with the following standards:
(1) All parking areas shall be buffered from views from adjacent
properties and roads. The rear yard buffer shall be minimally 10
feet in width, unless otherwise specified by the Township.
(2) Intermediate buffers at a minimum of five feet in width shall be
introduced where parking areas exceed 120 feet in any dimension.
An equivalent area of internal planting areas may be substituted in
other locations within parking areas, subject to the review and
approval of the Township.
(3) If fencing is incorporated in any parking lot, it shall be designed so
that not more than 25% of the fence permits through-views.
Fencing shall be between four and six feet in height.
(4) Planting size at installation.
(a) Canopy trees: two to 2 1/2 inches in caliper.
(b) Understory trees: seven to eight feet in height.
(c) Evergreen trees: seven to eight feet in height.
(d) Large shrubs (over five-foot mature height): 42 to 48 inches in
height.
(e) Small shrubs (under five-foot mature height): 24 to 30 inches in
height.
(5) Buffer screen shall not be required should existing planting,
topography or man-made structures remaining on the property be
deemed acceptable for screening purposes by the Township.
E. Parking shall also comply with Article V.
A. Crosswalks shall be provided at all street intersections.
B. Crosswalks shall be from six feet to 12 feet in width.
C. Crosswalks shall either be painted or stamped.
D. Crosswalks shall otherwise comply with § 255-39.
§ 255-80 CHARTER § 255-82
C:721
§ 255-82. Plaza/commons standards.
Commons shall be provided and installed using the following examples:
§ 255-83. Trash receptacle standards.
Waste receptacles shall be provided consistent with the following (see
Figure 5215):
§ 255-84. Benches.
Benches shall be provided as follows (see Figure 6216):
§ 255-85. Bicycle rack standards.
Bicycle racks shall be provided and installed as follows:
A. Unit pavers and concrete pavers shall be installed to the maximum
extent possible.
B. Streetlights shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
§ 255-76.
C. Shade trees, planters, and other landscaping shall be installed and
maintained.
D. Benches, walls, kiosks, and other functional and aesthetic street
furnishings shall be installed and maintained (see Figure 4214).
A. Victor Stanley, Model S-42, Ironsites Series litter receptacle in black, or
approved equal, shall be installed, anchored, and serviced.
B. Waste receptacles shall be located every 200 feet of sidewalk length in
the WBOD.
C. Waste receptacles shall be positioned in strategic locations, especially
at street intersections.
D. Refer to § 255-74 for requirements.
A. The Victor Stanley, Model S-13, Ironsites Series bench in six-foot
length, or approved equal, shall be installed and maintained.
B. Benches shall be located every 200 feet of sidewalk length in the
WBOD.
C. Benches shall be located in plaza/commons areas to the maximum
extent possible.
D. Refer to § 255-74 for requirements.
214. Editor's Note: Figure 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
215. Editor's Note: Figure 5 is included at the end of this chapter.
216. Editor's Note: Figure 6 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-82 RADNOR CODE § 255-85
C:722
§ 255-86. Wayfinding standards.
§ 255-87. Site amenity standards.
The following standards shall apply to all new or redeveloped properties in
the WBOD:
A. Anchor and maintain bicycle racks in plaza/commons areas whenever
possible.
B. An inverted "U" model, painted black to match other street furniture.
C. Bicycle rack every 200 feet of sidewalk length (see Figure 7217).
D. Refer to § 255-74 for requirements.
A. Wayfinding signage to aid in finding locations for parking and to the
train station shall be installed, anchored, and maintained.
B. Wayfinding signage in gateway locations shall be installed, anchored,
and maintained.
C. Design and location of wayfinding standards shall be subject to
Township approval.
A. Setback zero to 35 feet (see Figure 10, sketch 1218):
(1) Lights and street trees at curbline (trees shall be in grates in
accordance with § 255-75).
(2) Brick border at curbline.
(3) Concrete paving to building.
B. Setback 25 to 45 feet, parallel parking in front (see Figure 10, Sketch
2219):
(1) Parallel parking bordered by bulbout plus special paving.
(2) Lights and street trees at curbline (trees shall be in grates in
accordance with § 255-75).
(3) Brick border at curbline.
(4) Concrete walk.
(5) Remaining front yard.
(a) Maximum of 50% additional pedestrian paving (for nonvehicular
circulation).
217. Editor's Note: Figure 7 is included at the end of this chapter.
218. Editor's Note: Figure 10, Sketch 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
219. Editor's Note: Figure 10, Sketch 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-85 CHARTER § 255-87
C:723
(b) No thru service drives.
(c) No bituminous paving.
(d) Additional paving shall be separated from the public walkway
by a minimum of three feet of landscaping.
(e) Minimum of 25% landscape improvements (trees and shrubs in
addition to street tree requirements).
(f) Placement shall include screening of views to rear service/
parking.
C. Setback 45 to 60 feet, angled parking in front (see figure 10, Sketch
3220):
(1) Angled parking plus twenty-four and one-quarter-inch brick
herringbone.
(2) Bulbout plus special paving for properties at corner locations.
(3) Lights and street trees at curbline (trees shall be in grates in
accordance with § 255-75).
(4) Permitted expansion of concrete walk to building line to permit
dining area (or landscape area).
D. Setback 36 feet and greater, parking in side and rear (see Figure 10,
Sketch 4221):
(1) Lights at curbline.
(2) Brick border at curbline.
(3) Concrete walk.
(4) Street trees inside of concrete walk in turf or landscape.
(5) Maximum of 50% additional pedestrian paving (nonvehicular
circulation).
(6) No through service drives.
(7) No bituminous paving.
(8) Additional paving shall be separated from the public walkway by a
minimum of three feet of landscaping.
(9) Minimum of thirty-three-percent landscape improvements (trees
and shrubs in addition to street tree requirements shall be subject
to Township review to ensure clear sight lines at curbcuts).
220. Editor's Note: Figure 10, Sketch 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
221. Editor's Note: Figure 10, Sketch 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-87 RADNOR CODE § 255-87
C:724
(10) Placement of landscaping shall include screening of views to rear
service/parking by means of one of the following:
(a) Site walls shall be a minimum of six feet in height.
(b) Fencing shall be six feet in height and shall be made of either
wood or brick. If wood fencing is used, then it shall not permit
more than twenty-five-percent through-view.
§ 255-87 CHARTER § 255-87
C:725

ARTICLE X
Garrett Hill Zoning District
[Added 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-27]
§ 255-88. Legal basis.
A new Article X creating provisions for the Garrett Hill Zoning District
within Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land, of the Township Code is enabled
through provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, PL 805, No.
247, as reenacted and amended.222
§ 255-89. Purpose; intent of regulations.
Article X of the Zoning Code is hereby enacted to provide and manage
opportunities for development and redevelopment within the Garrett Hill
Zoning District (hereinafter "GHZD") as set forth in the Garrett Hill Master
Plan adopted by the Board of Commissioners on July 21, 2008, and revised
on July 20, 2009. These regulations are intended to provide for enhanced
vibrancy through building, site, and streetscape design.
§ 255-90. Designation of district boundaries.
The GHZD shall be the boundaries designated within the Garrett Hill Zoning
District Map.223
§ 255-91. Conflict with other Code sections.
§ 255-92. Site amenity requirements.
A. The definitions and regulations set forth in this article shall apply to the
GHZD.
B. Wherever there is a conflict or inconsistency between these GHZD
regulations and other definitions and regulations of Chapter 255, those
regulations set forth in this article shall govern development and
redevelopment within the GHZD.
A. Upon demolition of a principal building or structure, site amenities
shall be provided and installed by the applicant where required by this
chapter.
B. The amenities shall be installed by the applicant, or, by agreement
between the Township and applicant, the cost for such installation shall
be escrowed in a Township fund or a Township-approved trust fund
dedicated to GHZD improvements, to be held until applied to the
installation of site amenities on the property for which the installation
was deferred. The applicant shall not be required to spend more than
5% of the cost of improvements for the site amenities.
222. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
223. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 255-88 CHARTER § 255-92
C:727
§ 255-93. Tree design standards.
Street trees shall be installed and maintained as follows:
§ 255-94. Streetlight, parking lot and exterior light standards.
C. The maintenance of these amenities shall be provided by the property
owner where applicable. Each application will be reviewed individually.
Required amenities, or any deviation therefrom, shall be at the
discretion of the Township.
A. Street trees, 2 1/2 to three inches in caliper, shall be planted along both
sides of Conestoga Road at an interval of 25 feet on center, but they
shall not block visibility of existing store windows. In spacing trees,
consideration shall be made for driveways, streetlights, utility poles,
underground utilities, traffic light poles and other obstructions, the
existing streetscape, as well as future placement of trees in front of
adjacent properties. (See Figure 1.)224
B. Street trees shall be deep rooted and stress tolerant and shall be of the
following species or as approved by the Shade Tree Commission:
(1) Acer buergerianum – Trident maple.
(2) Acer Japonicum – Fullmoon maple.
(3) Acer palmatum – Japanese maple.
(4) Acer trifolium – Three-flower maple.
(5) Acer truncatum – Shantung maple.
(6) Carpinus betulus "fastigiata" – American hornbeam.
(7) Cratageus viridis "Winter King" – Winter King hawthorn.
(8) Maackia amurensis – Amur Maackia.
(9) Magnolia virginiana (single stem) – Sweet Bay magnolia.
(10) Malus "Donald Wyman" – flowering crabapple selection.
(11) Prunus x incam "Okame" – Okame cherry.
(12) Sorbus alnifolia – Korean mountainash.
(13) Syringa reticulata – Japanese tree lilac.
A. Streetlights shall be installed as follows:
(1) Fixtures shall be 12 feet high and shall meet Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) "cutoff" or "fullcutoff"
criteria.
224. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-92 RADNOR CODE § 255-94
C:728
§ 255-95. Sidewalk design standards.
Sidewalks shall be provided as follows:
(2) Streetlights shall be spaced a maximum of 40 feet apart on each
side of the street in an offset alternating arrangement along both
sides of street.
(3) Streetlight poles and fixtures shall be of compatible design
throughout the GHZD, unifying the Route 100 station area and all
GHZD Districts.
B. Parking lot lights shall be installed as follows:
(1) Full cutoff light fixtures shall be used to direct light downwards.
For the GH-N, GH-GA, GH-CR, GH-OS Districts, fixture height shall
not be higher than 12 feet. Fixture height shall be limited to 20 feet
in the GH-BC District.
(2) Shields shall be used to deflect light away from adjacent properties
so that no direct light from the filament, bulb or lens is visible from
outside the property.
C. Exterior lights attached to buildings:
(1) External lighting shall be restricted to that which is necessary for
minimum safety and security levels. Light standards shall be low
profile and shall have a sharp cut-off shield and directed downward
to reduce dispersal of ambient light to the night sky. Sodium vapor
lights shall not be allowed.
A. Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of:
(1) Six feet on Conestoga Road.
(2) Four feet on Garrett Avenue.
B. Whenever any perpendicular or angled parking abuts a sidewalk, wheel
stops shall be installed to prevent car overhang.
C. Sidewalks shall be made of concrete or brick.
D. Concrete shall have no exposed aggregate or color additive.
E. On Conestoga Road, concrete sidewalks shall be designed to be
consistent with Figure 2225 and to match adjoining properties as
follows:
(1) Have twenty-four-inch-by-twenty-four-inch squares.
(2) Have a twenty-four-inch brick herringbone border with a six-inch
curb.
225. Editor's Note: Figure 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-94 CHARTER § 255-95
C:729
§ 255-96. Curb standards.
Curbs shall be installed and maintained as follows:
§ 255-97. Curb-cut design standards.
§ 255-98. Ingress and egress.
F. On Garrett Avenue, concrete sidewalks shall:
(1) Have thirty-six-inch-by-thirty-six-inch squares.
(2) Have a twelve-inch herringbone border with a six-inch curb (See
Figure 3.)226
A. Curbs shall be provided along all streets and access drives.
B. Curbs shall be of the vertical concrete type with a six-inch reveal.
C. Curbs shall comply with Article VI, § 255-51 of the Township Code.
D. Curbs shall be made to provide barrier-free access and to accommodate
pedestrians with disabilities, in accordance with ADA standards.
E. All low points along curbs shall be adequately drained to prevent
flooding and ponding of water.
A. New driveways shall be discouraged.
B. Existing driveways shall be narrowed to the maximum extent possible.
C. Two-way driveways shall not be required to meet the minimum widths
standards otherwise required in this chapter. This provision shall not
apply to GH-BC.
D. Existing curb cuts that are no longer needed shall be sealed off and
replaced with six-inch curbing and sidewalks.
E. Whenever there is an existing curb cut, the sidewalk material
(concrete, brick, etc.) and design shall be extended to promote
pedestrian continuity along the sidewalk. A terra-cotta colored brick
pattern that is stamped into newly laid concrete to match the adjoining
sidewalk in color, texture and pattern is also acceptable.
F. Shared driveways through agreements between adjoining property
owners are hereby encouraged and shall be subject to Township
approval.
A. Existing curb cuts may be modified, or shared with adjacent property
owners, provided there is no increase in the number of existing curb
cuts.
226. Editor's Note: Figure 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-95 RADNOR CODE § 255-98
C:730
§ 255-99. Parking standards.
Parking shall be as follows:
B. Wherever possible, ingress and egress between various properties shall
be shared in an attempt to minimize curb cuts. The Township
encourages adjacent landowners to enter into agreements providing
access easements to accomplish this goal.
A. On-street parking shall be provided to the maximum extent possible
and as follows:
(1) Curbside, parallel on-street parking spaces shall be at least eight
feet in width and 22 feet in length. (See Figure 4.)227
(2) Curbside perpendicular parking spaces shall be at least 9.5 feet in
width and 20 feet in depth and shall have a 4.5-foot backup buffer
between each row of spaces and the travel lane. (See Figure 5.)228
B. Off-street parking shall be located in the front, side or rear yards and
shall meet the following standards:
(1) Front yard parking shall be limited to curbside perpendicular
parking.
(2) Front yard perpendicular parking spaces shall meet the following
standards:
(a) Spaces shall be at least 9.5 feet in width and 20 feet in depth.
(b) A 4.5-foot backup buffer shall be provided between each row of
spaces and the travel lane. (See Figure 5.)229
(3) Side and rear yard parking spaces shall be at least nine feet in
width and 18 feet in depth.
(4) All side and rear commercial parking areas shall be buffered from
views from adjacent residential properties.
(5) The buffer shall be an opaque evergreen vegetated buffer at least
six feet in height and three feet in depth at the time of planting and
shall be maintained by the property owner.
(6) If fencing is incorporated in any parking lot, it shall be designed so
that not more than 25% of fence permits through-views. Fencing
shall be between four to six feet in height.
(7) Buffer screen shall not be required should existing planting,
topography or man-made structures remaining on the property be
deemed acceptable for screening purposes by the Township.
227. Editor's Note: Figure 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
228. Editor's Note: Figure 5 is included at the end of this chapter.
229. Editor's Note: Figure 5 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-98 CHARTER § 255-99
C:731
§ 255-100. Crosswalk standards.
Crosswalks at street intersections shall be consistent with the Master Plan
and as follows:
§ 255-101. Trash receptacle standards.
Waste and recycling receptacles shall be provided consistent with Figure
7230 and the following:
§ 255-102. Wayfinding standards.
C. Parking surfaces shall be installed and maintained and shall be asphalt,
concrete or approved equal. Permeable pavements that meet
Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Manual porous pavement
specification are encouraged.
A. Crosswalks shall be provided at all street intersections.
B. Crosswalks shall be from six to 12 feet in width.
C. Crosswalks shall either be painted or stamped.
(1) At a minimum the design shall mark the crosswalks with broad
painted stripes that are parallel to the cartway and not less than six
feet in length, 12 inches in width and not more than 24 inches
apart.
(2) Colored and textured pavement shall be used to enhance the
aesthetics of the crosswalks at gateway locations and the
Conestoga Road/Garrett Avenue intersection. A terra-cotta colored,
brick pattern that is stamped into newly laid concrete with at least
an eight-inch uncolored concrete border shall be encouraged.
D. Crosswalks shall otherwise comply with § 255-39.
A. Victor Stanley, Model S-42 Ironsite, in a color to match the streetlights,
or approved equal shall be installed, anchored, and serviced.
B. Waste and recycling receptacles may be located at each corner and at
the discretion of the Township at a minimum of every 200 feet of
sidewalk length along Conestoga Road in the GHZD.
C. The Township shall be responsible for emptying and maintaining these
receptacles.
A. Wayfinding signage to aid in finding locations for parking and the Route
100 station shall be installed and maintained by the Township.
B. Design and location of wayfinding standards shall be subject to Design
Review Board approval.
230. Editor's Note: Figure 7 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-99 RADNOR CODE § 255-103
C:732
§ 255-103. Site amenity standards.
The following standards shall apply to all new or redeveloped properties in
the GHZD:
A. Conestoga Road (without front yard parking). (See Figure 8.)231
(1) A six-inch curb.
(2) A twenty-four-inch brick border at curbline.
(3) Minimum concrete sidewalk width of four feet.
(4) A 3.5-foot planted buffer.
(5) Lights within 24 inches of the curbline.
(6) Street trees centered in the twenty-four-inch brick border; trees
shall be in grates manufactured by Neenah Foundry or an equal
approved by the Zoning Officer.
(7) Bulbout plus stamped concrete paving to match brick borders in
color, texture and size for properties at corner locations.
(8) Planters are encouraged against the building front or along the
curbline.
B. Conestoga Road (perpendicular parking in the front yard). (See Figure
6.)232
(1) Parking plus six-inch curb, twenty-four-inch brick border and fourfoot
concrete sidewalk.
(2) Concrete paving to building.
(3) Lights within 24 inches of the curbline.
(4) Street trees centered in the twenty-four-inch brick border; trees
shall be in grates manufactured by Neenah Foundry or an equal
approved by the Zoning Officer.
(5) Bulbout plus stamped concrete paving to match brick borders in
color, texture and size for properties at corner locations.
(6) Planters are encouraged against the building front or along the
curbline.
C. On a local or collector street in the Conestoga Road District, when
perpendicular parking is constructed:
(1) Parking plus six-inch curb, twenty-four-inch brick border and fourfoot
sidewalk.
231. Editor's Note: Figure 8 is included at the end of this chapter.
232. Editor's Note: Figure 6 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-103 CHARTER § 255-103
C:733
(2) Concrete paving to building.
(3) Bulbout stamped concrete paving to match brick borders in color
texture and size for properties at corner locations.
(4) Planters are encouraged against the building front or along the
curbline.
D. Garrett Avenue in the Garrett Avenue Mixed-Use District. (See Figure
9.)233
(1) Lights in bulbouts according to the Garrett Hill Master Plan design
shall be required.
(2) The installation of light fixtures in the front yard is hereby
encouraged. Fixtures shall be six feet high and meet Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America "cutoff" or "full-cutoff"
criteria.
E. Garrett Avenue in the Garrett Avenue Neighborhood District:
(1) Lights in bulbouts according to the Garrett Hill Master Plan design
are hereby encouraged.
(2) The installation of light fixtures in the front yard shall be
encouraged. Fixtures shall be six feet high and meet Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America "cutoff" or "full-cutoff"
criteria.
233. Editor's Note: Figure 9 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-103 RADNOR CODE § 255-103
C:734
Chapter 260
TAXATION
CHARTER REFERENCES
Finance Director — See § 6.09. Finances generally — See Art. VII.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Treasurer — See Ch. 5, § 5-18.
Finance Department — See Ch. 5, § 5-25.
Fiscal affairs generally — See Ch. 5, Art. VII.
Assessments — See Ch. 9.
Cable television franchise fees — See Ch. 140.
Sewer service charges — See Ch. 235, Art. III.
§ 255-103 CHARTER § 255-103
C:735

ARTICLE I
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 2-25-1974 by Ord. No. 1564 as Ch. 122, Part 1, of the 1974
Code]
§ 260-1. Intent; statutory authority.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Radnor, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, under and by virtue of the authority vested in it by the Act
of December 31, 1965, being Act No. 511 and known as the "Local Tax
Enabling Act,"234 does hereby ordain that a tax to provide revenue for
general Township purposes is hereby levied, assessed and imposed upon the
privilege of attending or engaging in the amusements in the Township of
Radnor, in accordance with the following.
§ 260-2. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Township Amusement
Tax Ordinance."
§ 260-3. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definition of terms. As used in this article, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
AMUSEMENT — All manner and forms of entertainment, including,
among others, theatrical or operatic performances, concerts,
vaudeville, circus, carnival and side shows, all forms of entertainment
at fairgrounds and amusement parks, athletic contests, including
wrestling matches, boxing and sparring exhibitions, football and
baseball games, skating, golfing, tennis, hockey, bathing, swimming,
archery, shooting, riding, dancing, rowing, bowling, billiards, pool and
all other forms of diversion, sport, recreation or pastime, shows,
exhibitions, contests, displays and games and all other methods of
obtaining admission charges, donations, contributions or monetary
charges of any character from the general public or a limited or
selected number thereof, directly or indirectly in return for other than
tangible property or specific personal or professional
services.[Amended 2-13-1979 by Ord. No. 79-04]
ASSOCIATION — Any partnership, limited partnership or other forms
of unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more persons.
ESTABLISHED PRICE — Regular monetary charges of any character
whatsoever, including donations, contributions and dues or
membership fees (periodical or otherwise), fixed and exacted or in any
manner received by producers, as herein defined, from the general
public or a limited or selected number thereof, directly or indirectly, for
234. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 260-1 CHARTER § 260-3
C:737
§ 260-4. Amusement permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any producer to continue to conduct or thereafter
to begin to conduct any form of amusement at any permanent or temporary
place of amusement or any itinerant form of amusement within the
Township, unless an amusement permit or permits shall have been issued to
him as hereafter prescribed and the tax herein imposed paid in accordance
with the provisions herein made.
§ 260-5. Permit application; fee.
the privilege to attend or engage in any entertainment or amusement,
provided that when such entertainment or amusement is conducted at
any place where the charge for admission is wholly or in part included
in the price paid for refreshment, services or merchandise, the amount
paid for admission to such amusement shall be deemed to be 50% of
the amount paid for refreshment, service and merchandise.
FINANCE DIRECTOR — The Finance Director of the Township of
Radnor.[Added 2-13-1979 by Ord. No. 79-04]
PERSON — Every natural person, copartnership, association or
corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a
penalty, the term "person" as applied to copartnerships of associations
shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place, indoors or outdoors, within the
Township, where the general public or a limited or selected number
thereof may, upon payment of an established price, attend or engage in
any amusement as herein defined, including, among others, theaters,
opera houses, amusement parks, stadia, arenas, baseball parks, skating
rinks, circus or carnival tents or grounds, fairgrounds, social, sporting,
athletic, riding, gun or country clubs, riding academies, golf courses,
golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, bathing and swimming
places, dance halls, tennis courts, archery, rifle or shotgun ranges,
bowling alleys, pool and billiard parlors, roof gardens, cabarets,
nightclubs and other restaurants where amusement or entertainment
is provided, and other like places.[Amended 2-13-1979 by Ord. No.
79-04]
PRODUCER — Any person, as herein defined, conducting any place of
amusement, as herein defined, where the general public or a limited or
selected number thereof may, upon the payment of an established price,
attend or engage in any amusement.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
TREASURER — The Treasurer of the Township of Radnor.
B. Word usage. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and neuter.
§ 260-3 RADNOR CODE § 260-5
C:738
§ 260-6. Issuance, assignability, display and expiration of permit.
A. Every producer desiring to continue to conduct or hereafter to begin to
conduct any amusement within the Township shall file an application
for a permanent, temporary or itinerant amusement permit or permits,
as the case may be, with the Finance Director. Every application for
such permit or permits shall be made upon a form prescribed, prepared
and furnished by the Finance Director and shall set forth the name
under which the producer conducts or intends to conduct an
amusement, whether the producer conducts or intends to conduct a
permanent, temporary or an itinerant form of amusement and such
other information as the Finance Director may require. [Amended
2-13-1979 by Ord. No. 79-04]
B. If the producer has or intends to have more than one place of
amusement within the Township, he shall state the location of each
such place and, in the case of itinerant forms of amusement, the date
and length of time such amusement is to be conducted at each place.
C. In the case of an application for a permit for a temporary place of
amusement, the producer shall state the name and address of the
owner, lessee or custodian of the premises upon which such amusement
is to be conducted.
D. If a producer is an association or a corporation, the application shall
state the names and addresses of the principal officers thereof and any
other information prescribed by the Finance Director for purposes of
identification. [Amended 2-13-1979 by Ord. No. 79-04]
E. The application shall be signed and verified by oath or affirmation by
the producer, if a natural person, and in the case of an association, by a
member or partner thereof, and in the case of a corporation, by an
executive officer thereof or some person specifically authorized by the
corporation to sign the application, to which shall be attached the
written evidence of his authority.
F. The applicant, at the time of making the application, shall pay to the
Treasurer a permit fee as follows: [Amended 2-13-1979 by Ord. No.
79-04]
(1) For a temporary permit, good for one day only: $10.
(2) For a permanent permit, good for one year: $20.
(3) For an itinerant permit, good for three months: $15.
A. Issuance. Upon approval of the application and the payment of any
permit fee or fees herein required, the Finance Director shall grant and
issue to each producer an annual, temporary or itinerant amusement
permit for each place of amusement within the Township set forth in the
application. [Amended 2-13-1979 by Ord. No. 79-04]
§ 260-5 CHARTER § 260-6
C:739
§ 260-7. Notice of change in itinerary. [Amended 2-13-1979 by Ord.
No. 79-04]
The producer of an itinerant form of amusement shall notify the Finance
Director promptly of any change in the original contemplated itinerary
either as to date or time of the conduct of the amusement at each place.
§ 260-8. Renewal and replacement of permits. [Amended 2-13-1979
by Ord. No. 79-04]
§ 260-9. Suspension of permit; hearings. [Amended 2-13-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-04]
The Finance Director may suspend an amusement permit whenever he finds
that the holder thereof has failed to comply with any of the provisions of
this article. Upon the suspension of any amusement permit, the Finance
Director shall request the holder thereof to surrender immediately all
permits or duplicates thereof which have been issued to him, and the
holder shall promptly surrender all such permits to the Finance Director
as directed. A producer whose permit has been suspended, upon request
made, in writing, within 10 days after such suspension, shall be entitled
to a hearing before the Board of Commissioners on or before the next
regular meeting. After such hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall
either rescind the order of suspension or, good cause appearing therefor,
shall continue the suspension or revoke the permit.
B. Validity; display. Amusement permits shall not be assignable, shall be
valid only for the persons in whose names issued and for the conduct of
amusements at the places designated therein and shall at all times be
conspicuously displayed at the places for which issued.
C. Expiration.
(1) All permits for permanent places of amusement shall expire on the
31st day of December next succeeding the date upon which they
are issued, unless sooner suspended, surrendered or revoked for
cause by the proper authorities of the Township.
(2) Permits for temporary places of amusement or for forms of
itinerant amusement shall expire at the time specified therein.
A. Renewal of permanent permits. Permits issued for permanent places of
amusement, under the provisions of this article, may be renewed
annually before the first day of January upon application made to the
Finance Director and the payment of a renewal fee of $20.
B. Replacement of permits. When any permit issued under the provisions
of this Part is defaced, destroyed or lost, the Finance Director may issue
a duplicate permit to the holder thereof upon the payment of a fee of
$2.
§ 260-6 RADNOR CODE § 260-10
C:740
§ 260-10. Imposition of tax; rate.
A tax to provide revenue for general Township purposes is hereby levied,
assessed and imposed upon the admission fee or privilege to attend or
engage in any amusement within the Township, at the rate of 10% of the
established price charged the general public or a limited or selected group
thereof by any producer for such privilege, which shall be paid by the
person acquiring such privilege.
§ 260-11. Tax on free admissions and box seats.
§ 260-12. Collection of tax.
§ 260-13. Report and payment of tax.
A. Free admission. In the case of persons (except bona fide employees of a
producer or municipal or state officers on official business) admitted
free or at a reduced rate to any place of amusement at a time when and
under circumstances where an established price is charged to other
persons, the tax imposed by this article shall be computed on the
established price charged to such other persons of the same class for
the same or similar accommodation, to be paid by the persons so
admitted.
B. Permanent use of seats. In the case of persons having the permanent
use of boxes or seats in any place of amusement or having a lease for
the use of such box or seat in such place of amusement, the tax imposed
by this article shall be computed on the established price for which a
similar box or seat is sold for each performance or exhibition at which
the box or seat is used or reserved by or for the lessee or holder, such
tax to be paid by the lessee or holder.
A. Collection by producer. Producers shall collect the tax imposed by this
article and shall be liable to the Township as agents thereof for the
payment of the same to the Treasurer, as hereinafter provided in this
article.
B. Other means of payment. Where permits are obtained for conducting
amusements by persons who are not the owners, lessees or custodians
of the places where the amusements are to be conducted or where the
amusement is permitted by the owner, lessee or custodian of any places
to be conducted without the procurement of a permit or permits
required by this article, the tax imposed by this article shall be paid by
the owner, lessee or custodian of such place where such amusement is
held or conducted, unless paid by the producer conducting the
amusement.
A. Responsibilities of producers. For the purpose of ascertaining the
amount of tax payable by the producers to the Township: [Amended
4-25-1956 by Ord. No. 871]
§ 260-10 CHARTER § 260-13
C:741
§ 260-14. Powers of Finance Director. [Amended 2-13-1979 by Ord.
No. 79-04]
(1) Every producer, except as hereinafter provided, conducting a place
of amusement shall, on or before the 10th day of each month,
transmit to the Finance Director and Treasurer, on forms
prescribed and prepared by the Finance Director, a report of the
amount of tax collected by him during the preceding month.
[Amended 2-13-1979 by Ord. No. 79-04]
(2) Every producer conducting a temporary place or itinerant form of
amusement promptly after each performance shall file a report
with the Finance Director on forms prescribed and prepared by the
Finance Director and furnish the information required therein.
[Amended 2-13-1979 by Ord. No. 79-04]
(3) Every producer, at the time of making every report required by this
section, shall compute and pay to the Treasurer the taxes collected
by him and due to the Township during the period for which the
report is made; provided, however, that such producer may deduct
therefrom a discount of 2% if the report is filed and the tax paid on
or before the due date thereof.
B. Due date. The amount of all taxes imposed under the provisions of this
article shall, in the case of places of permanent amusement, be due and
payable on the 10th day of the next succeeding month following each
monthly report, and in the case of temporary places or itinerant forms
of amusement, it shall be due and payable on the date the reports in
such cases are required to be made under this article, and all such taxes
shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month or fractional part of a
month from the date they are due and payable until paid. [Amended
2-13-1979 by Ord. No. 79-04]
C. Failure to comply. If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any
report and payment as herein required, an additional 10% of the
amount of the tax shall be added and collected.
D. Method of recovery. All such taxes shall be recoverable as other debts
of like amount are now by law recoverable.
A. Examination of records. If the Finance Director is not satisfied with the
report and payment of tax made by any producer under the provisions
of this article, he is hereby authorized and empowered to make a
determination of the tax due by such producer, based upon the facts
contained in the report or upon any information within his possession or
that shall come into his possession, and for this purpose the Finance
Director is authorized to examine the books, papers, tickets, ticket
stubs and records of any producer taxable under this article, to verify
the accuracy of any report or payment made under the provisions
hereof or to ascertain whether the taxes imposed by this article have
been paid.
§ 260-13 RADNOR CODE § 260-14
C:742
§ 260-15. Payment of receipts into treasury.
All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered under the
provisions of this article shall be paid into the treasury of the Township of
Radnor for the use and benefit of the Township of Radnor.235
§ 260-16. Exemptions.
B. Estimation of tax. If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any
report and payment of tax required by this article, or if, as a result of an
investigation by the Finance Director, a report is found to be incorrect,
the Finance Director shall estimate the tax due by such producer and
determine the amount due by him for taxes, penalties and interest
thereon.
C. Rules and regulations. The Finance Director is authorized and
empowered to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations
relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article and the collection of the tax hereby imposed,
subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners of the Township
of Radnor.
A. The tax imposed and permit fees provided for by this article shall apply
to or be imposed upon the privilege to attend any amusement the
proceeds of which, after payment of reasonable expenses, inure:
(1) Exclusively to the benefit of religious, educational and charitable
institutions, societies or organizations, provided that no part of the
net earnings of the institutions, societies or organizations inures to
the benefit of any private shareholder or person.
(2) Exclusively to the benefit of organizations or persons in the military
or naval forces of the United States or of national guard
organizations, reserve officers' associations or organizations, posts
or organizations of war veterans or auxiliary units or societies of
such posts or organizations or such post, organizations, units or
societies organized in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and if
no part of their net earnings inures to the benefit of any private
shareholder or person.
(3) Exclusively to the benefit of organizations or associations created
and maintained for the purpose of benefiting employees of any
political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or their
dependents or heirs or for the purpose of benefiting the members
or the dependents of or heirs of members of police or paid or
volunteer fire departments of any political subdivision of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
235. Editor's Note: Former § 122-27, Age limit, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 2-13-1979 by Ord. No. 79-04.
§ 260-14 CHARTER § 260-16
C:743
§ 260-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Any person, copartnership, association or corporation who shall fail, neglect
or refuse to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this article or
of any regulation or requirement pursuant thereto and authorized thereby
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $600 and
costs for each such offense, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Such fines imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other penalty
imposed by any other section of this article.
B. No tax shall be due under the provisions of this article on any
amusement which is expressly excluded from such tax by the Local Tax
Enabling Act, as the same may be from time to time amended, or any
other portion of said Act.236
C. In no event shall any exemption be allowed under this article unless the
producer thereof shall comply with the provisions of this article and the
rules and regulations of the Township with respect to the application for
and approval of exemptions.
236. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 260-16 RADNOR CODE § 260-17
C:744
ARTICLE II
Mercantile Tax
[Adopted 2-25-1974 by Ord. No. 1564 as Ch. 122, Part 3, of the 1974
Code]
§ 260-18. Intent; statutory authority.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Radnor, under and by virtue
of the authority vested in it by Act No. 511 of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, approved December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257,
as amended, known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act,"237 does ordain that a
mercantile tax to provide revenue for general Township purposes is hereby
levied, assessed and imposed upon persons engaging in the occupation or
business of wholesale vendor of or dealer in goods, wares and merchandise
or retail vendor of or dealer in goods, wares and merchandise and wholesale
and retail dealer therein and all persons engaged in conducting restaurants
or other places where food, drink or refreshments are sold, in accordance
with the following.
§ 260-19. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Mercantile Tax
Ordinance."
§ 260-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The Township Manager of the Township of Radnor or his
designated representative.
GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — Includes both cash and credit
transactions, and trade-in transactions as provided by law.
LICENSE YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning the first day of
January.[Amended 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association or
corporation (except such as are wholly exempt from taxation under the
Act of the General Assembly No. 511, approved December 31, 1965, P.L.
1257).238
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer in or a
vendor of goods, wares and merchandise and who is not a wholesale dealer
or vendor or a wholesale and retail dealer or vendor, as hereinafter defined.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar days.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor.
237. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
238. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 260-18 CHARTER § 260-20
C:745
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL DEALER or WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
VENDOR — Any person who sells to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares
and merchandise and to other persons.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who sells
to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and to no other
persons.
§ 260-21. Applicability. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
The terms of this article shall not apply to nonprofit corporations or
associations organized for religious, charitable or educational purposes,
agencies of the Government of the United States or of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or any person vending or disposing of articles of his own
manufacture for shipment or delivery away from the place of the
manufacture thereof or any farmer vending or disposing of his own produce
or other transaction exempted by law.
§ 260-22. Mercantile license required; fee. [Amended 12-26-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-32; 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13; 9-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-13]
A. Every person desiring to continue to engage in or hereafter to begin to
engage in the business of wholesale or retail or wholesale and retail,
vendor or dealer in goods, wares and merchandise and any person
conducting a restaurant or other place where food, drink or
refreshments are sold in the Township shall, on or before the first day of
July of each license year or prior to commencing business in any such
license year, apply for and procure a mercantile license for his place of
business or, if more than one, for each of his places of business in the
Township from the Collector, who shall issue the same upon payment of
a fee of $10 for a wholesale or retail license for his place of business or,
if more than one, for each of his places of business in the Township for
such license year.
B. If the person applying for a mercantile license has engaged in and is
continuing to engage in business in the Township and already is in
possession of a valid mercantile license to expire at the end of the
calendar year, the person shall make application and pay for the
following year's mercantile license at the time of filing of that person's
mercantile tax return, by completing the mercantile tax form and
making payment for the mercantile license fee contemporaneously
therewith.
C. If the person appling for a mercantile license intends to begin to engage
in business in the Township and does not possess a valid mercantile
license, the person shall make application to and pay for a mercantile
license at or before that person begins to engage in business inthe
Township, by completing an appropriate application for such license
with the Township and making payment to the Township for the
mercantile license fee contemporaneously therewith.
§ 260-20 RADNOR CODE § 260-23
C:746
§ 260-23. License application; assignability and posting;
replacement.
§ 260-24. Imposition of tax; applicability.
A. Each application for a license shall be signed by the applicant, if a
natural person, and in the case of an association or partnership, by a
member or partner thereof and, in the case of a corporation, by an
officer thereof.
B. Such licenses shall not be assignable and shall be conspicuously posted
at the place of business or each of the places of business of every such
person at all times.
C. In the case of loss, defacement or destruction of any license, the person
to whom the license was issued shall apply to the Collector for a new
license, for which a fee of $0.50 shall be charged.
A. Assessment of tax; rate. A tax to provide revenue for general Township
purposes is hereby levied, assessed and imposed upon every person
engaging in any of the following occupations or businesses in the
Township, at the rate hereinafter set forth, and such persons shall pay a
mercantile tax for each year, beginning January 1, at such rate, subject
to the exemptions hereinafter set forth: [Amended 12-9-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-35; 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
(1) Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise of
every kind, at the rate of three mills on each dollar of the gross
volume of business transacted by him during the license year.
(2) Retail vendors or dealers of goods, wares and merchandise of every
kind, and all persons engaged in conducting restaurants or other
places where food, drink or refreshments are sold, at the rate of
three mills on each dollar of the gross volume of business
transacted by him during the license year.
B. Amount of gross volume nontaxable. The first $25,000 of gross volume
of business transacted by the vendors specified and described within
this section in Subsection A(1) and (2) above, shall be exempt from and
not subject to the rates of taxation determined for such vending
transactions. The first $25,000 of gross volume of business transacted
by the vendors specified and described in Subsection A shall be exempt
from and not subject to the rates of taxation determined and specified
therein, such exemption first applying to the gross volume of business
arising from retail sales and the balance, if any, applying to the gross
volume of business arising from wholesale sales conducted by such
vendors.
C. Exemption for resale or trade-ins. The tax imposed by this article shall
not apply to the dollar volume of annual business transacted by
wholesale and retail dealers described in Subsections A(1) and (2)
above, derived from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise taken
§ 260-23 CHARTER § 260-24
C:747
§ 260-25. Computation of tax.
The following subsections refer to the computation of the estimated gross
volume of business:
§ 260-26. Taxpayer returns. [Amended 9-10-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-13]
by any dealer as a trade-in or as a part payment for other goods, wares
and merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price exceeds the
trade-in allowance.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced his business at least a full year prior to the beginning of a
license year shall compute the estimated gross volume of business for
that license year upon the actual gross amount of business transacted
by him during the 12 months preceding.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced his business less than one fill year prior to the beginning of
a license year shall compute the estimated gross volume of business for
that year by multiplying by 12 the monthly average of the actual gross
amount of business transacted by him during the months he was
engaged in business prior to January 1. [Amended 9-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-13]
C. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
commences his business subsequent to the beginning of a license year
shall compute the estimated gross volume of business for that license
year upon the gross volume of business transacted by him during the
first month of his engaging in business, multiplied by the number of
months remaining in the license year.
D. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in business which is temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature shall compute the estimated gross volume of business upon the
actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the license
year.
A. General requirements. Every return, as hereinafter required by this
article, shall be made upon a form furnished by the Collector thereof
under the penalties of perjury. Every person making such return shall
furnish all information requested therein and certify the correctness
thereof.
B. Tax returns.
(1) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business at least one full year prior to the
beginning of the license year shall, on or before the 15th day of
May following, file with the Collector a return setting forth his
name, his business and business address and such other
§ 260-24 RADNOR CODE § 260-26
C:748
§ 260-27. Payment of tax.
information as may be necessary to compute the actual gross
volume of business transacted by him during the license year and
the amount of tax estimated to be due.
(2) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business less than one full year prior to the
beginning of the license year shall, on or before the 15th day of
May following, file with the Collector a return setting forth his
name, his business, business address and such other information as
may be necessary to compute the actual gross volume of business
transacted by him during the license year and the amount of tax
estimated to be due.
(3) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who
commences business subsequent to the beginning of the license
year shall, within 60 days from the date of commencing such
business, file with the Collector a return setting forth his name,
business and business address and such information as may be
necessary to compute the actual gross volume of business
transacted by him during the license year and the amount of tax
estimated to be due.
(4) Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this
article who engages in a business which is temporary, seasonal or
itinerant by its nature shall, within seven days from the day he
completes such business, file with the Collector a return setting
forth his name, his business and business address and such
information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross
amount of business transacted by him during such period and the
amount of the tax due.
C. Final tax return.
(1) On or before May 15 of each year, every person subject to the tax
hereby imposed shall make a final return to the Collector, showing
the actual volume of business transacted by the taxpayer during
the preceding license year. Such final return shall state the amount
of the gross volume of business as set forth in the first tax return,
the amount of tax paid at the time of filing the first tax return and
the amount of tax due upon the final computation.
(2) Any person ceasing to do business during the license year shall,
within 14 days from the date of ceasing to do business, file a final
return showing the actual gross volume of business conducted
during that portion of the license year in which said person was
actually in business, and pay the tax due as computed thereon.
A. Estimated tax. At the time of filing the first tax return, the person
making the same shall pay the amount of the tax estimated to be due.
§ 260-26 CHARTER § 260-27
C:749
§ 260-28. Collection of tax; record.
It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the fees, taxes,
fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep
a record showing the amount of the tax received by him and the date of
payment.
§ 260-29. Examination of taxpayer records; other duties of
Collector.
If the Collector is not satisfied with the return and payment of tax made
by any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer under the provisions of this article,
he is hereby authorized and empowered to make a determination of the tax
due by such person, based upon the facts contained in the return or upon
any information within his possession or that shall come into his possession,
and for this purpose the Collector or his authorized agent is authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any such person to verify the
accuracy of any return or payment made under the provisions thereof or
to ascertain whether the taxes imposed by this article have been paid. The
Collector is hereby authorized and directed to make and keep such records,
prepare such forms and take such other measures as may be necessary or
convenient to carry this article into effect and may, in his discretion, require
reasonable deposits to be made by licensees who engage in a business
temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature.
§ 260-30. Estimation of tax by Collector.
If any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make any
return and payment of tax required by this article, or if, as a result of
an investigation by the Collector, a return is found to be incorrect, the
Collector shall estimate the tax due by such person and determine the
amount due by him for taxes, penalties and interest thereon.
§ 260-31. Responsibility for claiming exemption.
The burden is hereby imposed upon any person, firm or corporation
claiming an exemption from the payment of the tax hereby imposed to
convince the Collector of his legal right to such exemption.
§ 260-32. Refunds.
If the final return of the taxpayer shows an overpayment of the tax by reason
of the fact that the gross volume of business as stated in the estimated
computation was more than the actual volume of business for the year or by
B. Balance due. At the time of the filing of the final tax return, if the full
amount of the tax due by the taxpayer for the license year has not been
paid, the taxpayer shall pay the remaining balance of the tax, which will
be the difference between the amount of tax paid at the time of making
the first return on the estimated computation and the amount of the tax
finally shown to be due.
§ 260-27 RADNOR CODE § 260-32
C:750
reason of the fact that the taxpayer did not continue to engage in business
throughout the year, the Collector shall refund to the taxpayer the amount
of such overpayment, which shall be the difference between the amount of
tax paid upon the filing of the first return and the amount of the tax finally
shown to be due.
§ 260-33. Confidential nature of returns.
Any information gained by the Collector or any other Township employee
or official from the administration of this tax shall be confidential, except in
accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, and
divulgence of any information so gained is hereby declared to be a violation
of this article.
§ 260-34. Additional regulations.
On or before the effective date of this article, the Board of Commissioners
shall, by resolution, adopt mercantile tax regulations for the purpose of
further clarifying applicability of the tax.
§ 260-35. Recovery of unpaid taxes; interest and penalty.
§ 260-36. Payment of receipts into general fund.
All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered under the
provisions of this article shall be paid into the general fund of the Township
of Radnor for the use and benefit of the Township of Radnor.
§ 260-37. Limitations.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Township to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person or any
business or any portion of any business not within the taxing power of the
Township under the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 260-38. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13; 3-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
A. All taxes due and unpaid under this article shall be recoverable by the
Township Solicitor as other debts due the Township are now by law
recoverable.
B. All taxes due under this article shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per
month or fractional part of a month from the day they are due and
payable until paid. If any taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make any
return or payment as herein required, an additional 10% of the amount
of the tax shall be added by the Collector and collected.
A. Any person, as defined in this article, who shall fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with the terms or provisions of this article shall be responsible
§ 260-32 CHARTER § 260-38
C:751
and liable for the costs of collection, including attorneys' fees, at the
flat and hourly rates shown below and at the rate of $165 per hour for
any work not included in the fees shown below:
Activity Legal Fees Court Fees
Sheriff
Fees
Verify account information
and data, establish and open
file; prepare and send
demand letter; account for
monies received
$135 n/a n/a
Prepare and file civil
complaint in Magisterial
District Court; account for
monies received
$250 According
to fee
schedule
Varied
Represent taxing authority
at any MDJ hearing: includes
preparation of case;
preparation of witnesses and
any exhibits; attendance at
any hearings or conferences;
post-hearing pleadings or
exhibits
$165 per
hour
n/a n/a
Prepare and file request to
certify judgment with
County; account for monies
received
$125 According
to fee
schedule
n/a
Execution of judgment
against delinquent taxpayer,
e.g., prepare praecipe for
writ of execution and all
related documents
$165 per
hour
According
to fee
schedule
Varied
B. Any person, as defined in this article, or any officer, agent, servant or
employee thereof who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of
the terms or provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof
before a District Judge of the Township of Radnor, be subject to a fine of
not more than $600 and costs of prosecution for each offense and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 30 days. The fine imposed by this section
shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of
this article.
§ 260-38 RADNOR CODE § 260-38.1
C:752
§ 260-38.1. Short tax year and reporting period to effectuate
conversion from fiscal to calendar year. [Added 9-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-13]
To effectuate the conversion from a fiscal tax year ending June 30 to a
calendar tax year during the year 2012, for purposes of the year 2012 only,
there shall be a short tax year covering the period beginning July 1, 2012,
and ending December 31, 2012. For purposes of payment of estimated taxes
for 2013 only, the estimated tax to be paid for the tax year 2013 shall by
calculated based upon a calculation of double the taxable gross receipts for
the short calendar year beginning July 1, 2012, and ending December 31,
2012.
§ 260-38.1 CHARTER § 260-38.1
C:753

ARTICLE III
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 12-26-1979 as Ord. No. 79-31 (Ch. 122, Part 5, of the 1974
Code)]
§ 260-39. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Radnor Business
Privilege Tax Ordinance."
§ 260-40. Definitions and word usage.
A. The masculine includes the feminine, the singular includes the plural,
and the plural includes the singular.
B. The following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS, TRADES, OCCUPATIONS and PROFESSIONS — All
businesses, trades, occupations and professions in which there is
offered any service or services to the general public or a limited number
thereof, including but not limited to financial business and those
enterprises engaged in by hotel operators; motel operators; office and/
or residential apartment building operators; parking lot and garage
operators; warehouse operators; lessors of tangible personal property;
physicians and surgeons; osteopaths; podiatrists; chiropractors;
veterinarians; optometrists; pharmacists; lawyers; dentists; engineers;
architects; chemists; certified public accountants; public accountants;
funeral directors; promoters; agents; brokers; manufacturer's
representatives; advertising and public relations agencies; real estate
brokers; insurance brokers and agents; cable television operators;
operators of places of amusement providing either passive or active
recreation; vending machine operators; barbershop operators and
beauty shop operators; cleaning, pressing and dyeing establishment
operators; laundry operators; shoe repair shop operators; tailors;
upholsterers; electrical, plastering, bricklaying, carpentry, heat,
ventilating, plumbing and painting contractors engaged in building or
other construction of any kind or in the alteration, maintenance or
repair thereof; and repairers of electrical, electronic and automotive
machinery and equipment or other machinery and equipment and other
wares and merchandise.
DIRECTOR — The Finance Director of the Township of Radnor or his
duly authorized representative.
FINANCIAL BUSINESS — The services and transactions of banks and
bankers; trust, credit and investment companies; holding companies;
dealers and brokers in money, credits, commercial paper, bonds, notes,
securities and stocks and monetary metals; and factors and commission
merchants.
§ 260-39 CHARTER § 260-40
C:755
GROSS RECEIPTS —
OPERATOR — Includes both the owner of a hotel, motel, office and/or
residential apartment building, parking lot, garage or warehouse and
any person the owner may engage for hire to supervise the operation
Includes the gross amount of cash, credits or property of any kind
or nature received in both cash and credit transactions allocable or
attributable to the Township by reason of any sale made (including
resales of goods, wares or merchandise taken by a dealer as a
trade-in or as part payment for other goods, wares and
merchandise), service rendered (including labor and any materials
employed in or becoming part of the service) or commercial or
business transactions in connection with any business, trade,
occupation or profession.
(1)
Gross receipts shall not include:
(a) The first $25,000 received.
In the case of a sale of goods, the receipts from a sale in which
the goods are delivered from a place of business regularly
maintained outside the Township by the taxpayer to a place
of business regularly maintained outside the Township by the
purchaser, provided that such delivery is not made for the
purpose of evading this tax.
(b)
In the case of any service, the receipts from the performance
or rendering of any service no part of which was performed or
rendered within the Township.
(c)
The amount of any allowance made for goods, wares and
merchandise taken by a dealer as a trade-in or as part payment
for other goods, wares and merchandise in the usual and
ordinary course of his business.
(d)
In the case of a financial business, the cost of securities and
other property sold, exchanged, paid at maturity or redeemed
and moneys or credits received in repayment of advances,
credits and loans (not to exceed the principal amount of such
advances, credits and loans) and deposits.
(e)
In the case of a broker, any portion of the fees or commissions
with respect to any transaction paid by him to another broker
on account of a purchase or sale contract initiated by or
exercised or cleared in conjunction with such other broker.
(f)
Receipts by a dealer from sales to other dealers in the same
line where the dealer transfers title or possession at the same
price for which he acquired the goods, wares and merchandise,
provided that such other dealers are not the parent or
subsidiary of the vendor dealer or have no other affiliation or
cooperative arrangement with the vendor dealer.
(g)
(2)
§ 260-40 RADNOR CODE § 260-40
C:756
§ 260-41. Registration. [Amended 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-14]
of such hotel, motel, apartment building, parking lot, garage or
warehouse.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
association, corporation, trust or other legally recognizable entity,
except such as are wholly exempt from taxation under the Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended.239 Persons exempted from
taxation under this article shall include agencies of the Government of
the United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or political
subdivisions thereof and nonprofit corporations or associations
organized solely and exclusively for religious, educational or charitable
purposes and not conducting any regular or established business
competing commercially with any person subject to the tax imposed by
this article.
SERVICE — Any act or instance of helping or benefiting another for a
consideration.
TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning the first day of
January.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS, TRADE,
OCCUPATION OR PROFESSION — Any business, trade, occupation or
profession that is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive
calendar days.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor.
A. For the tax year beginning January 1, 1980, and for each tax year
thereafter, every person desiring to continue to engage in or hereafter
to begin to engage in a business, trade, occupation or profession at an
actual place of business in the Township shall make application for
registration for each place of business in the Township, and if such
person has no actual place of business within the Township, then one
registration, with the Director.
B. Original registration shall be made by the completion of an application
furnished by the Director and the payment of a fee of $10 for each place
of business. Each subsequent annual application for registration shall
occur with the filing of the taxpayer's business privilege tax return and
accompanied with the payment of a fee of $10 for each place of
business. Each applicant shall receive a certificate of registration from
the Director, which shall not be assignable. In the case of loss,
defacement or destruction of any certificate, the person to whom the
certificate was issued shall apply to the Director for a new certificate
for which a fee of $10 shall be charged. Such certificate shall be
conspicuously posted at each place of business within the Township at
all times.
239. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 260-40 CHARTER § 260-42
C:757
§ 260-42. Imposition of tax; rate. [Amended 12-9-1985 by Ord. No.
85-36]
Every person engaging in a business, trade, occupation or profession in the
Township shall pay an annual business privilege tax for the year beginning
January 1, 1986, and for each tax year thereafter at the rate of three mills
on such person's gross receipts.
§ 260-43. Exemption; joint return.
All persons required to pay a business privilege tax under the provisions
of this article shall be exempted from paying such tax upon the same
subject matter of taxation upon which such persons are required to pay a
mercantile license tax under Article II, Mercantile Tax. Any person required
to pay both a business privilege tax and a mercantile license tax need pay
only one license fee of $10 for each place of business.
§ 260-44. Computation of tax.
Computation of estimated and actual gross receipts shall be made in the
following manner:
§ 260-45. Taxpayer returns.
A. The estimated gross receipts for any tax year of any person subject to
the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has commenced business at
least a full year prior to January 1 of that tax year shall be the actual
gross receipts of that person during the 12 months preceding such
January 1.
B. The estimated gross receipts for any tax year of any person subject to
the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has commenced business
less than one full year prior to January 1 of that tax year shall be
computed by multiplying by 12 the monthly average of such person's
actual gross receipts during the months while engaged in business
prior to such January 1.
C. The estimated gross receipts for any tax year of any person subject to
the payment of the tax hereby imposed who commences business
subsequent to January 1 of that tax year shall be computed for that tax
year by multiplying such person's actual gross receipts for the first
month of business by the number of months remaining in the tax year.
D. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in business which is temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature shall compute gross receipts upon such person's actual gross
receipts during the tax year.
A. Form for return. Every return as hereinafter required by this article
shall be made upon a form furnished by the Director and in accordance
with such regulations as may hereafter be issued by the Director,
§ 260-42 RADNOR CODE § 260-45
C:758
§ 260-46. Payment of tax.
pursuant to § 260-53 hereof. Every person making such return shall
certify the correctness thereof under the penalties of perjury.
B. First return.
(1) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced business at least one full year prior to the beginning of
the tax year shall, on or before the 15th day of May following, file
with the Director a return setting forth such person's name,
business and business address and such other information as may
be necessary to compute the actual gross receipts of such person
during the preceding year and the amount of tax estimated to be
due.
(2) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced business less than one full year prior to the beginning
of the tax year shall, on or before the 15th day of May following, file
with the Director a return setting forth such person's name,
business and business address and such other information as may
be necessary to compute the actual gross receipts of such person
during the preceding year and the amount of tax estimated to be
due.
(3) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who
commences business subsequent to the beginning of the tax year
shall, within 40 days from the date of commencing such business,
file with the Director a return setting forth such person's name,
business and business address and such other information as may
be necessary to compute the actual gross receipts of such person
during the first month of business and the amount of tax estimated
to be due.
(4) Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this
article who engages in a business which is temporary, seasonal or
itinerant by its nature shall, within seven days from the date of
completion of such business, file with the Director a return setting
forth such person's name, business and business address and such
information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross
receipts of such person during such period and the amount of the
tax due.
C. Final return. At the end of the tax year and on or before May 15 of the
following year, every person subject to the tax hereby imposed shall
make a final return to the Director of the actual gross receipts of the tax
payer during the period for which the taxpayer is subject to the tax.
Such final return shall state the amount of the gross receipts as set
forth in the first return, the amount of tax paid at the time of filing the
first return and the amount of tax due upon final computation.
§ 260-45 CHARTER § 260-46
C:759
§ 260-47. Collection of tax; record.
It shall be the duty of the Director to collect and receive the taxes, fines and
penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be the duty of the Director
to keep a record showing the amount of the tax received and the date of
payment. A receipt shall be given to the person paying the tax.
§ 260-48. Determination of tax; examination of return.
If the Director is not satisfied with the return and payment of tax made by
any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer under the provisions of this article, the
Director is hereby authorized and empowered to make a determination of
the tax due by such person based upon the facts contained in the return
or upon any information within the Director's possession or that shall
come into his possession, and for this purpose the Director or the deputy
or authorized agent of the Director is authorized to examine the books,
papers and records of any such person to verify the accuracy of any return
or payment made under the provisions hereof or to ascertain whether
the taxes imposed by this article have been paid. The Director is hereby
authorized and directed to make and keep such records, prepare such forms
and take such other measures as may be necessary or convenient to carry
this article into effect and may, in his discretion, require reasonable deposits
to be made by persons who engage in a business which is temporary,
seasonal or itinerant by its nature.
§ 260-49. Estimation of tax.
If any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make any
return and payment of tax required by this article or if, as a result of an
investigation by the Director, a return is found to be incorrect, the Director
shall have the power to estimate the tax due by such person and determine
the amount due for taxes, penalties and interest thereon.
§ 260-50. Responsibility for claiming exemption.
The burden is hereby imposed upon any person claiming an exemption from
the payment of the tax hereby imposed to prove by clear and convincing
evidence his legal right to such exemption.
A. Estimated tax. At the time of filing the first return, the person making
the same shall pay the amount of the tax estimated to be due, as
determined pursuant to §§ 260-42, 260-44 and 260-45 of this article.
B. Balance due. At the time of filing the final return, if the full amount of
tax due by the taxpayer for the tax year has not been paid, the taxpayer
shall pay the remaining balance of the tax, which shall be the difference
between the amount of the tax paid at the time of making the first
return on the estimated computation and the amount of the tax finally
shown to be due.
§ 260-46 RADNOR CODE § 260-51
C:760
§ 260-51. Refunds.
If the final return of the taxpayer shows an overpayment of the tax by reason
of the fact that the gross receipts as stated in the estimated computation
were more than the actual gross receipts of the taxpayer for the year or by
reason of the fact that the taxpayer did not continue to engage in business
throughout the year, the Director shall refund to the taxpayer the amount
of such overpayment, which shall be the difference between the amount of
tax paid upon the filing of the first return and the amount of the tax finally
shown to be due.
§ 260-52. Confidential nature of returns.
Any information contained on the returns of a taxpayer and any information
obtained as a result of the examination of the books and records of the
taxpayer shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except for
purposes of judicial order.
§ 260-53. Additional rules and regulations.
The Director is hereby authorized to make rules and regulations consistent
with the provisions of this article relating to the interpretation or
application of any section of this article or to any matter affecting the
administration and enforcement of this article, including provision for the
reexamination and correction of returns and the adjustment or refund of
any overpayment of tax.
§ 260-54. Method of recovery.
All taxes due and unpaid under this article shall be recoverable by the
Township Solicitor as other debts due the Township are now or may
hereafter be by law recoverable.
§ 260-55. Interest and penalty. [Amended 5-27-1980 by Ord. No.
80-08]
All taxes due under this article shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per
month or fractional part of a month from the day they are due and payable
until paid. If any taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make any return or
payment as herein required, an additional 10% of the amount of the tax
shall be added by the Director and collected.
§ 260-56. Payment of receipts into treasury.
All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered under the
provisions of this article shall be paid into the treasury of the Township for
the use and benefit of the Township.
§ 260-51 CHARTER § 260-57
C:761
§ 260-57. Limitations.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Township or levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person or any
business, trade, occupation or profession or any portion of any business,
trade, occupation or profession not within the taxing power of the Township
under the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution and laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 260-58. Intent.
§ 260-59. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13; 3-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
A. It is not the intention of the Board of Commissioners, in adopting this
article, to impose nor should any portion of this article be construed to
mean that the Board of Commissioners has imposed, by adopting this
article, a room tax on hotels or motels in the Township of Radnor or any
other tax which is an invalid duplication of any tax imposed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Rather, all taxes imposed by this
article are taxes on the privilege of conducting businesses, trades,
occupations and professions, including the business of operating a hotel
or motel.
B. It is the intent of the Board of Commissioners to impose a tax on the
privilege of conducting the business of operating an office and/or
residential apartment building, and the renting of space to tenants of
such buildings shall be deemed to be the minimum sufficient activity to
constitute the conduct of a business under the terms of this article, and
such minimum activity shall not be deemed to be merely preserving the
asset of the property.
A. Any person, as defined in this article, who shall fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with the terms or provisions of this article shall be responsible
and liable for the costs of collection, including attorneys' fees, at the flat
and hourly rates shown below and at the rate of $165 per hour for any
work not included in the fees shown below:
Activity Legal Fees Court Fees
Sheriff
Fees
Verify account information
and data, establish and open
file; prepare and send demand
letter; account for monies
received
$135 n/a n/a
Prepare and file civil
complaint in Magisterial
District Court; account for
monies received
$250 According
to fee
schedule
Varied
§ 260-57 RADNOR CODE § 260-59
C:762
§ 260-60. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause
or causes of action acquired or existing prior to its adoption, nor shall any
just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected
by this article.
§ 260-61. Apportionment.
In the event that this article takes effect after the beginning of a tax year,
the tax imposed by § 260-42 hereof shall be imposed on the gross receipts
for that portion of the tax year commencing with the effective date of this
article and the estimated gross receipts determined under § 260-44A, B and
C of this article shall be apportioned accordingly.
Activity Legal Fees Court Fees
Sheriff
Fees
Represent taxing authority at
any MDJ hearing: includes
preparation of case;
preparation of witnesses and
any exhibits; attendance at
any hearings or conferences;
post-hearing pleadings or
exhibits
$165 per
hour
n/a n/a
Prepare and file request to
certify judgment with County;
account for monies received
$125 According
to fee
schedule
n/a
Execution of judgment against
delinquent taxpayer, e.g.,
prepare praecipe for writ of
execution and all related
documents
$165 per
hour
According
to fee
schedule
Varied
B. Any person, as defined in this article, or any officer, agent, servant or
employee thereof who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of
the terms or provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof
before a District Judge of the Township of Radnor, be subject to a fine of
not more than $600 and costs of prosecution for each offense and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 30 days. The fine imposed by this section
shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of
this article.
§ 260-59 CHARTER § 260-62
C:763
§ 260-62. Statutory authority.
This article has been adopted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling
Act of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
approved December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended.240
240. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 260-62 RADNOR CODE § 260-62
C:764
ARTICLE IV
Amusement Devices Tax
[Adopted 4-11-1983 as Ord. No. 83-15 (Ch. 122, Part 6, of the 1974
Code)]
§ 260-63. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless otherwise herein expressly stated, the following terms shall
have, for the purpose of this article, the meanings hereby respectively
indicated:
DEVICE — Any jukebox, mechanical shuffleboard game, pinball
machine, electrical or mechanical amusement device used, possessed,
owned or operated for profit.
ELECTRICAL OR MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any
electronic or mechanical device, machine or apparatus which, upon
the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, operates or may be
operated as a game or contest of skill, amusement or entertainment
of any kind or description, whether or not registering a score and
whether or not a prize is offered, and which may or may not contain
an automatic payoff for the return of money or token or slugs or
which may or may not make any provision whatever for the return of
money to the player or which may or may not provide an award of
additional games or additional playing time. Further, an "electrical or
mechanical amusement device" includes any electronic or mechanical
device, machine or apparatus which is used or may be used as a game
of skill and amusement wherein a player initiates, employs or directs
any force generated by the machine or light illustrated on a screen,
board or machine. The term "amusement device" includes electronic
television entertainment operated by coin, slug, token, plate or disc,
some of which are known as video games; provided, however, that this
does not include coin-operated radios or television sets carrying regular
radio and telephone frequencies. It is provided further that such term
shall not include any gambling device or other mechanism that has
been determined to be a gambling device, the operation of which is
contrary to law.
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which,
upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot,
crevice or other opening, operates or may be operated for the emission
of song, music or similar entertainment or amusement.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, copartnership, firm or
corporation.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and neuter.
§ 260-63 CHARTER § 260-64
C:765
§ 260-64. Statutory authority; imposition of tax.
There is hereby imposed a tax, for general revenue purposes, under the
authority of the Act of December 31, 1965, Act. No. 511, the Local Tax
Enabling Act (53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.), upon the privilege of using for profit,
within the Township of Radnor, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, for a period
of time in excess of 72 hours, any device or electrical or mechanical
amusement device, as defined herein. On or after January 1, 1984, such
tax shall be payable at the following rate: on each device or electrical or
mechanical amusement device, $150 for the calendar year or any portion
thereof.
§ 260-65. Payment of tax.
The tax imposed under this article shall be payable by the owner or lessee
of the electrical or mechanical amusement device to Radnor Township on or
before the first day of February for the taxable year beginning January 1. No
deduction or refund of any tax payable under this article shall be granted
in the case of any tax payable for less than a full year or in the case of
any device destroyed, stolen, sold or otherwise disposed of or transferred
after the payment of such tax; provided, however, that in the case of the
substitution of any device by another device in the same class, the use of
which is taxable under this article, no additional tax shall be paid, provided
that the total number of devices of the same class in use upon the premises
remains no greater than that upon which such tax was paid.
§ 260-66. Certificates of payment.
A. The Finance Director of Radnor Township shall procure, at the expense
of the Township, a sufficient number of certificates, upon each of which
the following information shall be printed or inserted in ink or by
typewriter:
(1) The name of the Township.
(2) The number of the certificate.
(3) The name and address of the person paying the tax.
(4) The year for which the tax shall have been paid.
(5) The date on which such tax shall have been paid.
(6) The type of device for which the tax shall have been paid.
(7) The amount of the tax paid.
B. Whenever any tax shall have been paid under this article, the Finance
Director shall prepare, in duplicate, a certificate as herein prescribed.
The original of such certificate, to which the Township Seal shall be
affixed, shall be given to the person paying such tax, and the duplicate
shall be kept on file by the Finance Director. The Finance Director shall
also procure and give to each person paying such tax a seal to be affixed
§ 260-64 RADNOR CODE § 260-66
C:766
§ 260-67. Penalty for nonpayment.
If any tax levied pursuant to this article shall not be paid when due, a
penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax due and unpaid shall be added
thereto, in addition to all other penalties provided by law.
§ 260-68. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Any person who violates this article or fails to carry out any of the provisions
or requirements of this article; or who neglects or fails or refuses to furnish
complete, accurate and correct returns to Radnor Township or neglects,
fails or refuses to pay over any tax levied by this article at the time required;
or who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return; or
who does or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid payment of
the whole or any part of the tax imposed hereunder shall be guilty of
a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof in any District Justice
Court of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall be liable to a fine or
penalty not to exceed $600 for each and every offense and the costs of
prosecution thereof, and, in default of payment of any such fine and costs,
to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days, provided that
any such fine or penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed
by any other section of this article.
to each device for the use of which such tax shall have been paid. Such
seal shall indicate the year for which such tax shall have been paid, the
type of device and the certificate number.
C. In case of the loss, defacement or destruction of any original certificate
or seal, the person to whom such certificate or seal was issued shall
apply to the Finance Director, who may issue a new certificate or seal in
replacement thereof, upon payment of a fee of $0.50, and who shall
amend the duplicate of the certificate first issued in the case that a new
certificate has been issued.
D. In case of the removal of any establishment, in which any device for the
use of which a tax shall have been paid under this article, to another
location in the Township or in case of a change of identity of the person
operating or owning such establishment, the person operating such
establishment shall report such fact within five days of such change in
location or personnel, and the Finance Director shall immediately
amend the certificate and duplicate certificate.
E. Before the removal of any device from any establishment, the person
operating such establishment shall remove the seal issued under this
article from such device. Such seal may be affixed to any other device of
the same class used in such establishment during the current year.
§ 260-66 CHARTER § 260-68
C:767

ARTICLE V
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 4-27-1987 as Ord. No. 87-09 (Ch. 122, Part 2, of the 1974
Code)]
§ 260-69. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Township of Radnor."
§ 260-70. Statutory authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Township of Radnor, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 260-71. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, investment or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof, unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 260-70 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
§ 260-69 CHARTER § 260-71
C:769
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendents of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Township, including,
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which, by custom,
usage or law, pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding
permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings, exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
A.
§ 260-71 RADNOR CODE § 260-71
C:770
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 260-72. Imposition of tax; interest.
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest.
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the consideration of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 260-71 CHARTER § 260-72
C:771
§ 260-73. Exempt parties.
The United States or the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 260-74. Excluded transactions.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof a
tax at the rate of 1 1/2% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
[Amended 3-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-09]
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 260-72 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Township is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at a sheriff's sale or
tax claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
§ 260-72 RADNOR CODE § 260-74
C:772
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
covenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and between grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of
his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity, if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
§ 260-74 CHARTER § 260-74
C:773
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) Any transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage
in default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
§ 260-74 RADNOR CODE § 260-74
C:774
§ 260-75. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners and stockholders.
Except as otherwise provided in § 260-74, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 260-76. Acquired company.
§ 260-77. Credits against tax.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
§ 260-74 CHARTER § 260-77
C:775
§ 260-78. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 260-79. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 260-80. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount or tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by the Act of July 7, 1983
(P.L. 40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for
the local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the
Township of Radnor based on a redetermination of the amount of tax
due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax, without compensation from the Township of Radnor.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
§ 260-77 RADNOR CODE § 260-80
C:776
§ 260-81. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 260-82. Civil penalties.
§ 260-83. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying or being situated
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Township of Radnor all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for
use of the county, together with a report containing the information as
is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2% commission
shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall re-record the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a re-recording or recording fee has been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax, if the failure is for not more than one month, with
an additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 260-80 CHARTER § 260-83
C:777
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Township of Radnor which
lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or
conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax
imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time
when the tax under this article is due and payable and continue until
discharge by payment or in accordance with the law, and the solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas
of Delaware County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Tax Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements
and amendments.
§ 260-84. Recovery of taxes, interest and penalties.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 260-85. Enforcement; additional regulations.
The Director of Finance of the Township of Radnor is charged with
enforcement and collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and
enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax.
The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into
and made a part of this article.
§ 260-83 RADNOR CODE § 260-85
C:778
ARTICLE VI
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 9-28-1987 by Ord. No. 87-27 (Ch. 122, Part 4, of the 1974
Code); amended in its entirety 11-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-36]
§ 260-86. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
DIRECTOR — The Finance Director of the Township of Radnor, or his duly
authorized representative.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in § 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person engaged in any occupation, trade or profession
within the corporate limits of Radnor Township.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in § 13 (relating to
earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character (including services, domestic or other) carried on
or performed within the corporate limits of Radnor Township for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission, tips, or fees for services rendered.
RADNOR TOWNSHIP — The area within the corporate limits of the
Township of Radnor.
SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUAL — Includes sole proprietor, Schedule C filer,
any member of a limited-liability company, and any general partner of a
partnership, or partner who participates in partnership activity.
TAX — The local services tax, at the rate fixed in § 260-87 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor.
§ 260-87. Levy of tax; effective date; use; maximum per person.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging
§ 260-86 CHARTER § 260-87
C:779
§ 260-88. Exemption and refunds.
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within Radnor
Township during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such
privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax
for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro-rata basis, in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. This tax may be used solely for the following purposes, as the same may
be allocated by the Township from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S. Ch. 85,
Subchapter F241 (relating to homestead property exclusion).
C. The Township shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the
tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of
any kind or nature heretofore levied by the Township.
D. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within Radnor Township is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is on, or is called to, active duty for at least three
weeks, at any time during the taxable year. For the purposes of this
subsection, "reserve component of the armed forces" shall mean
the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve,
United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard
241. Editor's Note: See the Homestead Property Exclusion Program Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et
seq.
§ 260-87 RADNOR CODE § 260-88
C:780
Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army
National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
must annually file an exemption certificate with the Township and
with the person's employer, affirming that the person reasonably
expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources
within Radnor Township of less than $12,000 in the calendar year
for which the exemption certificate is filed. The exemption
certificate shall be the form that is provided by and available from
the Township. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a
copy of all of the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from
employment within Radnor Township for the year prior to the fiscal
year for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the
tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the Township, or except as required by Subsection
B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the person
during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall ensure
that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption from the tax for
a given calendar year, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the Township that the person has received earned
income and net profits from all sources within Radnor Township
equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the
person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption from the tax for a given
calendar year becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year
under Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
§ 260-88 CHARTER § 260-88
C:781
§ 260-89. Duty of employers to collect.
outstanding balance of tax due, and the Township may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), an employer shall not be
responsible for investigating exemption certificates, monitoring tax
exemption eligibility, or exempting any employee from the local
services tax.
C. Refunds. The Director shall establish procedures for the processing of
refund claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for
exemption. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days
after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last
quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to
interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar
year that do not exceed $1. The Director shall determine eligibility for
exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons. Claims for refunds
by exempt persons will be denied in cases where the employer failed to
remit the withheld local services tax to the Township.
A. Each employer within Radnor Township, as well as those employers
situated outside Radnor Township but who engage in business within
Radnor Township, is hereby charged with the duty of collecting the tax
from each of his employees engaged by him or performing for him
within Radnor Township and making a return and payment thereof to
the Director. Further, each employer is hereby authorized to deduct this
tax for each employee in his or her employ, whether said employee is
paid by salary, wage or commission and whether or not all such services
are performed within Radnor Township.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro-rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro-rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll-period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by Radnor Township School District and the Township.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
§ 260-88 RADNOR CODE § 260-89
C:782
§ 260-90. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms provided by or available from the Township. If an employer
fails to file the return or pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 260-91. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Director on or before the last day of the month
following the end of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 260-92. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind or
engages in any occupation or profession within Radnor Township shall be
required to comply with this article and pay the pro-rata portion of the tax
due to the Township on or before the 30th day following the end of each
quarter.
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and
a statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer, and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
an application for exemption form provided by and available from the
Township.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The Township shall provide a taxpayer a
receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the Township if the failure to
withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by the
employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 260-88B
above and remits the amount so withheld in accordance with this
article.
G. Employers must remit the local services taxes on or before the last day
of the month following the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 260-89 CHARTER § 260-93
C:783
§ 260-93. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 260-94. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of Radnor Township but who perform services of any
type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within Radnor
Township do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject themselves
to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under this article
with the same force and effect as though they were residents of Radnor
Township. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation within Radnor
Township and an employee of a nonresidential employer may, for the
purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed person, and in the
event his or her tax is not paid, the Township shall have the option of
proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of
this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 260-95. Administration of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. It shall be the duty of the Director to accept and receive payments of
this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by
him from each employer or self-employed person, together with the
date the tax was received.
B. The Director is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article or
§ 260-93 RADNOR CODE § 260-95
C:784
§ 260-96. Collections costs; attorneys' fees. [Amended 3-18-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-03]
believed to be subject to this article, the examination and correction
of any return made in compliance with this article and any payment
alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed
or found to have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
Director shall have the right to appeal consistent with the Township's
Local Taxpayer Bill of Rights.
C. The Director is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer and determine the proper amount of tax due and,
if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer is
hereby directed and required to give the Director the means, facilities
and opportunity for such examination.
D. In the event an employer does not have sufficient records to support the
correct calculation of the tax, or fails to make books and records
available for examination, the Director is authorized to ascertain the tax
due using estimates.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates set forth in this article, the Director may sue
for the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article,
together with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 1%
per month, or fraction of a month, on the amount of such tax shall be
calculated beginning with the due date of the tax, and a penalty of 10%
shall be added to the flat rate of such tax for nonpayment thereof.
C. In addition to all interest and penalties as are allowed by law, there
shall be added to each delinquent local services tax such costs,
attorneys' fees, charges and expenses as are incurred by the Township
in the delinquent collection process.
D. Such fees and charges shall be reasonable, and the same are hereby
established in a cost rate schedule as set forth in Subsection E of this
section. The rate schedule below is hereby determined to be
reasonable, fair and necessary in order to allow the Township to collect
past-due sums.
E. Any entity empowered to collect local services taxes on behalf of the
Township is directed to add such costs of collection as are incurred as
set forth in the schedule below. Such entity which incurs costs of
collection shall be entitled to retain an amount equal to the sums as set
forth in the schedule below. Any sums collected pursuant to this section
shall be in addition to any tax penalty, interest or other costs already
part of the delinquent account or assessment.
Schedule of Collection Costs
§ 260-95 CHARTER § 260-96
C:785
(1) Taxpayer notification and administration.
(a) Taxpayer late filing or underpayment notice: $10.
(b) Employer late filing notice or underpayment penalty notice for
quarterly or annual earned income tax or local services tax
return: 10% of the tax, penalty and interest due, minimum
charge $50.
(c) Delinquent account servicing fee, including records imaging or
other detailed recordkeeping, office staffing, computer
equipment and software, office space, telephone, printing and
imaging equipment, supplies and postage used to generate
delinquent notices and to establish monthly payment plans:
10% of tax, penalty and interest due; minimum charge $50.
(d) Partial payment fee, where payment received does not pay
account in full: $3.
(e) Fee for check returned from bank (NSF, account closed, etc.):
$29.
(f) Notice of intent to file civil suit: $50.
(2) Wage attachment.
(a) Taxpayer notice prior to wage attachment: $25.
(b) Employer wage attachment notice: $25.
(3) Litigation.
(a) Prepare Magisterial District Court complaint: $75.
(b) Prepare for Magisterial District Court hearing: $100.
(c) Attend Magisterial District Court trial or hearing: $150.
(d) Attend Constable execution sale: $350.
(e) Prepare arbitration complaint/appeal: $150.
(f) Attend arbitration trial: $350.
(g) Enter default judgment: $150.
(h) Issue Sheriff's writ of execution: $250.
(i) Attend Sheriff's sale: $250.
(j) Non-litigation legal work: $70 per hour.
(k) Litigation legal work: $80 per hour.
(l) All other clerical work not itemized above: $50 per hour.
§ 260-96 RADNOR CODE § 260-96
C:786
§ 260-97. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article or to pay any tax imposed
by this article, shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 for each offense,
and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce the
penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge
of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to
file a return required by this article or any person who has failed to pay
a tax imposed by this article. Each incidence of noncompliance shall be
considered a separate offense.
§ 260-98. Construal of provisions.
(4) This schedule may be amended from time to time by separate
resolution of the Township of Radnor.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Township to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation
not within the taxing power of the Township under the Constitution of
the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 260-96 CHARTER § 260-98
C:787
Chapter 262
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 267. Parking and storage of vehicles — See Ch.
272.
§ 262-1. Definitions and hooking fees.
The costs of towing passenger cars and trucks, to be paid to and received
by any authorized towing service or approved pound keeper, shall be due
upon a vehicle being "hooked" and removed from the premises and shall not
exceed the amounts set forth in §§ 262-2 and 262-3.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DAY — Anytime between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
Monday through Friday.
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD — The Design Review Board of Radnor
Township.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Community Development of Radnor
Township.
HOOKING — Having at least two wheels of the towed vehicle lifted
from the ground.
NIGHT — Shall be defined as all other times throughout the week.
STORAGE DAY — A twenty-four-hour period, commencing at the time
the vehicle is actually placed into storage (i.e., a vehicle placed in
storage at 11:00 p.m. would be charged one-day storage for a twentyfour-
hour period ending 11:00 p.m. the following night.)
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor.
B. Hooking fees:
(1) In all instances, when a vehicle is hooked and the owner/operator
returns prior to the vehicle being moved, tow operators shall
charge no more than a hooking fee of $95 and immediately release
the vehicle to its owner. [Amended 12-14-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-21]
(2) If the owner/operator is unable to pay the hooking fee, the tow
operator has the option of towing the vehicle to an impound facility
or releasing the vehicle to the owner/operator and issuing a written
bill at the scene. Tow operators are encouraged to allow vehicle
owners/operators 15 minutes to obtain funds to pay hooking fees
§ 260-98 RADNOR CODE § 262-1
C:788
§ 262-2. Vehicles towed at the request of the Township of Radnor.
[Amended 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-21]
§ 262-3. Towing unattended vehicles from private property.
[Amended 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-21]
The following regulations shall apply to the towing of vehicles parked or left
unattended on private property without the consent of the property owner:
before towing the vehicle to an impound facility. [Amended
12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-21]
(3) Owners/operators of hooked vehicles shall not engage in disorderly
conduct or sit in the hooked vehicle to prevent its removal.
A. Police towing services. The costs for towing services ordered by the
Police Department for passenger cars and trucks with the gross vehicle
weight of 10,000 pounds or less, to be paid and received by any
authorized towing service or approved pound keeper, shall be due upon
a vehicle being hooked and removed from the premises and shall not be
in excess of the flat rate of $125. The standard cleanup fee is $25; if
excessive cleanup is needed, a flat fee of $45 will be charged.
B. Towing costs of heavy vehicles (for vehicles with a gross weight in
excess of 10,000 pounds). The costs of towing trucks and other heavy
vehicles shall not exceed $200 flat rate per hour, commencing on arrival
at the tow scene.
C. Storage costs.
(1) The cost of storage of any impounded passenger car or truck with a
gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or less shall not exceed the
rate of $45 per storage day.
(2) Storage costs of heavy vehicles with a gross vehicle weight in
excess of 10,000 pounds shall not exceed $75 per storage day.
D. Police administration fee. Prior to release of the vehicle, the impound
yard shall collect an administrative fee of $25 and a release form from
the Police Department. This payment shall be made to the Township for
each vehicle towed, by the order of the Police Department. Records of
such payment will be included in the monthly reports provided to the
Police Department.
E. Review of all fines, towing, storage and administrative fees. All fines,
towing, storage and administrative fees may be amended from time to
time by separate resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
A. No towing service shall remove vehicles parked or left unattended on
private property without the written authorization of the property
owner who shall be present at the time of the removal of the vehicle if
he or she is available. No towing service shall pay a fee to a private
§ 262-1 CHARTER § 262-3
C:789
property owner in consideration for contracted towing services. The
towing service must be issued a license by the Township on a yearly
basis authorizing them to do so. The license shall be issued by the
Radnor Township Police Department upon completion of an application
and payment of a fee in the amount of $200 per year or as amended by
separate resolution by the Board of Commissioners. The license shall be
effective for one year from the date of its issuance and shall be renewed
every year by the towing service by the procedures established in this
section. The application form shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the towing service.
(2) The name and business address of all persons or entities having an
ownership interest in the towing service.
(3) The name and address of all persons, businesses and institutions
from whose property in Radnor Township the towing service is
authorized to remove vehicles.
(4) The address of the storage yard where vehicles removed from
private property in Radnor Township will be towed.
(5) The name of the insurance company and the name and address of
the insurance company agent through whom the insurance
required by this section has been issued.
B. If any licensed towing service commits a violation of any provision of
this chapter, the Superintendent of Police, upon determining that any
provision of this section has been violated, shall issue a written warning
to the licensed towing service informing them of the violation. In the
event that a second violation of this chapter occurs within the same
calendar year, the Superintendent of Police may revoke a license issued
hereunder together with the right to reapply for a subsequent license
for a period of up to two years. The Superintendent of Police shall notify
the towing service in writing no less than five days prior to the
revocation of its license and provide an explanation of the violation of
this chapter and the length of the revocation. The Superintendent of
Police may issue an intent to revoke a license for a period of up to two
years. Upon receipt of the intent to revoke a license, the towing service
may request a pretermination hearing before the Superintendent of
Police or his/her designee.
C. Authorized towing services shall:
(1) Provide certificates of insurance to the Township as follows: in the
minimum amount of $500,000 combined single limit for any auto,
hired autos, nonowned autos; $100,000 for each personal injury;
and garage keepers' liability in the amount of $50,000 per
occurrence. The towing services must provide the Township with
immediate notice of any change in coverage.
§ 262-3 RADNOR CODE § 262-3
C:790
§ 262-4. Application for duty tow license.
(2) Notify the Radnor Township Police Department of the removal of a
vehicle from private property within one hour of such removal and
provide a description and license number of the vehicle thus
removed.
(3) Treat all owners of towed vehicles with courtesy and dignity and
provide secure, well-lighted and maintained facilities which at all
times promote the safety and protection of towed and impounded
vehicles and owners thereof who visit such facility.
A. License required. No person shall be called by the Township or its
Police Department as a tower for the purpose of removal of disabled,
wrecked, or abandoned vehicles unless that person is granted a duty
tow license by the Board of Commissioners.
B. License application.
(1) Applications for a duty tow license shall be made to the Township
Manager upon a form available from his office, which form shall
require the following information:
(a) The name, address, and telephone number of the business for
which the license is sought.
(b) The name, home and business address and telephone number
of all the owner(s) or, in the case of a corporation,
stockholder(s) of the business for which the license is sought,
together with a designation of the business organization (i.e.,
sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation. etc.).
(c) A list of tow trucks, vehicle wreckers, car carriers or other
vehicles available for service to Radnor Township. A
description of each vehicle (make, model, type, year, and
vehicle identification number), copies of current registrations
and insurance cards, the name and address of the owner/lessee
of each vehicle or piece of equipment, and the location where
regularly parked or stored, shall be included.
(d) A certificate of insurance providing a minimum of $1,000,000
automobile liability and garage liability or other proof
acceptable to the Township that the applicant has obtained the
liability insurance required for the issuance of a duty tow
license.
(2) Applications shall be completed and signed by the owner(s) of the
business for which a duty tow license is sought or, in the case of a
corporation, the president of the corporation.
§ 262-3 CHARTER § 262-4
C:791
(3) Applicants must execute an agreement to indemnify the Township
for any and all losses or expenses incurred by virtue of any acts
performed in the course of service.
(4) Applications for duty tow licenses must be accompanied by a fee of
$200 per year to offset the cost of investigation and processing of
licenses. [Amended 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-21]
(5) The application shall be reviewed by the Police and Code
Enforcement Departments within 60 days of receipt of the
completed application and application fee. Incomplete applications
shall be promptly returned to the applicant. A report shall be filed
with the Township Manager for recommendation to the Board of
Commissioners by each department responding to applications.
(6) Applicants for duty tow licenses must possess a current and valid
salvor's license from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and have
a minimum five years' experience as a tower.
(7) Vehicles required.
(a) The following vehicles shall be owned or leased exclusively by
the applicant and available on call for service at the request of
the Township or its Police Department:
[1] Two light/medium flatbed or two wheel-lift trucks.
[2] All of the aforesaid required vehicles shall bear a sign
indicating the name and telephone number of the
applicant's towing business and must be made available
for inspection by the Township.
[3] Applicants must show proof that access to heavy-duty
equipment, including a heavy-duty wrecker, is available to
applicant on a twenty-four-hour basis.
(8) The applicant's place of business shall be located within the
Township boundaries in order that the response time to a call for
duty tow service is within 15 minutes. [Amended 12-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-21]
(9) After consideration of the Township Manager's recommendations,
the Board of Commissioners shall appoint one or more duty towers
meeting the requirements of this chapter by January 31 of each
year to serve for a period of four years, The Police Department shall
determine an on-call schedule for all licensed duty towers in the
Township. [Amended 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-21;
1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2017-19]
(10) Each duty tower shall pay a license fee as fixed by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners. Upon payment of the license fee, the
Police Department shall issue a license to appointed duty towers.
§ 262-4 RADNOR CODE § 262-4
C:792
Such licenses shall be effective for a period of four years from the
date of issuance. [Amended 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2017-19]
C. Specific duties of duty tow licensees shall be as follows: [Amended
12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-21]
(1) All licensees shall respond within 15 minutes from their receipt of
the Police Department's call requesting service to the arrival of the
licensee's towing vehicle at the location of the disabled, wrecked,
or abandoned vehicle, except during adverse roadway conditions.
(2) If any licensee cannot respond to the service call from the Police
Department with the appropriate towing vehicle or within the
required response time, the licensee shall so advise the police
dispatcher. If the licensee's vehicle is delayed while in transit to the
requested location, the vehicle operator shall advise the police
dispatcher of the delay and of his present location, whereupon a
determination shall be made by the appropriate police official as to
whether the secondary duty tower shall be called.
(3) Any licensee who performs duty towing services as an independent
contractor to the Township of Radnor shall not exceed the
maximum rates established in Chapter 262.
(4) All licensees shall be responsible for removing vehicular parts and
debris from the highway. Minor liquid cleanup is required of the
licensee.
(5) All licensees shall comply with all rules and regulations established
by the Township Manager or Police Department.
(6) Duty tow licensees must secure a towed vehicle in a designated
impound yard. The windows and doors of the towed vehicle must be
closed and/or locked whenever possible. The vehicle's key must be
deposited with a copy of the invoice for services in the impound
yard office.
(7) An invoice for each tow service must be completed by the licensee,
which invoice shall include the following information:
(a) The incident number.
(b) The date and location.
(c) Whether a police release is required.
(d) The make, model, vehicle identification number and license
plate number.
(e) Indication of status, i.e., wrecked, stolen, abandoned, disabled
or impounded.
(f) Amount charged, including storage fees.
§ 262-4 CHARTER § 262-5
C:793
§ 262-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-14-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-21]
Any person, firm, association or corporation who operates a towing service
without a license in violation of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall
be subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $50 or more than $600 for
each and every offense. Such fines or penalties shall be collected as like
fines or penalties are now by law collected, and shall be in addition to any
other penalty provided for herein.
§ 262-6. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
in any Court, any right acquired or liability incurred, any permit issued, or
any cause or causes of action existing.
Chapter 262A
TRAFFIC CALMING SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 270.
§ 262A-1. Intent. [Amended 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-05]
The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines for the installation
of traffic calming systems on Township-owned roadways. Such systems
shall be specifically designed to reduce the speed, but not necessarily the
volume, of motor vehicle traffic in residential areas, nor is their purpose
to move traffic to adjoining roadways. Traffic calming measures shall also
consist of enforcement and education activities by the Police Department.
§ 262A-2. Definition. [Amended 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-05]
For the purpose of this chapter, except as may otherwise be determined
under § 262A-5M herein, "speed hump" shall be synonymous with "traffic
calming system" or "traffic calming measure." A speed hump shall be a
raised hump in the pavement extending across the width of the roadway at
a right angle to the direction of the flow of traffic.
§ 262A-3. Policy.
It is the policy of the Township to install speed humps on streets in
accordance with the procedures and criteria listed in §§ 262A-4 and 262A-5
herein.
§ 262-5 RADNOR CODE § 262A-4
C:794
§ 262A-4. Procedure. [Amended 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-05]
Applicants may request that a study be conducted to construct speed humps
in a particular neighborhood. Requests shall be submitted in writing, along
with a petition described below, to the Superintendent of Police for
consideration at the next available meeting of the Staff Traffic Committee
(the "Committee"). Such requests shall be submitted a minimum of 30 days
before the Committee meeting at which they will be discussed.
§ 262A-5. Criteria. [Amended 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-05]
The following criteria shall be used to limit speed humps to areas where
they will be most effective and practical:
A. Petition.
(1) All adult residents of the affected streets pursuant to Subsection
A(2) below, must be contacted by the applicants and advised that
speed humps are being considered for their street.
(2) A signed petition must be submitted reflecting the support of a
minimum of 80% of the residents of households on the street on
which humps are proposed to be installed and a minimum of 60% of
the residents of households located on streets or cul-de-sacs whose
only access is via the street on which humps are proposed to be
installed.
(3) Only one adult signature per household, apartment or business will
be considered on the petition.
A. Speed humps will not be installed on state roadways.
B. The legally posted speed limit on the street shall not exceed 25 miles
per hour (mph).
C. The minimum length of the street, or portion thereof, measured from
the nearest intersecting street, shall be at least 1,000 feet.
D. The average daily traffic (ADT) shall not be less than 1,000 vehicles per
day, which shall be determined by a seven-day automated traffic count
conducted by the Department's Traffic Safety Unit. Manual counts may
be instituted at the Department's discretion.
E. The average vehicle speed (based upon the 85th percentile of the
speeds recorded during the traffic count) shall not be less than five mph
over the legally posted speed limit, which shall be determined by a
seven-day automated traffic count.
F. The Department will analyze the number of accidents on the affected
roadway over the most recent three-year period to ascertain the extent
to which excessive or unsafe speeds were a major contributing factor.
§ 262A-4 CHARTER § 262A-5
C:795
§ 262A-6. Approval and installation.
G. The distance between speed humps shall not be less than 250 or
greater than 600 feet apart; provided, however, that should an
intersection controlled by a stop sign or yield sign be located on the
affected roadway, the distance between humps may exceed 600 feet.
The existing stop sign or yield sign may be reevaluated to see if it
continues to meet the warrants of the State of Pennsylvania after the
installation of humps.
H. Speed humps shall not be less than 150 feet from an intersecting
roadway or within 250 feet of a signalized intersection.
I. Speed humps shall not be installed on hills or curves that could affect
the safe control of vehicles.
J. Speed humps shall traverse the entire roadway, allowing one foot on
each side for the flow of storm water.
K. Speed humps shall be no less than 12 feet in width.
L. Signs indicating HUMP shall be erected in each direction at the
location of the hump and a sufficient distance before the hump to warn
approaching motorists. For increased visibility, reflective stripes shall
be painted on the humps.
M. Other traffic calming measures:
(1) Notwithstanding whether or not a petition has been submitted
under § 262A-4, nothing herein shall limit the Township's right to
unilaterally consider and install any traffic calming measures
whatsoever, including but not limited to speed humps, bulb outs,
chicanes, raised crosswalks, etc., as it may deem necessary to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of a specific neighborhood or
the public in general.
(2) This section shall apply to any street within the Township,
especially streets where the Township determines there is a high
concentration of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, such as those
near schools, parks and recreation areas, churches, and business
districts.
(3) The Township shall notify the residents and businesses on any
streets for which such traffic calming measures are being
considered to permit their input before such measures are
approved and installed.
A. All decisions regarding whether or not to recommend the installation of
speed humps shall be made by the Committee in accordance with the
criteria contained herein.
B. All Committee recommendations to install speed humps in the
petitioned area shall be subject to final approval by the Board.
§ 262A-5 RADNOR CODE § 262A-6
C:796
Chapter 263
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Clearing — See Ch. 144.
Contractors — See Ch. 145.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 255.
§ 263-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a mechanism for the establishment
of a commission which shall encourage proper selection, planting,
replanting and care and establish protective regulations for trees within
Radnor Township in order to control problems of air and noise pollution, soil
erosion, aesthetic depreciation, maintain maximum tree cover and to make
Radnor Township a healthier and safer place to live.
§ 263-2. Establishment of commission.
A commission to be known as the Shade Tree Commission is hereby
established.
§ 263-3. Personnel of Commission; appointment; terms; vacancies.
§ 263-4. Word usage; definitions.
A. The Commission shall be comprised of seven residents of the Township,
two of whom shall be appointed annually, one from the Parks and
Recreation Board and one from the Planning Commission, all of whom
shall serve without compensation. Where applicable, at least three of
the members should be professionally trained in horticulture,
arboriculture, forestry or an associated field.
B. On the expiration of the term of any Shade Tree Commissioner, a
successor shall be appointed by the Board, to a term of five years.
C. Vacancies in the office of Shade Tree Commission shall be filled by the
Board of Commissioners for the unexpired term.
D. Any Commission member may be removed at the discretion of the
Board of Commissioners.
A. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 262A-6 CHARTER § 263-4
C:797
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer as hereinafter defined who
has filed an application for a subdivision or land development, or an
application for a grading or clearing permit, or a permit for either an
emergency tree removal or other tree removal within the jurisdiction of
the Shade Tree Commission.
AREA OF DISTURBANCE — An area proposed to be disturbed in any
manner, temporary or permanent, as a result of construction activities,
plus a buffer zone of 20 feet.
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Radnor.
CLEARING PERMIT — The clearing or removal of six or more trees
annually, each having a DBH of six inches or greater on any property or
adjacent properties under single ownership.
COMMEMORATIVE SHADE TREE FUND — A fund comprised of
contributions from interested persons and other entities, including
payments in lieu of replanting requirements and fines levied, for the
purpose of maintaining the wooded character of the streets and lands
within the Township.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT — Includes CO, C1, C2, WBOD, C3, PB and
Garrett Hill Zoning Districts.
DBH (DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT) — Standard measurement of a
tree's diameter taken at breast height (4 1/2 feet above the ground or
1.5 meters).
DEAD TREE — A tree that is no longer alive, has been removed beyond
repair, or is in an advanced state of decline (where an insufficient
amount of live tissue, green leaves, limbs or branches exists to sustain
life) and has been determined to be in such a state by a certified
arborist during a nondormant or other natural stage of the tree that
would minimize the likelihood that the tree would be mistakenly
identified as being in such a dead state.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes, or causes to be made,
a subdivision of land or a land development, or who has applied for a
permit within the jurisdiction of the Shade Tree Commission.
EMERGENCY TREE — A tree that is currently failing or has failed.
FORESTRY MANAGEMENT — The branch of forestry concerned with
the overall administrative, economic, legal, scientific and technical
aspects of silvicultural and forest regulation. This includes
management for aesthetics, fish, recreation, urban values, water,
wilderness, wildlife, wood products, forest genetic resources and other
forest resource values. Management can be based on conservation,
economics or a combination of the two. Techniques include timber
extraction, thinning, planting and replanting of various species, and/
or the establishment of roads and pathways through forests, and the
prevention of fire hazards.
§ 263-4 RADNOR CODE § 263-4
C:798
HAZARD TREE — Any tree that may fail due to mortality or a structural
defect or changed stand conditions and, as a result, may cause property
damage or personal injury.
HERITAGE TREE — A tree having a thirty-inch-or-greater DBH.
INVASIVE PLANTS — Nonindigenous species or strains that become
established in natural plant communities and wild areas, replacing
native vegetation. Invasive plants are introduced species that can thrive
in areas beyond their natural range of dispersal. These plants are
characteristically adaptable, aggressive, and have a high reproductive
capacity. Their vigor combined with a lack of natural enemies often
leads to outbreak populations.
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD — The Park and Recreation Board
of Radnor Township.
PERMIT — A permit in writing as issued by the Township Manager or
Township Engineer pursuant to application approval by the Shade Tree
Commission.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation
or any other legal entity, other than the Township.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Radnor
Township.
PROTECTIVE TREE PRESERVATION FENCE — A temporary fence
installed, at minimum, around the dripline of any tree which is to be
preserved during construction or demolition operations, inside of which
no grading, storing or dumping of any material may occur. Chain link
fence shall be six feet tall with two-inch mesh chain link fabric. Twoinch
posts shall be tied with six-gauge aluminum wire ties at 24 inches
on center. Posts shall be a minimum of two feet in the ground and space
of 10 feet on center. Plastic zip ties may not be used.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — All property owned or under the control of the
Township, including but not necessarily limited to all property of the
school district of Radnor Township, all public parks and playgrounds,
municipal building property, public library and fire station(s).
PUBLIC STREET OR HIGHWAY — Any Township right-of-way, a portion
of which is used for vehicular or pedestrian travel.
SHADE TREE — Any tree with a six-inch-or-greater DBH that is subject
to review and/or approval by the Shade Tree Commission under any
section of this chapter.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — A commission established pursuant to
powers granted by the Radnor Township Home Rule Charter.
STREET TREE — Any tree on any public property or public street or
highway in Radnor Township.
STREET TREE PERMIT — A permit in writing issued by the Township
Manager upon application approval to any arborist or person certified
§ 263-4 CHARTER § 263-4
C:799
§ 263-5. General powers and duties of Shade Tree Commission.
by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) to do any work on a
shade or street tree in Radnor Township.
TREE REPLACEMENT FORMULA —
TREE SPECIES — All existing and/or replacement trees shall include
both the common name and botanical name (e.g., red maple-acer
rubrum).
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor.
TOWNSHIP ARBORIST — The duly appointed arborist of the Township
or his designee.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The duly appointed engineer of the
Township or his designee.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The duly appointed manager of the Township
or his designee.
Replacement of any tree removed or recommended to be removed
by the Shade Tree Commission as follows:
6 to 18 inch DBH
removed
= 1 replacement tree
19 to 29 inch DBH
removed
= 3 replacement trees, two being
large canopy trees
30 inch DBH or greater
removed
= 6 replacement trees, four being
large canopy trees
(1)
All replacement trees shall have a minimum two to two and onehalf-
inch DBH.
(2)
See approved Township tree replacement list on Appendix A242 for
listing of species that should be used as replacement trees.
(3)
A. General.
(1) The Shade Tree Commission shall advise the Township when
necessary on recommended locations for new trees and/or the
removal of unsuitable trees on all streets within the Township.
(2) The Shade Tree Commission shall recommend and publish on the
Township website suitable species of trees for planting and
replanting pursuant to the tree replacement formula along streets
and in other areas, as well as appropriate size, spacing, planting,
bracing, fertilization, maintenance and pruning of trees.
(3) The Shade Tree Commission may, with approval of the Board of
Commissioners, consult the Township arborist to advise on suitable
242. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 263-4 RADNOR CODE § 263-5
C:800
species or trees, their planting, durability, rate of growth, litter
tendencies, care, protection and treatment, tolerance to
impervious coverage and traffic, and other such advice that may be
useful or appropriate to the duties and responsibilities of the Shade
Tree Commission. All fees and other costs incurred pursuant to this
section shall be reimbursed to the Township by the applicant.
(4) The Shade Tree Commission shall recommend to the Board of
Commissioners rules and regulations to further carry out its duties
and responsibilities, which may include the issuance of mandatory
or voluntary guidelines governing the planting, maintenance and
removal of trees.
(5) The Shade Tree Commission may periodically conduct a survey of
heritage trees within the Township and shall encourage the
protection of all such trees. No entry on private property shall be
made without written or verbal permission from the landowner.
(6) The Township shall administer the Commemorative Shade Tree
Fund.
(7) The Shade Tree Commission shall hold public meetings on a
regular basis, but not less frequently than eight times a year, and
shall publish its schedule. Meetings and notices thereof shall be
governed by the Radnor Township Home Rule Charter and
appropriate state law.
(8) At the end of each year the Shade Tree Commission shall submit an
annual report to the Board of Commissioners summarizing its
yearly activities and its plans for the next year.
B. The Shade Tree Commission shall review or cause to be reviewed all
applications submitted to the Township for the following:
(1) Land development.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Grading in excess of 200 cubic yards.
(4) Grading for parking lots of five or more cars.
(5) Clearing on any property of six or more trees annually, each having
a DBH of six inches or greater.
(6) Removal of a heritage tree in a nonemergency situation.
Documentation must be provided to the Shade Tree Commission
following emergency cleanup and mitigation.
(7) Forestry management (thinning, herbicide applications, timber
retail).
(8) Forestry practices (selective thinning, invasive species control,
timber harvesting, replanting).
§ 263-5 CHARTER § 263-5
C:801
§ 263-6. Emergency tree removal.
(9) Pool permits.
(10) Excavation in excess of 60 cubic yards.
C. The Shade Tree Commission shall review, if directed by the Township
Engineer or Director of Community Development, any applications
submitted to the Township for the following:
(1) Demolition permits on any building lot whereby the proposed work
may impact or cause the removal of trees; and
(2) Commercial tree removal permits.
D. Notwithstanding the requirements of this section or any other section
of this chapter, the following species of Ash trees, including
horticultural cultivars of each species, are exempt from the
requirements of this chapter. [Added 9-11-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-13]
(1) Green (Fraxinus pennsylvanica).
(2) White (Fraxinus americana).
(3) Black (Fraxinus nigra).
(4) Blue (Fraxinus quadrangulata).
A. In the case of immediate necessity for the protection of life or property,
any shade or street tree described in this chapter may be removed
without first obtaining a permit. The property owner or designee shall
report the emergency removal to the Township within 10 days of
removal. If applicable, a hazardous tree report, including relevant
documentation and photographs, shall be submitted by a certified
arborist.
B. Hazardous tree removal. The property owner is to contact the Township
or fill out an online application before removing the tree. When the
application has been approved by the Township, the tree may be
removed.
C. If, upon determination by the Director of Public Works, or his/her
designee, and after consultation with the Township Arborist that a tree
or trees on private property are considered a hazard tree, or such trees
are in imminent danger of falling or creating property damage or
personal injury, the applicable property owner shall be notified of the
hazard tree. The property owner shall then remove, in part or in whole,
the tree or trees to correct the hazardous condition within five days of
notification by the Township. If the hazard tree is not removed within
five days of notice, the Township may take such action as necessary to
remedy the situation resulting in a lien being filed against the property
to cover the Township's costs.
§ 263-5 RADNOR CODE § 263-6
C:802
§ 263-7. License requirements.
§ 263-8. Review of permit applications.
D. Emergency tree removals shall not require Shade Tree Commission
approval prior to the tree being removed, provided that the Township
has been notified by the property owners.
A. License required. Effective the date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful
for any person, firm, or corporation to prune or remove a street tree
within the jurisdiction of the Shade Tree Commission without first
having obtained a license as a specialty contractor from the Community
Development Department, as required by Chapter 145 of the Township
Code.
B. Application. Applications for license shall be made on a form provided
by the Township and shall include name and address of the business,
partnership or corporation, and the name of the individual to be
licensed, along with any additional information which the Township
may require.
C. Certification. Upon the filing of an application for license, applicants
shall be required to provide evidence of current certification through
the International Society of Arboriculture. Certification as an ISA
arborist shall be required for renewal of a contractor's license pursuant
to this subsection.
D. Insurance requirements.
(1) All applications for a license shall include proof of general liability
insurance coverage and worker's compensation insurance
coverage in the following amounts:
(a) General liability: coverage for personal injury in a minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and in the aggregate,
and property damage in a minimum amount of $250,000 per
occurrence and in the aggregate. In the alternative, a
combined coverage of $1,000,000 of personal injury and
property damage per occurrence and $1,250,000 in the
aggregate may be provided.
(b) Worker's compensation: coverage as is required by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) All policies shall be issued and in full force and effect before
commencement of any construction. All insurance coverages shall
not be altered, modified or canceled without the express written
consent of the Township.
A. Land development/subdivision. In addition to any applicable
requirements of the Radnor Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,243 all applicants shall submit to the Shade
§ 263-6 CHARTER § 263-8
C:803
Tree Commission the following information contemporaneously with
the filing of the land development or subdivision plan:
(1) The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating:
(a) The size, species and location of all shade trees and street
trees with a DBH of six inches or greater which are in the
proposed area of disturbance.
(b) All trees to be removed designated with an X; and listed in
report form with species, size and general point of location on
property.
(c) Approximate location of trees listed in plan form with species,
size, on adjoining properties that are located within 10 feet of
the property line (said locations can be approximated from the
subject property or via existing aerial photographic data).
(2) A planting plan shall also be required illustrating the size, species
and location of trees to be planted in compliance with the tree
replacement formula. The planting plan shall include a chart
summarizing sizes and species of trees to be removed and trees to
be planted.
(3) The plan(s) shall illustrate the location of protective tree
preservation fence around trees to remain, including a detail of
such. Additionally, the following measures must be addressed by
the applicant and inspected by the Township Engineer or Township
Arborist prior to the start of work or issuance of the permit:
protective tree preservation fence must be installed. All trees to be
removed within the area of disturbance must be clearly marked at
the base of each tree with visible, permanent forestry-type paint in
the color of pink indicating the status of each tree. All trees to
remain within the area of disturbance must be clearly marked at
the base of each tree with forestry-grade flagging tape in green
color.
(4) In addition to the requirements of § 255-38 of the Radnor Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, shade trees and
street trees shall be planted by the applicant or developer for any
land development or subdivision as follows:
(a) Along both sides of new streets.
(b) Along new sidewalks.
(c) Along both sides of existing streets, highways, sidewalks,
pedestrian ways, bicycle trails or pathways when they abut or
lie within the subdivision or land development.
243. Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Subdivision of Land.
§ 263-8 RADNOR CODE § 263-8
C:804
(d) Along both sides of access driveways to residential
development.
(5) The Shade Tree Commission shall review the proposed application
for compliance with the requirements of the Township's tree
replacement formula. The Shade Tree Commission shall also
consider the impact, if any, on all trees with a DBH of six inches or
greater and shall make recommendations for the preservation of
existing trees and for the species, location and size of new
plantings. Such recommendations shall be made in writing to the
Planning Commission.
(6) In the event that replanting is impractical or impossible as
determined by the Shade Tree Commission, the applicant has the
option of making payment to the Commemorative Shade Tree Fund
in lieu of replanting in accordance with the tree replacement
formula as set forth in § 263-4.
(7) No tree removal permits may be issued until final plan approval and
the escrow required by § 263-10 of this chapter has been
established.
B. Grading and clearing permits.
(1) The application for a grading permit for grading in excess of 200
cubic yards, or for grading in a parking lot of five or more cars or in
connection with a pool permit, shall be made in writing to the
Township Engineer upon forms available on the Township website,
together with the required filing fee.
(2) The application for a clearing permit on any lot in which six or more
trees of six or more inches or greater DBH or upon which a
heritage tree is proposed to be removed shall be made in writing to
the Township Engineer upon forms available on the Township
website, together with the required filing fee.
(3) The applicant shall submit a plan, including:
(a) The size, species and location of all shade and street trees with
a DBH of six inches or greater which are in the proposed area
of disturbance.
(b) All trees to be removed designated with an X.
(c) Approximate location of trees on adjoining properties that are
located within 10 feet of the property line (said locations can
be approximated from the subject property or via existing
aerial photographic data). A planting plan shall also be
required illustrating the size, species and location of trees to
be planted in compliance with the tree replacement formula.
The plan shall include a chart summarizing sizes and species of
trees to be removed and trees to be planted.
§ 263-8 CHARTER § 263-8
C:805
(4) The plan(s) shall illustrate the location of protective tree
preservation fence around trees to remain, including a detail of
such. Additionally, the following measures must be addressed by
the applicant and inspected by the Township prior to the start of
work or issuance of the permit:
(a) Protective tree preservation fence must be installed and
maintained until the work is complete and not removed until
directed by the Township.
(b) All trees to be removed within the area of disturbance must be
clearly marked at the base of each tree with visible, permanent
forestry-type paint in the color of pink indicating the status of
each tree. All trees to remain within the area of disturbance
must be clearly marked at the base of each tree with forestrygrade
flagging tape in green color.
(c) For every 30 trees to be removed, the applicant must provide
five photographs capturing as many trees as possible to obtain
a broad spectrum of the proposed property to be cleared and/
or areas of six or more trees to be removed.
(5) The Shade Tree Commission shall make a recommendation
regarding each grading or clearing permit plan before it and
provide a written basis for its findings. Upon recommendation of
the Shade Tree Commission, the Township Engineer may issue a
grading or clearing permit.
(6) The Shade Tree Commission may, in its discretion as a condition of
a permit, recommend that the applicant file a bond or to deposit
security satisfactory to the Township to guarantee compliance with
the terms and conditions upon which the permit is issued.
(7) In the event that replanting is impractical or impossible on site as
determined by the Shade Tree Commission, the applicant shall
make payment to the Commemorative Shade Tree Fund in lieu of
replanting in accordance with the tree replacement formula set
forth at § 263-4 of this chapter, or may plant the required trees in
locations in need in the Township.
C. Removal of a heritage tree; trees greater than 30 inches in DBH.
(1) Removal of heritage trees is strongly discouraged. The application
for the removal of a heritage tree shall be made in writing to the
Township Engineer upon forms published on the Township website,
together with the required filing fee.
(2) The plan shall illustrate the size, species and location of the
heritage tree that is proposed to be removed, and the size, species
and location of new trees to be planted in compliance with the tree
replacement formula. Three to five photographs of the proposed
heritage tree to be removed must accompany the application: 1) at
§ 263-8 RADNOR CODE § 263-8
C:806
the base of the trunk at ground level; 2) the entire tree if possible;
3) the subject area of concern (defect, crack). If the applicant
cannot produce photos, an on-site visit may be necessary.
(3) The Shade Tree Commission shall approve or disapprove each
heritage tree permit application in accordance with this chapter. If
the removal of a heritage tree is approved, the applicant shall
replace each heritage tree DBH for DBH, unless such replacement
planting on site is impractical or impossible, in which event the
applicant shall contribute a fee in lieu of such planting to the
Commemorative Shade Tree Fund or shall plant the required trees
in locations in need in the Township.
D. Tree removal and tree planting in commercial districts.
(1) The application for tree removal in a commercial district shall be
made in writing to the Township Engineer upon forms furnished on
the Township website, together with the required filing fee and
shall be required when one or more trees of two and one-half
inches in DBH or larger are to be removed from a commercially
zoned property.
(2) A plan shall be submitted illustrating the size, species and location
of the tree that is proposed to be removed, and the size, species and
location of new trees to be planted in compliance with the tree
replacement formula.
(3) The Shade Tree Commission shall review the application for
compliance with the requirements of the Township's tree
replacement formula at § 263-4.
(4) The Shade Tree Commission shall approve or disapprove each
application it receives and provide a written basis for its findings. If
approved, the Township Engineer may issue a tree removal permit.
(5) In the event that replanting is impractical or impossible on site as
determined by the Shade Tree Commission, the applicant shall
make payment to the Commemorative Shade Tree Fund in lieu of
replanting in accordance with the tree replacement formula as set
forth at § 263-4, or shall plant the required trees in locations in
need in the Township.
E. Demolition permit.
(1) The application for a demolition permit shall be made in writing to
the Director of Community Development upon forms furnished by
him, together with the required filing fee.
(2) The applicant shall be required to submit a plan illustrating the
size, species and location of all shade and street trees with a DBH
of six inches or greater which are in the proposed area of
disturbance; all trees to be removed designated with an X [It is
§ 263-8 CHARTER § 263-8
C:807
§ 263-9. Street trees.
recommended that permanent spray paint be used for trees to be
removed (pink) and trees to remain with forestry flagging tape
(green)]; and approximate location of trees on adjoining properties
that are located within 10 feet of the property line (said locations
can be approximated from the subject property or via existing
aerial photographic data).
(3) All demolition permits and other tree removal applications shall
meet the tree replacement formula as set forth at § 263-4 of this
chapter.
(4) The Shade Tree Commission shall approve or disapprove each
application and provide a written basis for its findings. If approved,
the Director of Community Development may issue a demolition
permit.
(5) In the event that replanting is impractical or impossible on site as
determined by the Shade Tree Commission, the applicant shall
make payment to the Commemorative Shade Tree Fund in lieu of
replanting in accordance with the tree replacement formula as set
forth at § 263-4 or may plant the required trees in locations in need
in the Township.
A. Planting.
(1) Street trees shall be planted by the developer for any land
development or subdivision as follows:
(a) Along new streets.
(b) Along new sidewalks.
(c) Along existing streets, highways, sidewalks, pedestrian ways,
bicycle trails or pathways when they abut or lie within the
subdivision or land development.
(d) Along access driveways to residential development.
(2) The Shade Tree Commission encourages all residents to plant,
maintain and assume stewardship for street trees within the
Township. Appropriate species and recommended sizes for new or
replacement trees are listed on Appendix "A" of this Chapter and
can be viewed on the Township's website. The Township reserves
the right to amend and update Appendix "A" by separate resolution
on an annual basis.244 Careful attention should be given to
encouraging proper planting, especially under utility wires. As to
location, it is advisable to consult the Shade Tree Commission for
244. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 263-8 RADNOR CODE § 263-9
C:808
appropriate locations for new street trees. [Amended 6-11-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-06]
(3) Whenever any street tree shall be planted in violation of this
chapter, or an unsuitable species is planted, or a street tree is
planted in an inappropriate location due to traffic sight lines,
overhead wires, insufficient area for root growth or similar
conditions, the Township may remove the street tree at the cost of
removal to the owner of the property.
B. Maintenance of street trees.
(1) The cost and expenses of planting, pruning, maintaining,
fertilizing, protecting and caring for street trees shall be borne by
the Township unless the Township determines that a property
owner is responsible.
(2) Any firm, subcontractor, certified arborist or person contracted to
prune or otherwise maintain or remove a street tree must first
apply to the Township for an annual permit to perform such
activities. Certification shall be from the International Society of
Arboriculture (ISA).
(3) Public utilities wishing to do routine maintenance shall apply to the
Township for an annual permit to perform such activities. The
permit application shall specify the kind of work the utility desires
to perform and the area where the operation will occur during the
period of the permit.
(4) Whenever, in order to take down or prune any street tree, it shall be
deemed necessary to remove any wire or wires, every person or
utility having any such wire(s) running through a public street or
highway shall temporarily remove the same or cut off the flow of
the current therefrom within 24 hours after service of written
notice from the Township Manager to do so. Notice may be made by
regular mail. Tree trimming near energized electrical conductors
may be done by certified arborists trained to work in these
conditions.
C. Acts injurious to street trees. Except in case of necessity for protection
of life or property, it shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to
do any of the following acts:
(1) To cut down any street tree.
(2) To interfere or come in contact with the roots of any street tree.
(3) To cut into, drive nails or spikes into, break, climb with spurs, or
injure in any manner a street tree.
(4) To place any rope, guy wire, cable, sign, poster or other fixture on a
street tree.
§ 263-9 CHARTER § 263-9
C:809
§ 263-10. Obligation escrow.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Township Engineer and/or other
designated Township representative in order to carry out the requirements
of this section.
(5) To injure, misuse or remove any device placed to protect a street
tree.
(6) To discharge or pour salt, salt water, oil or other noxious liquids or
materials on a street tree or around its base.
(7) To place any stone, cement or other material on a street tree or
around its base so as to impede the natural passage of water and
air into its roots.
(8) To attach any electrical wire, insulator or any device for the holding
of an electrical wire to any street tree, without first obtaining a
permit.
A. An obligation escrow agreement shall be established by the applicant
with the Township for all approved land development/subdivision
applications, grading, clearing, commercial development applications,
pool permits, woodland thinning, tree planting, and demolition permits
(collectively the "approved permits").
B. The obligation escrow agreement is to guarantee the applicant's
compliance with the approved permits under this chapter and shall be
established in a form and manner to be approved by the Township prior
to the commencement of any tree planting or tree removal.
C. Prior to the removal or planting of any required trees, an applicant shall
be required to place in escrow the following amounts:
(1) An amount equal to $500 per tree scheduled to remain up to a
maximum of $7,500, unless waived or modified by the Township
Engineer;
(2) An amount equal to a minimum of $18/LF of tree protection
preservation fence or the amount set annually by the Board of
Commissioners, as required by the approved permit;
(3) An amount equal to $500 per newly installed replacement tree,
unless waived or modified by the Township Engineer, for
inspections in accordance with § 263-8; and
(4) In the event that replanting is impractical or impossible on site, the
applicant shall make payment to the Commemorative Shade Tree
Fund in lieu of replanting in accordance with the tree replacement
formula as set forth in § 263-4, or may plant the required trees in
locations in need in the Township.
§ 263-9 RADNOR CODE § 263-10
C:810
§ 263-11. Fines and penalties; enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Township Manager and his duly
authorized representatives, and the Township Manager shall carry out and
enforce the recommendations of the Shade Tree Commission.
D. In the event that an applicant removes any tree in violation of an
approved Township plan or permit, the applicant shall forfeit $500 for
each tree as a penalty and an additional $500 necessary to replace the
tree removed in violation of an approved plan or permit.
A. Fines shall be levied under the following circumstances:
(1) Failure to conform with a plan approved by the Shade Tree
Commission.
(2) Failure to install protective tree preservation fence on a
construction site, or to remove such a fence during construction or
clearing operations, or to violate the purpose of the fence by
storing materials within the fence, thereby damaging tree roots.
(3) Injury or injuries (as described in § 263-9C) or removal of any street
or shade tree in violation of this chapter.
(4) Upon the determination of the Township Engineer that an applicant
or his/her representative has violated or permitted the violation of
this chapter, the applicant shall pay a fine to the Township of $250
per day or $350 per tree unlawfully removed, or such other fine as
is determined to be equitable by the Township Engineer. Once the
Township Engineer determines the fine, the applicant shall have 10
days within which to pay the fine or the Township will institute a
civil enforcement complaint in District Justice Court.
B. Any person, partnership or corporation which has violated or permitted
the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found
liable in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township,
pay a minimum fine of $500 per day up to a maximum of $1,000 per day,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Township as a result of the violation. Each day the violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation.
C. If any tree has been injured, cut down or removed in violation of this
chapter, an applicant or person shall replace the tree with a new tree or
trees of a size and species to be recommended by the Shade Tree
Commission. The cost and maintenance of the new tree shall be the
responsibility of the violator for a period of two years during which time
the violator shall be responsible to replace the tree if it dies or becomes
diseased within that two-year time period.
§ 263-10 CHARTER § 263-12
C:811
§ 263-12. Disposition of penalties or assessments.
Any penalties or assessments imposed under the chapter shall be paid to
Radnor Township and deposited in the Commemorative Shade Tree Fund.
§ 263-13. Appeals.
Chapter 267
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 250.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 270.
§ 267-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED — Any motor vehicle which is found unattended without the
current year's registration or identification markers as required by law,
has been continuously parked in any public street, public land or private
property for a period of 10 days and is so disabled as to be incapable of
being operated under its own power or is without one or more tires.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is no longer in
actual use as a motor vehicle or which is wholly unfit to be operated or has
been discarded for use or otherwise abandoned.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is self-propelled as defined by the
Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania.246
A. Any person who wishes to contest any decision of the Shade Tree
Commission or any fines and/or penalties shall have the right to appeal,
in writing, to the Board of Commissioners, within 20 days of the date of
the alleged action pursuant to the Local Agency Law.245
B. On any appeal to the Board of Commissioners, the Board shall consider
individual hardship considerations of the property owner with respect
to cost, property maintenance and stewardship of the property, and
such other factors deemed appropriate by the Board.
245. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105 et seq.
246. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 263-12 RADNOR CODE § 267-2
C:812
§ 267-2. Abandonment prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a motor vehicle to be abandoned
upon any public or private lands in the Township of Radnor or upon any
public street, except that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to
prohibit any person from parking, storing or repairing a motor vehicle
upon private or public property where authorized under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the laws of the Township of Radnor and
nothing shall be deemed to prohibit the placing, keeping or storing of any
motor vehicle in an enclosed garage or other building.
§ 267-3. Junked automobiles prohibited.
No person shall place, keep or store any junked automobile on any public or
private property within the Township of Radnor or upon the public highways
in the Township of Radnor.
§ 267-4. Removal by owner; notice; failure to comply.
All abandoned motor vehicles shall be removed by the owner or operator
thereof or by the owner or occupant of the private property on which said
motor vehicle is abandoned. Upon the failure of the owner or operator
of any abandoned or junked motor vehicle to remove the same within 24
hours after receiving notice from the Radnor Township Police Department
to remove the same, such notice being given either by personal service or by
certified mail to the owner or operator of such abandoned motor vehicle or
to the owner or occupant of the private property on which said abandoned
or junked motor vehicle is found, the Radnor Township Police Department
may remove the same or cause the same to be removed.
§ 267-5. Towing and storage.
In removing any such abandoned motor vehicles, the Radnor Township
Police Department shall cause the same to be towed and stored by such
garages or towing services as are designated by the Chief of Police of
Radnor Township to be approved storage garages or pounds for the storage
of such vehicles.
§ 267-6. Storage garages.
Any designated storage garage, prior to engaging in any towing away
and/or storing of any vehicle hereunder, shall file a surety bond with the
Township of Radnor, said bond to indemnify the Township of Radnor and the
owner of any impounded vehicle against loss thereof or injury or damage
thereto while any vehicle is in custody of such garage.
§ 267-7. Towing and storage charges.
Specific towing and storage charges to be made under this chapter shall be
fixed from time to time by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with
§ 267-2 CHARTER § 267-7
C:813
the prevailing rates in the Township, and such charges shall be posted in
the Township Building.
§ 267-8. Notice of impoundment.
The Chief of Police or someone at his direction, within 12 hours after any
vehicle has been removed and impounded, shall notify the owner of record
or the operator of any such vehicle, either by personal service or by certified
mail, or the owner or occupant of the property from which any such vehicle
has been removed, in like manner, of the fact that such vehicle has been
impounded, the place from which it was removed, the reason for its removal
and impounding and the place where the vehicle has been impounded.
§ 267-9. Recovery of impounded vehicle; hearing.
§ 267-10. Ownership not ascertainable.
§ 267-11. Unclaimed vehicles.
Where an abandoned motor vehicle is removed under the provisions of
this chapter and it remains unclaimed for a period of 15 consecutive days
A. The owner or operator of any impounded vehicle shall be entitled to
recover possession of such vehicle upon the payment to the Township of
the towing and storage charges as above set forth.
B. The payment of such towing and storage charges, unless made under
protest, shall be final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of
any right to recover the money so paid. In the event that the towing and
impounding charges are paid under protest, the offender shall be
entitled to a hearing before a District Justice or a court of record having
jurisdiction, as in the case of a prosecution as in other cases of
summary offenses under the Motor Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, and
said District Justice or court of record shall proceed in accordance with
Paragraph 1103 of the Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
A. In the event that the Police Department shall be unable to ascertain the
ownership of an abandoned motor vehicle found upon private property,
the Chief of Police or someone at his direction, within 12 hours after the
vehicle has been found by the police, may notify the owner or occupant
of the private property, by certified mail, that such vehicle exists, and
thereafter said owner or occupant of the private property shall cause
the abandoned motor vehicle to be removed to an authorized junk or
scrap yard within 48 hours.
B. If the owner or occupant of such private property shall fail to remove
the abandoned motor vehicle as set forth in Subsection A hereof, said
owner or occupant shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 267-12
of this chapter. Each day that the motor vehicle is permitted to remain
shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
§ 267-7 RADNOR CODE § 267-11
C:814
without being removed by its owner or any other person duly authorized
to remove the same, the Chief of Police shall be authorized to report or
cause to be reported such abandonment to the Department of Revenue of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as provided in the Vehicle Code.247
§ 267-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
Except as otherwise provided for in 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3712, any person who
shall violate the terms of this chapter may be prosecuted and shall, upon
conviction therefor, pay a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be imprisoned in the
county jail for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 270
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing — See Ch. 262.
Traffic calming systems — See Ch. 262A.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 267.
Parking and storage of vehicles — See Ch.
272.
247. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 267-11 CHARTER § 267-12
C:815

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 270-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 270-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or parts of ordinances, or as amendments to ordinances of
the Township of Radnor.
§ 270-3. Chapter to be continuation of prior regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinance and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted under any of these repealed, modified or superceded ordinances
or regulations.
§ 270-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except
that in this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. The term "parking meter," as used in this chapter, shall mean any
mechanical device which is installed for the purpose of regulating
parking spaces in the Township. The term includes, but is not limited to,
coin-operated parking meters and parking kiosks which accept multiple
forms of payment.
D. In this chapter the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Police Superintendent shall have the powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm, or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
§ 270-1 CHARTER § 270-4
C:817
§ 270-5. Experimental regulations.
§ 270-6. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Radnor Township Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature.
A. The Board of Commissioners may, from time-to-time, designate places
upon and along the streets in the Township where, for a period of not
more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall
designate those locations by proper signs and markings. Such
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective just as if
they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall drive or park a
vehicle in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction,
and no person shall move, remove, or destroy or deface any sign or
marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any
person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
be liable to the penalty set out in the law or elsewhere in this chapter
for a violation of such nature.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Board of Commissioners shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion, while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Commissioners shall have authority to establish a
restricted traffic area upon any street where construction or
maintenance work is under way and to station flagmen at each end of
the restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area at any time when the
flagman is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling
that vehicle, by flag or other device, not to proceed.
§ 270-4 RADNOR CODE § 270-7
C:818
§ 270-7. Authority of police officers.
The police shall have authority to direct traffic on the streets of the
Township, at intersections in public and in other places where the Vehicle
Code or this chapter applies.
§ 270-7 CHARTER § 270-7
C:819

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 270-8. Speed limits.
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described below is hereby established at the rate of speed
indicated. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a
higher speed than the maximum prescribed for that street or part of a
street.
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Aberdeen
Terrace
25 Entire length
Abrahams Lane 25 Entire length
Academy Lane 25 Entire length
Airdale Road 25 Lancaster Avenue to County Line Road
Aldwyn Lane 25 Entire length
Allens Lane 25 Entire length
Amherst Circle 25 Entire length
Applegate Lane 25 Entire length
Arbordale Road 25 Entire length
Arbor Place 25 Entire length
Arden Road 25 Upper Gulph Road to Upper Merion
Township line
Arthur Road 25 Entire length
Ashwood Road 25 Entire length
Askin Road 25 Entire length
Atlee Road 15 Entire length
Atterbury Road 25 Entire length
Audubon Avenue 25 Entire length
Bailey Road 15 Entire length
Banbury Way 25 Entire length
Barbara Lane 25 Entire length
Barcladen Circle 15 Entire length
Barcladen Road 15 Entire length
Barclay Road 25 Entire length
Barley Cone
Lane
25 Entire length
§ 270-8 CHARTER § 270-8
C:821
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Barren Road 25 From Malin Road to the Newtown
Township line
Beatrice Drive 25 Entire length
Beechtree Lane 25 Between North Wayne Avenue and
Radnor Street Road
Bellevue Avenue 25 Entire length
Belrose Lane 25 Entire length
Berwind Circle 25 Entire length
Berwind Road 25 Entire length
Berwood Lane 25 Entire length
Biddulph Road 25 Entire length
Birches Lane 25 Entire length
Black Friar Road 25 Entire length
Bloomingdale
Avenue
25 Entire length
Boxwood Road 25 Entire length
Brandymede
Road
25 Entire length
Braxton Road 25 Entire length
Briarwood Road 25 Entire length
Brooke Road
[Added
9-8-2014 by
Ord. No.
2014-10]
25 Church Road to Conestoga Road
Brookfarm Road 25 Entire length
Brooklea Road 15 Entire length
Brookside
Avenue
25 Entire length
Brookside Circle 25 Entire length
Brook Street 25 Entire length
Browning Lane 25 Entire length
Browns Lane 25 Entire length
Buckingham
Drive
25 Entire length
Burnside Road 25 Entire length
§ 270-8 RADNOR CODE § 270-8
C:822
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Callanan Avenue 25 Entire length
Calvarese Lane 25 Entire length
Cambria Court 25 Entire length
Campwoods
Circle
25 Entire length
Campwoods
Road
25 Entire length
Castlefinn Lane 20 Entire length
Central Avenue 25 Entire length
Chalous Lane 25 Entire length
Chamounix
Circle
25 Entire length
Chamounix Road 25 Entire length
Chandler Road 25 Entire length
Charles Drive 20 Entire length
Chaumont Drive 25 Entire length
Chestnut Lane 25 Entire length
Cheswick Road 25 Strathmore Road to property line
Chew Lane 25 Entire length
Church Road 25 Entire length
Church Street 25 Entire length
Clover Lane 15 Entire length
Clyde Circle 25 Entire length
Clyde Road 25 Entire length
Colony Court 25 Entire length
Colony Road 25 Entire length
Colt Drive 25 Entire length
Comrie Lane 25 Entire length
Cornell Drive 25 Entire length
Cornerstone
Lane
25 Entire length
Cornwall Lane 25 Entire length
Countryview
Drive
25 Entire length
§ 270-8 CHARTER § 270-8
C:823
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
County Line
Road
25 From Matsonford Road to Airdale
Road
County Line
Road
35 From Upper Gulph Road to
Matsonford Road
Courtney Circle 25 Entire length
Creek Drive 15 Entire length
Crestview Circle 25 Entire length
Crestview Road 25 Entire length
Cricket Lane 25 Entire length
Cumberland
Place
25 Entire length
Cushman Road 25 Entire length
Dartmouth Road 25 Entire length
David Drive 20 Entire length
Dawn Lane 25 Entire length
Debaran Lane 15 Entire length
Deep Dene Road 25 Entire length
Devonwood
Road
25 Entire length
Donna Lane 25 Entire length
Dory Lane 25 Entire length
Doyle Road 25 Entire length
Drakes Drum
Drive
15 Entire length
Dreer Lane 15 Entire length
Drexel Lane 25 Entire length
Duncan Lane 25 Entire length
Durham Drive 25 Entire length
Eachus Avenue 25 Entire length
Eagle Road 25 From Lancaster Avenue to North
Wayne Avenue
Earle's Lane 25 From Saw Mill Road to Malin Road
East Laurier
Place
25 Entire length
Eaton Drive 15 Entire length
§ 270-8 RADNOR CODE § 270-8
C:824
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Edenton Place 25 Entire length
Edgehill Road 25 Entire length
Fairfax Road 15 Entire length
Fairfield Lane 25 Entire length
Fairview Avenue 25 Entire length
Fairview Drive 25 Entire length
Fariston Road 25 Entire length
Farm Road 15 Entire length
Fawnhill Road 25 Meadowbrook Lane to Marple
Township line
Federal Street 25 Entire length
Fenimore Lane 20 Entire length
Fieldstone Lane 25 Entire length
Fitz Williams
Road
25 Entire length
Forrest Road 25 Entire length
Fox Field Road 25 Ramblewood Drive to Haverford
Township line
Fox Run Lane 25 Entire length
Francis Avenue 25 Entire length
Galer Road 25 Entire length
Gallagher Road 25 Entire length
Garden Place 25 Entire length
Garrett Avenue 25 Entire length
Glenbrook
Avenue
25 Entire length
Glenmary Lane 25 Entire length
Glenmary Road 15 Entire length
Glenwyd Road 25 Entire length
Good Shepherd
Terrace
15 Entire length
Governor Circle 25 Entire length
Gramont Lane 25 Entire length
Grange Road 15 Entire length
Greenwell Lane 25 Entire length
§ 270-8 CHARTER § 270-8
C:825
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Greythorne
Woods Circle
25 Entire length
Hamilton Road 25 Entire length
Hansell Road 25 Malin Road to Newtown Township line
Harbison Road 25 Entire length
Hardwick Lane 25 Entire length
Hares Lane 25 Entire length
Harrison Road 25 Entire length
Harrow Circle 25 Entire length
Hartford Lane 25 Entire length
Haviland Drive 25 Entire length
Hawthorne Lane 25 Entire length
Haymarket Lane 15 Entire length
Heather Circle 25 Entire length
Heather Lane 25 Entire length
Hermitage Drive 25 Entire length
Hickory Lane 15 Entire length
Highfield Road 25 Entire length
Highland
Avenue
25 Entire length
Highview Lane 25 Coopertown Road to Haverford
Township line
Highview Drive 25 From Northwoods Road to the
Township line with Upper Merion
Township
Hilldale Road 25 Entire length
Hillside Circle 25 Entire length
Hiridge Road 25 Entire length
Hollybush Road 25 Entire length
Hopeton Lane 25 Entire length
Hothorpe Lane 25 Entire length
Hunt Road 15 From Bryn Mawr Avenue to
Meadowbrook Road
Hunt Road 25 From Bryn Mawr Avenue to Goshen
Road
§ 270-8 RADNOR CODE § 270-8
C:826
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Huston Road 25 Entire length
Inveraray Drive 25 Entire length
Iron Bark Circle 25 Entire length
Ithan Creek
Road
25 Entire length
Ithan Road 25 Entire length
Ithan Woods
Lane
25 Entire length
Iven Avenue 25 Entire length
Jefferson Road 25 Entire length
Julip Run 15 Entire length
Kenilworth Road 25 Entire length
King of Prussia
Road
35 From Radnor-Chester Road to
Lancaster Avenue
Kinterra Road 25 Entire length
Kirsch Avenue 25 Entire length
Knox Road 25 Entire length
Kromer Road 25 Entire length
Lakeview Circle 25 Entire length
Lanmore Avenue 25 Entire length
Lansdowne
Avenue
15 Entire length
Lantoga Road 25 Entire length
Larchwood Lane 25 Entire length
Laurier Place 25 Entire length
Lawrence Lane 25 Entire length
Leighton Drive 25 Entire length
Lenoir Road 20 Entire length
Lesley Road 25 Entire length
Lewis Lane 15 Entire length
Liberty Lane 25 Entire length
Lindsay Circle 25 Entire length
Locust Grove
Road
25 Entire length
Locust Road 15 Entire length
§ 270-8 CHARTER § 270-8
C:827
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Longwood Drive 25 Entire length
Loudan Lane 25 Entire length
Louella Avenue 25 Entire length
Louella Court 25 Entire length
Lowry's Lane 25 Entire length
Malin Road 25 From the Marple Township line to
Earles Lane
Maple Glen Lane 25 Entire length
Maplewood
Road
25 Entire length
Marlbridge Road 25 Entire length
Marlyn Circle 25 Entire length
Matlack Lane 25 Entire length
Meadowbrook
Avenue
25 Entire length
Meadowbrook
Circle
25 Entire length
Meadowbrook
Road
15 From Fawn Hill Road to the cul-de-sac
Meadowood
Road
25 Entire length
Meredith
Avenue
25 Entire length
Midland Avenue 25 Entire length
Midland Circle 25 Entire length
Midway Road 25 Entire length
Mill Road 25 From Ithan Avenue to Conestoga Road
Mill Road 25 From Roberts Road to Haverford
Township line
Miller Street 25 Entire length
Milmar Road 25 Entire length
Montgomery
Lane
25 Entire length
Montparnasse
Place
25 Entire length
§ 270-8 RADNOR CODE § 270-8
C:828
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Montrose
Avenue
25 Entire length
Moore Avenue 25 Entire length
Morningside
Circle
20 Entire length
Morris Circle 25 Entire length
Morris Road 25 Entire length
Moscia Lane 25 Entire length
North Aberdeen
Avenue
15 From Radnor Street Road to Plant
Avenue
North Aberdeen
Avenue
25 From Plant Avenue to Lancaster
Avenue
North Bellevue
Avenue
25 Entire length
North Black
Friar Road
25 From Lancaster Avenue to the cul-desac
North Ithan
Avenue
25 Entire length
Northwinds
Drive
25 Mill Road to the cul-de-sac
Northwoods
Road
25 Entire length
Oakford Circle 25 Entire length
Oakford Road 25 Entire length
Oak Grove Lane 25 Entire length
Oak Lane 25 Entire length
Oak Terrace 25 Entire length
Old Oaks Road 25 Entire length
Old Sugartown
Road
25 Entire length
Orchard Lane 25 Entire length
Orchard Way 25 Entire length
Overhill Road 25 Entire length
Overlook Lane 25 Entire length
Owens Lane 25 Entire length
Oxford Lane 25 Entire length
§ 270-8 CHARTER § 270-8
C:829
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Paddock Drive 25 Entire length
Parkes Run Lane 25 Entire length
Patton Lane 25 Entire length
Paul Road 25 Entire length
Pembroke
Avenue
25 Entire length
Pennsylvania
Avenue
25 Entire length
Petrie Avenue 25 Entire length
Pine Tree Road 25 Entire length
Plant Avenue 25 Entire length
Poplar Avenue 25 Entire length
Portledge Drive 25 Entire length
Princeton Court 25 Entire length
Quaker Lane 25 Entire length
Radnor Avenue 25 Entire length
Radnor Street
Road
25 From Aberdeen Terrace to Tredyffrin
Township line
Radnor Valley
Drive
25 Entire length
Radnor Way 25 Entire length
Ravenscliff 15 Entire length
Rawles Run
Lane
25 Entire length
Ridgewood Road 25 Entire length
Roberts Road 25 From County Line Road to South Ithan
Avenue
Roberts Road 25 From Sproul Road to Darby Paoli Road
Robinhood Road 25 Entire length
Rockingham
Road
15 Entire length
Rockland Circle 25 Entire length
Rockland Road 25 Entire length
Rock Rose Lane 25 Entire length
Rodney Road 25 Entire length
§ 270-8 RADNOR CODE § 270-8
C:830
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Rolling Road 25 Entire length
Rose Glen Drive 25 Entire length
Roundhill 25 Entire length
Runnymede
Avenue
25 Entire length
St. Davids
Avenue
25 Entire length
St. Davids Court 25 Entire length
St. Davids Road 25 Entire length
Sandcastle Drive 25 Entire length
Saw Mill Road 25 From Darby-Paoli Road to Newtown
Township line
School Lane 15 Entire length
Shadeland Road 25 Entire length
Shannon Circle 25 Entire length
Sinkler Drive 25 Entire length
South Aberdeen
Avenue
25 Entire length
South Devon
Avenue
25 From Conestoga Road to Valley Forge
Road
South Ithan
Avenue
25 Entire length
South Spring
Mill Road
25 Entire length
South Valley
Forge Road
25 From Newtown Township Line to
Easttown Township line, east side
Southwinds
Drive
25 Fox Field to the cul-de-sac
Springhouse
Road
25 Entire length
Spruce Tree
Road
25 Entire length
Stonecreek Lane 25 Between Bryn Mawr Avenue and the
cul-de-sac
Strafford Avenue 25 From Lancaster Avenue to Grant Lane
Strathmore
Road
25 Entire length
§ 270-8 CHARTER § 270-8
C:831
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Sturbridge Drive 25 Entire length
Sulgrave Lane 25 Entire length
Summer Hill
Lane
25 Entire length
Summit Terrace 25 From Conestoga Road to a point 650
feet southerly thereof
Sunny Hill Lane 25 Entire length
Tindall Lane 25 Entire length
Tower Road 25 Entire length
Trianon Lane 25 Entire length
Upland Way 25 Entire length
Upper Gulph
Road
25 From King of Prussia Road to County
Line Road
Valley Forge
Circle
25 Entire length
Valley Forge
Terrace
25 Entire length
Valley Place 25 Entire length
Van Lear's Run 25 Entire length
Vassar Circle 25 Entire length
Vauclain Road 25 Entire length
Villanova Road 25 Entire length
Walnut Avenue 25 Entire length
Watch Hill Road 25 Entire length
Waynewood
Avenue
25 Entire length
Weirwood Road 25 Entire length
Weldon Lane 25 Entire length
Wentworth Lane 15 Entire length
West Avenue 25 Entire length
West Beechtree
Lane
25 Entire length
West Beechtree
Lane
25 From Eagle Road to Tredyffrin
Township line
West Laurier
Place
25 Entire length
§ 270-8 RADNOR CODE § 270-8
C:832
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Westover Road 25 Entire length
West Wayne
Avenue
25 From Highland Avenue to South
Wayne Avenue
West Wayne
Avenue
25 From Maplewood Avenue to Odorisio
Park
West Wayne
Avenue
15 From Odorisio Park to Highland
Avenue
Williams Road 15 Entire length
Willow Avenue 20 Entire length
Willowburn
Road
25 Entire length
Windermere
Avenue
25 Entire length
Windsor Avenue 25 Entire length
Wistar Road 25 Entire length
Woodcrest
Circle
25 Entire length
Woodcrest Road 25 Entire length
Wooded Lane 25 Entire length
Woodland
Avenue
25 Entire length
Woodland Court 25 Entire length
Woodlea Road 25 Entire length
Woods Lane 25 Entire length
Woodstock Road 25 Entire length
Woodstone Lane 25 Entire length
Woodsworth
Court
25 Entire length
Wootten Road 25 Entire length
Wyldhaven Road 25 Entire length
Wyndom Lane 25 Entire length
Wyntrelea Drive 25 Entire length
Yorkshire Road 25 Entire length
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall pay a fine
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
§ 270-8 CHARTER § 270-9
C:833
§ 270-9. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersections of
those streets described below.
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 270-10. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
locations described below.
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
(Reserved)
§ 270-11. Prohibited turns at intersections.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the
kind designated (left, right, all) at any of the intersections described
below.
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Audubon Avenue West Left 24 hours Conestoga Road
Barley Cone
Lane
North Left 24 hours Lancaster Avenue
Bellevue Lane South Left 24 hours Lancaster Avenue
Black Friar Road North Left 24 hours Lancaster Avenue
Bloomingdale
Avenue
South Left 24 hours West Wayne
Avenue
Doyle Road North Left 24 hours Lancaster Avenue
Gallagher Road North Left 24 hours Lancaster Avenue
Garrett Avenue North Left 24 hours Lancaster Avenue
Hawthorne Lane North Left 24 hours Lancaster Avenue
Louella Avenue
[Added
3-24-2014 by
Ord. No.
2014-01]
North Left 24 hours Radnor Middle
School driveway
entrance
Louella Court South Left 24 hours Lancaster Avenue
Old Oaks Road North Left 24 hours Lancaster Avenue
Old Sugartown
Road
North Left 24 hours Lancaster Avenue
§ 270-9 RADNOR CODE § 270-11
C:834
§ 270-12. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the streets or parts of streets described below.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 270-13. One-way streets.
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Villanova
University
Parking Lot Exit
North (East
Main Lot)
Left 24 hours Lancaster Avenue
Windermere
Avenue [Added
3-24-2014 by
Ord. No.
2014-01]
East Left 24 hours Radnor Middle
School driveway
entrance
B. The following exits are prohibited:
(1) From driveway of Eagle Crossing Condominiums onto Eagle Road.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall pay a fine
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
A. The streets or parts of streets described below are hereby designated
as one-way streets in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the
direction established for traffic on that street.
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Charles Drive West From David Drive to Roberts Road
Clover Lane East From Morris Road to South Devon
Avenue
Cushman Road North From Lancaster Avenue to Lowry's
Lane
David Drive East From Roberts Road to Charles
Drive
Francis Avenue South From West Avenue to Banbury Way
Glenbrook
Avenue
West From County Line Road to Beatrice
Drive
Lenoir Avenue West From Bloomingdale Avenue to
Conestoga Road
§ 270-11 CHARTER § 270-13
C:835
§ 270-14. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established along those streets or parts of
streets described below, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle
to overtake or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of the
roadway in any no-passing zone described below.
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Louella Court North From east drive of Louella Court off
Lancaster Avenue to Station Road
and Louella Court
Louella Court South From 10 Louella Court to East
Lancaster Avenue
Meredith Avenue
[Added
5-23-2016 by
Ord. No.
2016-07]
Northwest From Conestoga Road to Eachus
Avenue
Moore Avenue East From Bryn Mawr Avenue to
Landover Road (from 6:30 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. only)
Moore Avenue West From Landover Road to Bryn Mawr
Avenue (from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
only)
Morris Road West From South Devon Avenue to
Clover Lane
North Aberdeen
Avenue
Southwest From Radnor Street Road to Plant
Avenue
Owens Lane Southeast From West Wayne Avenue to
Bloomingdale Avenue
Pennsylvania
Avenue
East From North Wayne Avenue to
Aberdeen Avenue
Petrie Avenue South From County Line Road to
Conestoga Road
Radnor Street
Road
Northwest From Aberdeen Terrace to
Aberdeen Avenue
West Wayne
Avenue
West From South Wayne Avenue to
Bloomingdale Avenue
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall pay a fine
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
§ 270-13 RADNOR CODE § 270-14
C:836
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 270-15. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets below are hereby established as through
streets, and the driver of any vehicle, upon approaching any such street
at any intersection thereof (except for such intersections where there are
now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals), shall come to a full
stop or yield the right-of-way, as the case may be, before entering any such
through street.
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 270-16. Stop intersections.
A. The intersections described below (in addition to intersections with the
through streets established by this chapter), are hereby established as
stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a
position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street in the direction or directions indicated. Every
driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on the first-named or
stop street, in the direction indicated in each case, shall stop the vehicle
as required by § 3323(b) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b),
and shall not proceed into or across the second-named or intersecting
or through street until he/she has followed all applicable requirements
of that section of the law.
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Aberdeen Avenue North Aberdeen Terrace
Aberdeen Avenue North Plant Avenue
Aberdeen Avenue South Midland Avenue
Aberdeen Avenue South Orchard Way
Aberdeen Avenue South Pembroke Avenue
Aberdeen Terrace Both Radnor Street Road
Aberdeen Terrace East Chamounix Road
Aberdeen Terrace
[Added
3-24-2014 by
Ord. No.
2014-01]
East St. Davids Avenue
Aberdeen Terrace West North Aberdeen Avenue
§ 270-14 CHARTER § 270-16
C:837
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Aberdeen Terrace
[Added
3-24-2014 by
Ord. No.
2014-01]
West St. Davids Avenue
Abraham Lane East Church Road
Abraham Lane East Newtown Road
Abraham Lane West Church Road
Academy Lane Southeast Bryn Mawr Avenue
Aldwyn Lane Both P & W Driveway
Aldwyn Lane Both Villanova Road
Aldwyn Lane Both Wooded Lane
Aldwyn Lane East South Ithan Avenue
Allens Lane North Applegate Lane
Amherst Circle South Briarwood Road
Applegate Lane North Yorkshire Road
Arbor Place Southeast Clyde Road
Arbordale Road Both Oakford Road
Arbordale Road Northwest South Devon Avenue
Arbordale Road Southeast West Wayne Avenue
Arden Road Southwest Upper Gulph Road
Arthur Road Southeast County Line Road
Ashwood Road Northeast North Spring Mill Road
Askin Road Northeast Brookside Avenue
Atlee Road Northwest West Wayne Avenue
Atlee Road Southeast Maplewood Road
Atterbury Road Northeast Newtown Road
Audubon Avenue Both Lansdowne Avenue
Audubon Avenue East South Wayne Avenue
Bailey Road Both Dreer Lane
Bailey Road Both Fitzwilliams Lane
Bailey Road North Conestoga Road
Bailey Road South Lewis Lane
Banbury Way North West Avenue
Barbara Lane Southeast Bryn Mawr Avenue
Barcladen Road Both Debaran Lane
§ 270-16 RADNOR CODE § 270-16
C:838
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Barcladen Road South Lowry's Lane
Barclay Road West Ithan Avenue
Barley Cone Lane North East Lancaster Avenue
Barren Road North Malin Road
Beatrice Drive East Glenbrook Avenue
Beechtree Lane Both Oak Lane
Beechtree Lane Both Woodland Avenue
Beechtree Lane East Radnor Street Road
Beechtree Lane West North Wayne Avenue
Beechwood Drive West Wentworth Lane
Bellevue Avenue North West Avenue
Bellevue Avenue South Lancaster Avenue
Belrose Lane Both Glenmary Road
Belrose Lane East King of Prussia Road
Belrose Lane West Huston Road
Belrose Lane West Montgomery Lane
Berwind Circle Both King of Prussia Road
Berwind Circle East Spruce Tree Road
Berwind Road Northeast Spruce Tree Road
Berwind Road Southwest King of Prussia Road
Berwood Road Northwest Boxwood Road
Berwood Road Southeast Strathmore Road
Biddulph Road East Gulph Creek Road
Biddulph Road West King of Prussia Road
Birches Lane Northeast Bryn Mawr Avenue
Black Friar Road North East Lancaster Avenue
Black Friar Road South Buckingham Drive
Bloomingdale
Avenue
Both West Wayne Avenue
Boxwood Road North Conestoga Road
Boxwood Road West Barclay Road
Brandymede Road East Wyldhaven Road
Braxton Road Northeast County Line Road
Braxton Road Northwest North Black Friar Road
Braxton Road South East Lancaster Avenue
§ 270-16 CHARTER § 270-16
C:839
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Briarwood Road Both Amherst Circle
Briarwood Road Northeast Darby Paoli Road
Briarwood Road West Malin Road
Brooke Road South Darby-Paoli Road
Brooke Road Southwest Darby-Paoli Road
Brook Street East Landover Road
Brooke Street Southwest Darby Paoli Road
Brookfarm Road North Brooke Road
Brooklea Road Both Debaran Lane
Brooklea Road North Hickory Lane
Brooklea Road South Meadowood Road
Brookside Avenue Both Iven Avenue
Brookside Avenue Northwest Oak Terrace
Brookside Avenue Northwest Orchard Way
Brookside Avenue Southeast Oak Terrace
Brookside Avenue Southwest Conestoga Road
Brookside Circle Northeast Brookside Avenue
Browning Lane East Meadowood Road (northerly
intersection)
Browning Lane East Meadowood Road (southerly
intersection)
Browns Lane Northeast Radnor Chester Road
Buckingham Drive Both Hawthorne Lane
Buckingham Drive South Lowry's Lane
Burnside Road Northeast Deed Dene Road
Callanan Avenue North Conestoga Road
Calvarese Lane East South Devon Avenue
Cambria Court Northeast Lancaster Avenue
Camp Woods
Circle
Southwest Camp Woods Road
Camp Woods Road Southeast Sproul Road
Canterbury Lane West Glenmary Lane
Castlefinn Lane East Bryn Mawr Avenue
Castlefinn Lane North Roberts Road
Chalous Lane East South Ithan Avenue
Chalous Lane West Trianon Lane
§ 270-16 RADNOR CODE § 270-16
C:840
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Chamounix Circle Northeast Chamounix Road
Chamounix Road Both Aberdeen Terrace
Chamounix Road Both St. Davids Avenue
Chandler Lane Both Sproul Road
Charles Drive East Glenbrook Avenue
Charles Drive West Roberts Road
Chaumont Drive North Conestoga Road
Chestnut Lane Both Eagle Road
Chestnut Lane East Beechtree Lane
Cheswick Road Northeast Strathmore Road
Chew Lane Northeast Radnor Chester Road
Church Road Northeast St. Davids Road
Church Road South Brooke Road
Church Street North Highland Avenue
Clover Lane South South Devon Avenue
Clyde Circle North Hamilton Road
Clyde Road Northeast Ithan Avenue
Cobblestone Lane North Bryn Mawr Avenue
Cobblestone Lane South Cornerstone Lane
Colony Court West Colony Road
Colony Road Southwest Darby Paoli Road
Colt Drive North Hunt Road
Colt Drive South Galer Drive
Comrie Drive North Woodstock Road
Comrie Drive Southwest Hardwicke Lane
Coopertown Road East Highland Lane
Cornell Drive Southeast Princeton Court
Cornerstone Lane East Stone Creek Lane
Cornerstone Lane South Cornerstone Lane
Cornwall Circle Northeast Chamounix Road
Cornwall Lane West Chamounix Road
Countryview Drive Northwest Bryn Mawr Avenue
County Line Road East Gulph Creek Road
County Line Road East Orchard Road
County Line Road Northwest Ithan Avenue
§ 270-16 CHARTER § 270-16
C:841
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
County Line Road Southeast Airdale Road
Creek Drive Both Entrance to Encke Tot Lot
Creek Drive North Iven Avenue
Creek Drive
[Added
5-11-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-04]
West Township Building driveway: Iven
Avenue
Crestview Circle Northeast Crestview Road
Crestview Road Southeast West Wayne Avenue — Welwyn Road
Crestview Road West Devonwood Road
Cricket Lane Northwest Pine Tree Road
Cricket Lane Southeast Gulph Creek Road
Cumberland Place East Clyde Road
Cushman Road Northwest Lowry's Lane
Darby Paoli Road Both Colony Road
Darby Paoli Road Both Goshen Road
Darby Paoli Road East Bryn Mawr Avenue
Darby Paoli Road West Brooke Road
Darby Paoli Road West Newtown Road
Dartmouth Road Southwest Bryn Mawr Avenue
David Drive East Charles Drive
Dawn Lane Northeast Roberts Road
Debaran Lane Northwest Brooklea Road
Debaran Lane Southeast Lowry's Lane
Debaran Lane Southwest Barcladen Road
Debaran Lane West Barcladen Road
Deepdene Road East Sproul Road
Devonwood Road
(both ends)
Northwest South Devon Avenue
Donna Lane Northwest South Devon Avenue
Donna Lane Southeast West Wayne Avenue
Dory Lane Southwest West Wayne Avenue
Doyle Road Northeast Lancaster Avenue
Doyle Road Southwest Conestoga Road
§ 270-16 RADNOR CODE § 270-16
C:842
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Drakes Drum
Drive
Both Haymarket Lane
Dreer Lane Both Williams Road
Dreer Lane Northeast Rockingham Road
Dreer Lane Southeast Wentworth Lane
Drexel Lane Northeast Bryn Mawr Avenue
Duncan Lane East Highland Avenue
Duncan Lane West Shannon Lane
Durham Road North Edenton Place
Eachus Avenue Southwest Meredith Avenue
Eagle Road Both Strafford Avenue
Eagle Road
[Added
10-13-2014 by
Ord. No.
2014-12]
Both West Avenue
Earles Lane Both Malin Road
Eaton Drive West South Devon Avenue
Edenton Place North South Ithan Avenue
Edgehill Road East Brook Street
Fairfax Avenue Southeast Lowry's Lane
Fairfax Road Southeast South Lowrys Lane
Fairfield Lane Northeast Forrest Lane
Fairfield Lane Southwest Old Eagle School Road
Fairview Avenue North Highland Avenue
Fairview Drive North Fenimore Lane
Fairview Drive Southwest Chamounix Road
Fariston Road Northeast Radnor Street Road
Farm Road Northwest Lancaster Avenue
Fawnhill Road Southwest Meadowbrook Road
Federal Street Southwest Highland Avenue
Fenimore Lane East Fairview Drive
Fenimore Lane West Chamounix Road
Fieldstone Lane East Cornerstone Lane
Fitzwilliams Lane Southeast Williams Road
Forrest Lane South Eagle Road
§ 270-16 CHARTER § 270-16
C:843
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Forrest Lane West West Beechtree Lane
Fox Fields Road West Ramblewood Drive
Fox Run Lane Southeast Mill Road
Francis Avenue Southwest Banbury Way
Galer Drive East Hunt Road
Galer Road
[Added
12-14-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-23]
South Loudan Lane
Gallagher Road North Lancaster Avenue
Gallagher Road Southeast South Devon Avenue
Garden Place Northeast Woods Lane
Garrett Avenue Southeast Lancaster Avenue
Glenbrook Avenue Both Beatrice Drive
Glenbrook Avenue Both Charles Drive
Glenmary Lane Both St. Davids Avenue
Glenmary Lane Southeast Glenmary Road — Hilaire Road
Glenmary Road Both Belrose Lane
Glenmary Road East Rose Glen Drive
Glenmary Road East King of Prussia Road
Glenmary Road Southwest Glenmary Lane
Glenmary Road West Canterbury Lane
Glenwyd Road Both Heather Lane
Glenwyd Road Southeast Bryn Mawr Avenue
Glynn Lane Northeast St. Davids Avenue
Glynn Lane Southeast Chamounix Road
Godfrey Road Northeast Radnor Valley Drive
Godfrey Road South Darby Paoli Road
Good Shepherd
Terrace
North Lowry's Lane
Good Shephard
Terrace
South Conestoga Road
Goshen Road North Darby Paoli Road
Goshen Road South Malin Road
Governor Circle Southwest/
Northeast
Westover Road
§ 270-16 RADNOR CODE § 270-16
C:844
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Gramont Lane East South Ithan Avenue
Gramont Lane West Trianon Lane
Grange Road Southwest Valley Forge Road
Grant Lane Northeast Strafford Avenue
Greene Countrie
Road
East Sawmill Road
Greenwell Lane Northeast Lesley Road
Greythorne Woods
Circle
Northeast Conestoga Road
Gulph Creek Road East County Line Road
Gulph Creek Road West King of Prussia Road
Hansell Road East Malin Road
Harbison Road West Brookside Avenue
Hardwicke Lane Northwest Conestoga Road
Hares Lane Southwest King of Prussia Road
Harrison Road Both Parkes Run Lane
Harrow Court Northeast Eaton Drive
Hartford Lane South Matsonford Road
Harvard Lane Southwest Bryn Mawr Avenue
Haviland Drive Southwest Roberts Road
Hawthorne Lane North East Lancaster Avenue
Hawthorne Lane South Buckingham Drive
Haymarket Lane West Clyde Road
Haymarket Lane Both Drakes Drum Drive
Heather Circle Southwest Inveraray Drive
Hermitage Lane South Gulph Creek Road
Hickory Lane Northwest Brooklea Road
Hickory Lane Southeast Lowry's Lane
Highfield Road East Sproul Road
Highland Avenue West West Wayne Avenue
High Road East King of Prussia Road
Highview Drive Both Highridge Road
Highview Drive Southwest Northwoods Road
Hilaire Road North St. Davids Avenue
Hilaire Road Northeast Glenmary Lane
§ 270-16 CHARTER § 270-16
C:845
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Hilldale Road East North Spring Mill Road
Hiridge Road Northeast Ridgewood Road
Hiridge Road South Highview Drive
Hollybush Road East Wyldhaven Road
Hopeton Lane Southwest Abrahams Lane
Hothorpe Lane East Newtown Road
Hunt Road Both Colt Drive
Hunt Road Both Galer Drive
Huston Road South Glenmary Lane
Inveraray Drive North Where circle road completes its loop
to Inveraray Drive
Iron Bark Circle Northeast Northwinds Drive
Ithan Avenue Both Barclay Road
Ithan Avenue Both Clyde Road
Ithan Avenue Both Mill Road
Ithan Avenue Both Roberts Road
Ithan Creek Drive Northeast Radnor Chester Road
Ithan Road Southwest St. Davids Avenue
Ithan Woods Lane Southwest Conestoga Road
Iven Avenue Both Brookside Avenue
Iven Avenue Both Sinkler Drive
Jefferson Road Southwest Hamilton Road
Julip Run Northeast Ravenscliff
Kenilworth Road Northeast Ashwood Road
Kinterra Road Southwest Church Road
Kirsch Avenue Southwest Calvarese Lane
Kirsch Avenue
(northerly leg)
Northeast Morningside Circle (northerly leg)
Kirsch Avenue
(northerly leg)
Southwest Morningside Circle (southerly leg)
Kirsch Avenue
(southerly leg)
Northeast Morningside Circle (southerly leg)
Knox Road Southwest Atterbury Road
Kromer Road Southwest East Lancaster Avenue
Lakeview Circle Northeast Malin Road
Lanmore Avenue Northeast Morningside Circle (northerly leg)
§ 270-16 RADNOR CODE § 270-16
C:846
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Lanmore Avenue Southwest Morningside Circle (southerly leg)
Lansdowne
Avenue
Northwest Runnymede Avenue
Lansdowne
Avenue
Southeast Audubon Avenue
Lantoga Road North West Lancaster Avenue
Lantoga Road South Conestoga Road
Larchwood Lane Northeast Sproul Road
Laurier Place South Mill Road
Lawrence Lane Northeast Darby Paoli Road
Leighton Drive Southwest Sturbridge Drive
Lenoir Avenue Southwest Conestoga Road
Lesley Road North Parkes Run Lane
Lesley Road West Abrahams Lane
Lewis Lane Northwest Rockingham Avenue
Liberty Lane Northeast South Devon Avenue
Lindsay Circle Northeast Inveraray Drive
Locust Grove Road Northeast Conestoga Road
Locust Grove
Terrace
Northeast Conestoga Road
Locust Road West Sugartown Road
Longwood Drive West Sugartown Road
Loudon Lane South Milmar Road
Louella Avenue Both Pembroke Avenue
Louella Avenue Both Windermere Avenue
Louella Court North Circle of Easterly Drive
Louella Court West Louella Court Drive (north-south) at
a point 307.43 feet south of the
intersection of Waynewood Avenue
Louella Court West Waynewood Avenue
Lowry's Lane Both Debaran Lane
Lowry's Lane Both Meredith Avenue
Lowry's Lane Northeast County Line Road
Lowry's Lane South Conestoga Road
Malin Road Both Barren Road
Malin Road Both Briarwood Road
§ 270-16 CHARTER § 270-16
C:847
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Malin Road Both Goshen Road
Malin Road Both Lakeview Circle
Malin Road Both Westover Road
Malin Road West Earles Lane
Maple Glen Lane Northeast Maplewood Road
Maplewood Road West Highland Avenue
Maplewood Road West Valley Forge Road, South
Marlbridge Road North Wyldhaven Road (southern end)
Marlbridge Road Northeast Wyldhaven Road
Marlyn Circle South West Avenue
Matlack Lane East Newtown Road
Meadowbrook
Avenue
East Orchard Way
Meadowbrook
Avenue
West Pembroke Avenue
Meadowbrook
Circle
Northeast Orchard Way
Meadowbrook
Lane
Both Fawnhill Road
Meadowbrook
Lane
South Hunt Road
Meadowood Road Both Browning Lane (northerly
intersection)
Meadowood Road Both Browning Lane (southerly
intersection)
Meadowood Road South Conestoga Road
Meadowood Road West South Ithan Avenue
Meredith Avenue Both Eachus Avenue
Meredith Avenue Northwest Lowry's Lane
Meredith Avenue
[Repealed
5-23-2016 by
Ord. No.
2016-07]
Midland Avenue Both Aberdeen Avenue
Midland Avenue Both Pembroke Avenue
Midland Avenue Both St. Davids Road
Midland Avenue West Louella Avenue
§ 270-16 RADNOR CODE § 270-16
C:848
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Midland Circle West St. Davids Road
Midway Avenue North Overhill Road
Midway Avenue South West Avenue
Mill Road East Conestoga Road
Mill Road East South Ithan Avenue
Mill Road Northwest Roberts Road
Mill Road West Conestoga Road
Miller Street East Landover Road
Milmar Road North Loudan Lane
Milmar Road South Malin Road
Milmar Road West Goshen Road
Montgomery Lane East KOP
Montparnasse
Place
Southwest Goshen Road
Montrose Avenue North County Line Road
Montrose Avenue South Conestoga Road
Moore Avenue East Landover Road
Moore Avenue West Bryn Mawr Avenue
Morningside
Circle (northerly
end)
Southeast South Devon Avenue
Morningside
Circle (southerly
end)
Southeast South Devon Avenue
Morris Circle West South Devon Avenue
Morris Road Both Clover Lane
Moscia Lane West South Devon Avenue
Newtown Road North Radnor Chester Road
Newtown Road Northwest Radnor Chester Road
Newtown Road South Darby Paoli Road
North Bellevue
Avenue
North Eagle Road
North Blackfriar
Road
Southwest East Lancaster Avenue
North Ithan
Avenue
Northeast County Line Road
Northwinds Drive North Mill Road
§ 270-16 CHARTER § 270-16
C:849
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Northwoods Road South Upper Gulph Road
Oakford Circle West Oakford Road
Oakford Road
[Added
5-11-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-04]
Both Arbordale Road
Oakford Road Both Oakford Circle
Oak Grove Lane Both Beechtree Lane
Oak Grove Lane North Eagle Road
Oak Grove Lane North Upper Gulph Road
Oak Grove Lane Southeast Walnut Avenue
Oak Terrace West Brookside Avenue
Old Oaks Road North East Lancaster Avenue
Old Oaks Road
[Added 1-6-2014
by Ord. No.
2013-17]
South Buckingham Drive
Old Sugartown
Road
North West Lancaster Avenue
Old Sugartown
Road
South Morris Road
Orchard Lane Southwest Parkes Run Lane
Orchard Way Both Aberdeen Avenue
Orchard Way West Louella Avenue
Overhill Road North Eagle Road
Overhill Road South West Avenue
Overlook Lane Southwest Brookfarm Road
Owens Lane Southeast Bloomingdale Avenue
Oxford Lane Northeast Tower Road
Paddock Drive Northeast Galer Road
Parkes Run Lane South Abrahams Lane
Parkes Run Lane Southwest Abrahams Lane
Patton Lane Northeast Biddulph Road
Paul Road North Eagle Road
Paul Road South Walnut Avenue
Pembroke Avenue Both Aberdeen Avenue
§ 270-16 RADNOR CODE § 270-16
C:850
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Pembroke Avenue Both Louella Avenue
Pembroke Avenue Both Midland Avenue
Pembroke Avenue Both St. Davids Road
Pembroke Avenue South East Lancaster Avenue
Pembroke Avenue West South Wayne Avenue
Pennsylvania
Avenue
East Aberdeen Avenue
Pennsylvania
Avenue
East Plant Avenue
Petrie Avenue Southwest Conestoga Road
Pine Tree Road
[Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-09]
Both Spruce Tree Road
Pine Tree Road Both Upper Gulph Road
Pine Tree Road
[Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-09]
Both Woods Lane
Plant Avenue Both Woodland Avenue
Plant Avenue East Aberdeen Avenue
Plant Avenue Southwest Pennsylvania Avenue
Poplar Avenue Both Woodland Avenue
Poplar Avenue Northeast Radnor Street Road
Portledge Drive Southwest Roberts Road
Princeton Court Northwest Cornell Drive
Quaker Lane Both Sproul Road
Quaker Lane South Willowburn Road
Radnor Avenue Northeast Conestoga Road
Radnor Street
Road
Both Beechtree Lane
Radnor Street
Road [Added
10-13-2014 by
Ord. No.
2014-12]
Both Poplar Avenue
§ 270-16 CHARTER § 270-16
C:851
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Radnor Street
Road
Both Walnut Avenue
Radnor Street
Road
Both Willow Avenue
Radnor Street
Road
North North Aberdeen Avenue
Radnor Way Northeast King of Prussia Road
Raider Road Northwest Radnor Chester Road
Raider Road South High Road
Ramblewood Drive East Northwinds Drive
Ravenscliff East Brooke Road
Ravenscliff
(southeast corner)
North Ravenscliff
Rawles Run Lane Southeast Bryn Mawr Avenue
Roberts Road Both Mill Road
Roberts Road North Sproul Road
Roberts Road South Darby Paoli Road
Roberts Road South South Ithan Avenue
Robinhood Road Southwest Roberts Road
Robinhood Road West Yorkshire Road
Rockingham Road Both Dreer Lane
Rockingham Road Both Lewis Lane
Rockingham Road North Conestoga Road
Rockingham Road Southwest Yorkshire Road
Rockland Circle Northeast Rockland Road
Rockland Road Northeast Morris Circle
Rockland Road Southwest Donna Lane
Rock Rose Lane Southwest Pine Tree Road
Rodney Road Southeast Braxton Road
Rolling Road North Boxwood Road
Rolling Road West Ithan Avenue
Rose Glen Drive North Glenmary Road
Round Hill Road North Round Hill
Round Hill Road West St. Davids Road
Runnymede
Avenue
Both Lansdowne Avenue
§ 270-16 RADNOR CODE § 270-16
C:852
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Runnymede
Avenue
West Bloomingdale Avenue
St. Davids Avenue Both Chamounix Road
St. Davids Avenue Both Hilaire Road
St. Davids Avenue East Glenmary Lane
St. Davids Avenue North Terminal point of St. Davids Avenue
at Aberdeen Terrace
St. Davids Court Northeast St. Davids Road
St. Davids Road Both Midland Avenue
St. Davids Road Both Pembroke Avenue
St. Davids Road Northeast Darby Paoli Road
St. Davids Road West Aberdeen Avenue
Sandcastle Drive Northeast Roberts Road
Saw Mill Road North Earles Lane
School Lane East Louella Avenue
School Lane West South Wayne Avenue
Shadeland Road West Newtown Road
Sinkler Drive West Iven Avenue
South Devon
Avenue
Both Arbordale Road
South Devon
Avenue
Both Devonwood Road
South Devon
Avenue
Both Morris Road — Morris Circle
South Devon
Avenue
East Conestoga Road
South Hunt Road Northeast Bryn Mawr Avenue
South Valley Forge
Road
Both Maplewood Avenue
South Wayne
Avenue
North Windermere Avenue
South Wayne
Avenue
South Conestoga Road
Southwinds Drive North Northwinds Drive
Southwinds Drive South Fox Fields Road
Southwinds Drive South Northwinds Drive
Spring Mill Road Both Sunnyhill Road
§ 270-16 CHARTER § 270-16
C:853
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Spring Mill Road Both Woodstock Road
Spring Mill Road South Conestoga Road
Spruce Tree Road East Pine Tree Road
Spruce Tree Road North Upper Gulph Road
Station Road East Waynewood Avenue
Strathmore Road Both Yorkshire Road
Strathmore Road Southeast Wyldhaven Road
Sturbridge Drive Northeast Sproul Road
Sulgrave Lane Northeast Bryn Mawr Avenue
Summer Hill Lane Northeast Brookfarm Road
Summit Terrace Northeast Conestoga Road
Sunnyhill Road Southeast Spring Mill Road
Sunnyhill Road West Sproul Road
Tindall Lane East Wooded Lane
Tower Road Northeast Mill Road
Township
Municipal Building
Drive
East Creek Road
Upland Way East Aberdeen Avenue
Upland Way West Louella Avenue
Upper Gulph Road Both Arden Road
Upper Gulph Road
[Added
2-26-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-02]
Both Oak Grove Lane
Upper Gulph Road Both Pine Tree Road
Upper Gulph Road East County Line Road
Upper Gulph Road West King of Prussia Road
Valley Forge Road Northwest Grange Road
Valley Forge Road West Sugartown Road
Valley Forge
Terrace
Southeast South Devon Avenue
Valley Place Northeast Woods Lane
Van Lears Run North Newtown Road
Vassar Circle West Woodstock Road
Vauclain Lane Northeast Roberts Road
§ 270-16 RADNOR CODE § 270-16
C:854
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Villanova Road West Aldwyn Lane
Walnut Avenue Both Radnor Street Road
Walnut Avenue Both Woodland Avenue
Walnut Avenue West North Wayne Avenue
Watch Hill Road Northeast Knox Road
Waynewood Road North Louella Court Drive
Weirwood Road North Spruce Tree Road
Weldon Lane Northeast Bryn Mawr Avenue
Welwyn Road Northeast West Wayne Avenue
Wentworth Lane Both Beechwood Drive
Wentworth Lane North Conestoga Road
Wentworth Lane South Lewis Lane
West Avenue Both Bellevue Avenue
West Avenue Both Banbury Way
West Avenue Both Eagle Road
West Beechtree
Lane
Both Eagle Road
West Beechtree
Lane
East North Wayne Avenue
West Wayne
Avenue
Both Arbordale Avenue
West Wayne
Avenue
Both Bloomingdale Avenue
West Wayne
Avenue
Both Donna Lane
West Wayne
Avenue
East Maplewood Avenue
West Wayne
Avenue
Northwest Welwyn Road and West Wayne
Avenue
Westover Road Southwest Malin Road
Williams Road Both Dreer Lane
Williams Road Both Fitzwilliams Lane
Willow Avenue East Radnor Street Road
Willow Avenue South Plant Avenue
Willowburn Road Southeast Sproul Road
Windermere
Avenue
Both Louella Avenue
§ 270-16 CHARTER § 270-16
C:855
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Windermere
Avenue
East Aberdeen Avenue
Windermere
Avenue
West South Wayne Avenue
Windsor Avenue East Banbury Way
Wistar Road Northeast County Line Road
Woodcrest Circle Northeast Woodcrest Road
Woodcrest Road East Woodcrest Circle
Woodcrest Road
[Added
3-24-2014 by
Ord. No.
2014-01]
Northeast Berwind Circle
Woodcrest Road Northeast King of Prussia Road
Wooded Lane North Aldwyn Lane
Woodland Avenue Both Beechtree Lane
Woodland Avenue Both Poplar Avenue
Woodland Avenue Both Walnut Avenue
Woodland Avenue North Eagle Road
Woodland Avenue South Eagle Road
Woodland Avenue Southeast Plant Avenue
Woodland Court Southwest Eagle Road
Woodlea Road Northeast Robinhood Road
Woodlea Road Southeast Roberts Road
Woods Lane West Pinetree Road
Woodstock Road Northwest South Spring Mill Road
Woodsworth Court West North Wayne Avenue
Wooton Road Northeast Bryn Mawr Avenue
Wyldhaven Road Both Strathmore Road
Wyldhaven Road South South Ithan Avenue
Wyldhaven Road Both Yorkshire Road
Wyndom Lane Northeast Biddulph Road
Wyntrelea Drive South Countryview Drive
Yorkshire Road Both Rockingham Road
Yorkshire Road Northwest Strathmore Road
Yorkshire Road
(southerly end)
West Wyldhaven Road
§ 270-16 RADNOR CODE § 270-16
C:856
§ 270-17. Yield intersections.
§ 270-18. Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger
vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or
towing any other vehicle), upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described below.
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 270-19. Motor vehicle weight limitations.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall pay a fine
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
A. The intersections described below (in addition to intersections with the
through streets established by this chapter) are hereby established as
yield intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected in such a
position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street in the direction or directions indicated. Every
driver of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the firstnamed
street, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall
slow down or stop the vehicle and then yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on the second-named street
so closely as to constitute a hazard during the time that the driver is
moving across or within such intersection.
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Barcladen Circle East Barcladen Road
Fitzwilliams Lane North Rockingham Road
Walnut Avenue East North Wayne Avenue
Windsor Avenue South Banbury Way
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall pay a fine
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination, having a gross
weight in excess of that respectively prescribed, except school buses,
emergency vehicles, Radnor Township Department of Highway vehicles
in the course of their duties and vehicles making local deliveries or
pickups on such street, and adjacent streets, upon any of the streets or
bridges, or portions thereof, described below.
§ 270-16 CHARTER § 270-19
C:857
Name of Street or
Bridge
Maximum
Gross Weight
(pounds) Location
Aberdeen Terrace 10,000 From Aberdeen Avenue north to
Chamounix Road
Abrahams Lane 10,000 From Church Road to Newtown
Road
Arden Road 10,000 From Upper Gulph Road to
Upper Merion Township line
Bailey Road 10,000 From Conestoga Road to Lewis
Lane
Banbury Way 10,000 From Lancaster Avenue to West
Avenue
Barclay Road 10,000 From Conestoga Road to South
Ithan Avenue
Beechtree Lane 10,000 From North Wayne Avenue to
Radnor Street Road
Bellevue Avenue 10,000 From Lancaster Avenue to West
Avenue
Bloomingdale
Avenue
10,000 From Lancaster Avenue to
Conestoga Road
Boxwood Road 10,000 From Conestoga Road to
Barclay Road
Brookside Avenue 10,000 From Orchard Way to
Conestoga Road
Castlefinn Lane 10,000 From Bryn Mawr Avenue to
Roberts Road
Chamounix Road 10,000 From Lancaster Avenue to
Walnut Avenue
Church Road 10,000 From Conestoga Road to Brooke
Road
Clover Lane 10,000 From South Devon Avenue to
Morris Road
Donna Lane 10,000 From South Devon Avenue to
West Wayne Avenue
Eagle Road 10,000 From Strafford Avenue to North
Wayne Avenue
Forrest Road 10,000 From Eagle Road to West
Beechtree Lane
Glenmary Lane 10,000 From St. Davids Avenue to King
of Prussia Road
§ 270-19 RADNOR CODE § 270-19
C:858
Name of Street or
Bridge
Maximum
Gross Weight
(pounds) Location
Iven Avenue 10,000 From Lancaster Avenue to
Conestoga Road
Lantoga Road 10,000 From Lancaster Avenue to
Conestoga Road
Lenoir Avenue 10,000 From Conestoga Road to
Bloomingdale Avenue
Louella Avenue 10,000 From Lancaster Avenue to
Conestoga Road
Louella Court 10,000 From Lancaster Avenue to
Waynewood Avenue
Lowry's Lane 10,000 From Conestoga Road to County
Line Road
Mill Road 10,000 From Conestoga Road to South
Ithan Avenue
Mill Road 10,000 From Roberts Road to Bryn
Mawr Avenue
Miller Street 10,000 From Landover Road to
Haverford Road
Montrose Avenue 10,000 From County Line Road to
Conestoga Road
Moore Avenue 10,000 From Bryn Mawr Avenue to
Landover Road
Moore Avenue 10,000 From Landover Road to Bryn
Mawr Avenue
Morris Road 10,000 From South Devon Avenue to
Sugartown Road
North Aberdeen
Avenue
10,000 From Lancaster Avenue to
Radnor Street Road
North Bellevue
Avenue
10,000 From Beechtree Lane west to
Eagle Road
Overhill Road 10,000 From West Avenue to Eagle
Road
Owens Lane 10,000 From West Wayne Avenue to
Bloomingdale Avenue
Paul Road 10,000 From Chamounix Road to Eagle
Road
Pembroke Avenue 10,000 From South Wayne Avenue to
Lancaster Avenue
§ 270-19 CHARTER § 270-19
C:859
Name of Street or
Bridge
Maximum
Gross Weight
(pounds) Location
Poplar Avenue 10,000 From North Wayne Avenue to
Radnor Street Road
Quaker Lane 10,000 From Sproul Road to
Willowburn Road
Radnor Street
Road
10,000 From North Aberdeen Avenue to
Eagle Road
Rockingham Road 10,000 From Conestoga Road to
Yorkshire Road
Rolling Road 10,000 From Boxwood Road to South
Ithan Avenue
Runnymede Avenue 10,000 From South Wayne Avenue to
Bloomingdale Avenue
St. Davids Avenue 10,000 From Aberdeen Avenue to
Glenmary Lane
Sinkler Drive 10,000 From Radnor Chester Road to
Iven Avenue
South Aberdeen
Avenue
10,000 From Lancaster Avenue to
Conestoga Road
South Ithan Avenue 10,000 From Conestoga Road to Bryn
Mawr Avenue
South Roberts
Road
10,000 From Sproul Road to Darby
Paoli Road
South Spring Mill
Road
10,000 From Sproul Road to Conestoga
Road
Strafford Avenue 10,000 From Lancaster Avenue to
Tredyffrin Township line
Walnut Avenue 10,000 From North Wayne Avenue to
Chamounix Road
Wentworth Lane 10,000 From Conestoga Road to Dreer
Lane
West Avenue 10,000 From North Wayne Avenue to
Eagle Road
West Beechtree
Lane
10,000 From North Wayne Avenue to
Tredyffrin Township line
West Wayne
Avenue
10,000 From Conestoga Road to
Maplewood Avenue
Williams Road 10,000 From Conestoga Road to Dreer
Lane
§ 270-19 RADNOR CODE § 270-19
C:860
§ 270-20. No through traffic.
§ 270-21. Motor vehicles driven on sidewalks.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or tractor upon any sidewalk in the
Township, nor shall any person operate a motor vehicle upon or across any
sidewalk except in order to gain access to or egress from a driveway or alley
at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is curbed, shall have been
properly cut down for the purpose.
§ 270-22. Operation of motor vehicles on closed highways.
Name of Street or
Bridge
Maximum
Gross Weight
(pounds) Location
Woodland Avenue 10,000 From Plant Avenue to Tredyffrin
Township line
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall pay a fine
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
A. Local traffic only is permitted on any of these streets or parts of these
streets described below.
Name of Street Location
Aldwyn Lane West From P&W Station driveway to Villanova
Road 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Aldwyn Lane East from Villanova Road to P&W Station 4:30
p.m. to 6:00 p.m./Mon. through Fri.
Ashwood Road Entire length
Hilldale Road Entire length
Mill Road From Bryn Mawr Avenue to Roberts Road, 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Mill Road From Roberts Road to Bryn Mawr Avenue, 4:00
p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Petrie Avenue
[Added 10-12-2015
by Ord. No.
2015-16]
Entire length
Roberts Road From Darby Paoli Road to Sproul Road, 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Willow Avenue Entire length
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall pay a fine
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
§ 270-19 CHARTER § 270-22
C:861
§ 270-23. Accident reports.
The operator of any motor vehicle involved in an accident in the Township
and required by law to report such accident to any department or agency of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any other person required to make
such report, shall at the time of making such report to the Commonwealth,
make a written report to the Radnor Township Police Department
containing the same information.
§ 270-24. Open vehicles prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor
upon any highway in the Township that is under construction,
resurfacing or repair, in disregard of any official sign, barricade or
notice that the same is closed to vehicular traffic.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall pay a fine
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any loaded open
commercial vehicle or other loaded open commercial tractor, trailer,
tractor-trailer combination, dump or pickup truck without first having
the same covered and any load contained therein covered and secured
with a tarp to prevent and prohibit any portion whatsoever of its load
escaping from the bed of said vehicle. Exempted hereunder are
equipment or similar loads incapable of escaping from said vehicle.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall pay a fine
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
§ 270-22 RADNOR CODE § 270-24
C:862
ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 270-25. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 270-26. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described below except at the angle designated and only within the painted
stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or
shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked
with the front thereof nearest curb.
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 270-27. No stopping or standing.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described below.
Name of Street Side Location
Bellevue Avenue East From the AT&T driveway to West Avenue
Poplar Avenue East From Pennsylvania Avenue in an easterly
direction for 122 feet
§ 270-28. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described below.
Name of Street Side Location
Aberdeen Avenue West From Lancaster Avenue to
Windermere Avenue
Aberdeen Terrace North From Aberdeen Avenue to Radnor
Street Road
Aberdeen Terrace South From St. Davids Avenue to
Chamounix Road
Aldwyn Lane North From South Ithan Avenue to the P &
W Station
Arthur Road West Entire length
§ 270-25 CHARTER § 270-28
C:863
Name of Street Side Location
Ashwood Road Both Entire length
Atlee Road Both From the northwesterly curbline of
Maplewood Avenue to a point 1,005
feet northwesterly thereof
Audubon Avenue Both,
except
Sunday
From South Wayne Avenue to
Lansdowne Avenue
Bailey Road East From Conestoga Road to Dreer Road
Banbury Way West From Lancaster Avenue to West
Avenue
Barcladen Circle
[Added 11-24-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-14]
North From the corner of Barcladen Road to
a point 389 feet west thereof.
Barcladen Road
[Added 11-24-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-14]
West From Debaran Lane to Barcladen
Circle
Beechtree Lane North/East From Bellevue Avenue to Eagle Road
Bellevue Avenue East From Lancaster Avenue to West
Avenue
Bellevue Avenue West From the northerly curbline of
Lancaster Avenue to a point 300 feet
northerly thereof
Belrose Lane Both From King of Prussia Road to
Glenmary Road
Bloomingdale
Avenue
Northwest From Runnymede Avenue to 67 feet
north on Bloomingdale Avenue
Bloomingdale
Avenue
Southwest From Conestoga Road to Runnymede
Avenue to 347 feet north of
Conestoga Road
Bloomingdale
Avenue
Southwest From Lenoir Avenue to West Wayne
Avenue
Braxton Road North/West Entire length of the inner loop from
North Black Friar Road to County
Line Road
Brooklea Road East/South From Meadowbrook Road 195 feet
north of Brooklea Road
§ 270-28 RADNOR CODE § 270-28
C:864
Name of Street Side Location
Brookside Circle
[Added 1-6-2014
by Ord. No.
2013-17]
South Entire length
Brook Street North Commencing at the point where
Brook Street becomes private
traveling west for a distance of 218
feet and seven inches
Bryn Mawr Avenue West From the southerly side of the
Philadelphia and Western Railroad
Bridge to a point 367 feet southerly
thereof
Buckingham Drive North From Lowry's Lane to Barley Cone
Lane
Callanan Avenue West Entire length
Cambria Court East From the northerly curbline of
Lancaster Avenue to a point 328 feet
northerly thereof
Chalous Lane North For its entire length from South Ithan
Avenue to the intersection with
Trianon Lane
Chamounix Road
[Added 9-8-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-10]
East From Lancaster Avenue to St. Davids
Avenue
Chamounix Road
[Added 9-8-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-10]
West From the corner of Lancaster Avenue
for a distance of 390 feet
Chamounix Road West From Lancaster Avenue to St. Davids
Road
Chandler Lane West Entire length
Charles Drive Southwest From the westerly curbline of David
Drive to a point 192 northwesterly
thereof
Charles Drive Southwest From the southwesterly curbline of
Roberts Road to a point 165 feet
southwesterly thereof
Church Street North 162 feet from the intersection of
Highland Avenue to a total of 181.3
feet
§ 270-28 CHARTER § 270-28
C:865
Name of Street Side Location
Clover Lane [Added
9-8-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-10]
Northeast From the corner of Morris Road to a
point 314 feet southeast for a
distance of 80 feet
Clover Lane West From Morris Road to South Devon
Avenue
Conestoga Road North For a distance of 52 feet affecting 829
and 831 Conestoga Road and for a
distance of 75 feet affecting 833
Conestoga Road
Conestoga Road
[Added 12-14-2015
by Ord. No.
2015-22]
North For a distance of 160 feet east from
South Wayne Avenue
Conestoga Road
[Added 12-14-2015
by Ord. No.
2015-22]
North For a distance of 320 feet west from
South Wayne Avenue
Conestoga Road North From a point 220 feet east of West
Wayne Avenue for a distance of 175
feet in an easterly direction
Conestoga Road South From a distance of 51 feet in front of
118 Conestoga Road
Conestoga Road South Between 204 Conestoga Road and
232 Conestoga Road consisting of 316
feet (frontage of Greythorne Woods)
Conestoga Road South From Radnor Chester Road to
Newtown Road
Conestoga Road South From the westerly curbline of Summit
Terrace to a point 135 feet westerly
thereof
Coopertown Road Southwest From Highland Avenue to Landover
Road
Cornerstone Lane
[Added 9-26-2016
by Ord. No.
2016-10]
Both From the curbline of Bryn Mawr
Avenue to a point 121 feet southeast
thereof
County Line Road North From North Ithan Avenue to Lowry's
Lane
County Line Road South From Lancaster Avenue to Landover
Road
County Line Road South From North Ithan Avenue to the
Township line
§ 270-28 RADNOR CODE § 270-28
C:866
Name of Street Side Location
County Line Road South From North Spring Mill Road to
Wistar Road
County Line Road South From Spring Mill Road to Ithan
Avenue
Creek Drive South From Iven Avenue to end of Township
property
David Drive Southeast From the southeasterly curbline of
Roberts Road to a point 630 feet
southeasterly thereof
Deharan Lane
[Added 11-24-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-14]
North Lowrys Lane to Barcladen Road
Doyle Road East Between Conestoga Road and
Lancaster Avenue
Dreer Lane South Between Bailey Road and
Rockingham Road
Eachus Avenue East From Meredith Avenue to its end
Eachus Avenue West For a distance of 50 feet north of the
driveway at 106 Eachus Avenue
Eagle Road Both From Lancaster Avenue to Paul Road
Earles Lane West From the Newtown Township line to
Malin Road
Eaton Drive South From the front to the rear of the
property at 100-160 Eaton Drive
Fairfield Lane North From Old Eagle School Road to the
Tredyffrin Township line
Fairfield Lane South From a point 55 feet west of the
curbline at its intersection with
Forrest Lane
Fairview Avenue Northwest From the southwesterly curbline of
Highland Avenue to a point 260 feet
southwesterly thereof
Fairview Drive Both Entire length of 1,530 feet from
Chamounix Road to Fenimore Lane
Fariston Road Inner In front of 23 Fariston Road and 25
Fariston Road
Fariston Road Outer Entire length
§ 270-28 CHARTER § 270-28
C:867
Name of Street Side Location
Farm Road West Commencing at Lancaster Avenue and
Farm Road on the west side and
continuing for 483 feet until the end
of Farm Road
Federal Street East Entire length
Fenimore Lane Both From Chamounix Road to Fairview
Drive
Fitzwilliams Lane North From Williams Road to Rockingham
Road
Gallagher Road East From Lancaster Avenue to South
Devon Avenue
Garrett Avenue East From Lancaster Avenue to Conestoga
Road, provided that parking will be
permitted 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on
the first Tuesday of the month;
parking prohibited on east side from
April 1 to December 1 only
Glenbrook Avenue North From Conestoga Road to County Line
Road
Glenbrook Avenue South From Conestoga Road for a distance
of 160 feet
Glynn Lane Both From Chamounix Road to St. Davids
Road
Grange Road Along the
inner
perimeter of
the circle
For a distance of 712 feet affecting
378, 380, 390, 396 and 400 Grange
Road and 415 Locust Road
Highland Avenue North From West Wayne Avenue to
Maplewood Avenue
Highland Lane West From Cooperstown Road for a
distance of 645 feet
Hilldale Road Both Entire length
Hillside Circle North From the intersection of Lancaster
Avenue for a distance of 344 feet and
five inches south therefrom
Hillside Circle South Entire length
Iven Avenue Both From Creek Drive to Lancaster
Avenue
Kenilworth Road Both From Ashwood Road to Spring Mill
Road
King of Prussia Road Both From Lancaster Avenue to Radnor
Chester Road
§ 270-28 RADNOR CODE § 270-28
C:868
Name of Street Side Location
Kirsch Avenue North Entire length
Kromer Road West From the curbline of Lancaster
Avenue north for a distance of 196
feet
Lanmore Avenue North Entire length
Lansdowne Avenue East, except
Sun
From Audubon Avenue to Runnymede
Avenue
Lantoga Road West Entire length
Lenoir Avenue South From Bloomingdale Avenue to
Conestoga Road
Louella Avenue East From Upland Way to Windermere
Avenue
Louella Avenue East From Windermere Avenue to
Pembroke Avenue
Louella Court Inside Entire length of circular portion
Louella Court Outside On the circular portion from Louella
Court Drive to the exit to Lancaster
Avenue southeasterly thereof
Louella Court Drive North From the easterly curbline of
Waynewood Avenue to a point 365
feet easterly thereof
Lowry's Lane East From Property No. 247 to Conestoga
Road
Lowry's Lane West From Lancaster Avenue to Conestoga
Road
Maplewood Road Both From Valley Forge Road to West
Wayne Avenue
Marlyn Circle East From the northerly curbline of West
Avenue to a point 185 feet northerly
thereof
Meredith Avenue Northeast From Lowry's Lane to Conestoga
Road
Meredith Avenue
[Repealed
5-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-07]
Midland Avenue North From Aberdeen Avenue to Louella
Avenue
Midland Avenue South For the entire length of the 300 block
between South Aberdeen Avenue and
Pembroke Avenue
§ 270-28 CHARTER § 270-28
C:869
Name of Street Side Location
Miller Street North From Landover Road to entire length
Mill Road Both From Bryn Mawr Avenue to the
Haverford Township line
Montrose Avenue East Entire length
Moore Avenue North From the northerly curbline of Bryn
Mawr Avenue to a point 135 feet
easterly thereof
Moore Avenue
[Added 8-13-2018
by Ord. No.
2018-09]
North From 741 Moore Avenue extending 82
feet west to 747 Moore Avenue
driveway (no parking between signs)
Moore Avenue South From Bryn Mawr Avenue to Landover
Road
Morningside Circle Inside curb Entire length
Morris Road South From South Devon Avenue to
Sugartown Road
Moscia Lane North To a point 38 feet east of the
intersection of South Devon Avenue at
the east end of the sewer grate
Moscia Lane South From South Devon Avenue for a
distance of 290 feet
North Aberdeen
Avenue
South From Radnor Street Road to
Aberdeen Terrace
North Black Friar
Road
East From Braxton Road to Rodney Road
North Black Friar
Road
West From Lancaster Avenue to 110 North
Black Friar Road
North Ithan Avenue Both From County Line Road to Lancaster
Avenue
North Lowry's Lane East From County Line Road to Lancaster
Avenue
North Wayne Avenue East From Poplar Avenue to Walnut Avenue
Old Matsonford
Road
Both Entire length
Overhill Road West/South From West Avenue to Eagle Road
Owens Lane South For a distance of 100 feet west toward
Wayne Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue South From North Wayne Avenue to
Aberdeen Avenue, north
Petrie Avenue West From County Line Road to Conestoga
Road
§ 270-28 RADNOR CODE § 270-28
C:870
Name of Street Side Location
Plant Avenue North Commencing from Woodland Avenue
continuing for 157 feet in a westerly
direction
Plant Avenue South From Woodland Avenue extended to
Aberdeen Avenue
Poplar Avenue Northwest From the northeasterly curbline of
North Wayne Avenue to a point 348
feet northeasterly thereof
Poplar Avenue South For a distance of 75 feet west of the
driveway at 110 Poplar Avenue
Radnor Chester
Road
Both From Newtown Road to King of
Prussia Road
Radnor Street Road Both From Eagle Road to Tredyffrin
Township Line
Radnor Street Road Both On the bridge crossing Gulph Creek
Radnor Street Road Northeast From Aberdeen Terrace to Aberdeen
Avenue extended
Radnor Street Road
[Added 1-6-2014
by Ord. No.
2013-17]
West From the corner of Aberdeen Avenue
to a point 103 feet northerly for a
distance of 4 feet
Roberts Road East From County Line Road to Conestoga
Road
Roberts Road North From Mill Road to Ithan Avenue
Roberts Road
[Added 3-24-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-01]
West From County Line Road to Conestoga
Road
Rockingham Road Southeast Entire length
Runnymede Avenue North From South Wayne Avenue to
Bloomingdale Avenue
St. Davids Avenue North From Aberdeen Terrace to Chamounix
Road
St. Davids Avenue South From Chamounix Road east for a
distance of 75 feet
St. Davids Road East From Lancaster Avenue to Midland
Avenue
St. Davids Road South From South Aberdeen Avenue for a
length of 290 feet east therefrom
School Lane Both From South Wayne Avenue to Louella
Avenue
§ 270-28 CHARTER § 270-28
C:871
Name of Street Side Location
South Devon Avenue East From a point opposite Morningside
Circle to Arbordale Road
South Devon Avenue East From Morris Circle south for a
distance of 60 feet
South Devon Avenue West From Conestoga Road to Valley Forge
Road
South Ithan Avenue Both From Bryn Mawr Avenue to Clyde
Road
South Ithan Avenue Both From Lancaster Avenue to Conestoga
Road
South Wayne Avenue East From Windermere Avenue to
Conestoga Road
South Wayne Avenue West From the southern line curbline of
Runnymede Avenue to a point 360
feet southerly thereof
South Wayne Avenue West From 164 feet south of West Wayne
Avenue to Conestoga Road
Upland Way North From Louella Avenue for a distance of
900 feet
Valley Forge Road North From Maplewood Road to Township
Line
Walnut Avenue Both From North Wayne Avenue to Oak
Lane
Waynewood Avenue Both From Lancaster Court to Louella
Avenue
West Avenue North From Eagle Road to North Wayne
Avenue
West Avenue South From Bellevue Avenue to Banbury
Way
West Wayne Avenue Both From Conestoga Road to Highland
Avenue
West Wayne Avenue East From Highland Avenue south for a
distance of 375 feet
West Wayne Avenue North From Welwyn Road to Maplewood
Road
West Wayne Avenue North From 137 West Wayne Avenue to
Conestoga Road
West Wayne Avenue South From Welwyn Road to 712 feet
southeasterly thereof
§ 270-28 RADNOR CODE § 270-28
C:872
Name of Street Side Location
West Wayne Avenue South Beginning from the corner of West
Wayne Avenue and South Wayne
Avenue westerly for 79 feet
Williams Road West From Conestoga Road to Lewis Lane
Willow Avenue Both From Plant Avenue for a distance of
250 feet
Willow Avenue Southeast For the entire length between Plant
Avenue and Radnor Street Road
Windermere Avenue North From a point 253 feet east of Louella
Avenue to a point 105 feet easterly
thereof
Windermere Avenue North From South Wayne Avenue to Louella
Avenue
Windermere Avenue
[Added 9-8-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-10]
South From the corner of Louella Avenue to
a point 255 feet westerly for a
distance of 13 feet
Windermere Avenue South,
except
Sunday
From Louella Avenue to South
Aberdeen Avenue
Windsor Avenue North From the westerly curbline of
Banbury Way to a point 200 feet
westerly thereof
Windsor Avenue South From the westerly curbline of
Banbury Way to a point 160 feet
westerly thereof
Woodland Avenue Both On the bridge crossing Gulph Creek
Woodland Avenue East From Plant Avenue to Poplar Avenue
§ 270-29. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described below during the hours specified, on any day except Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays.
§ 270-28 CHARTER § 270-29
C:873
Name of
Street Side Hours/Days Location
Aldwyn Lane Both 6:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat. and
holidays
From P&W Station to
Lancaster Avenue
Barley Cone
Lane
Both 8:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m., except
Sat., Sun. and
holidays
From Lancaster Avenue
to Buckingham Drive
Beatrice Drive
[Amended
6-12-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-08]
Both No parking
except holidays
Entire length
Black Friar
Road
Both 8:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m., except
Sat., Sun. and
holidays
From Lancaster Avenue
to Buckingham Drive
Browning Lane Both 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Mon.
through Fri. and
holidays
From 100 Browning Lane
to 114 Browning Lane
Browning Lane Both 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Mon.
through Fri. and
holidays
From Meadowood Road a
distance of 446 feet
Creek Drive North 12:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Iven Drive to
Township line
Doyle Road West 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except Sun.
Entire length
Garrett Avenue West 9:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./1st Tuesday
of each month
from April 1 to
December 1
From Lancaster Avenue
to Conestoga Road
Hawthorne
Lane
Both 8:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m., except
Sat., Sun. and
holidays
From Lancaster Avenue
to Buckingham Drive
Lantoga Road East 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except Sun.
and holidays
Entire length
§ 270-29 RADNOR CODE § 270-29
C:874
Name of
Street Side Hours/Days Location
Meadowood
Road
Both 6:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except Sun.
and holidays
From Ithan Avenue to
Brooklea Road
Midland Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./school days
only
From the westerly
curbline of Aberdeen
Avenue to a point 277
feet westerly thereof
Miller Street South 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
From Landover Road for
a distance of 129 feet,
except 20 feet opposite
the driveway for 204
Landover Road
Oak Lane East 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except Sun.
and holidays
From Walnut Avenue to
Beechtree Lane
Windermere
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./school days
only
From a point 173 feet
from the center line of
South Aberdeen Avenue
to a point 115 feet west
thereof
§ 270-30. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon
any of the streets or parts of the streets described below between the hours
specified for longer than the time indicated.
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Aberdeen
Avenue
East 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except Sun.
From Lancaster Avenue
to St. Davids Road
Banbury Way East 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except Sun.
and holidays
Entire length
Bellevue Avenue West 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sat., Sun. and
holidays
From Lancaster Avenue
to West Avenue
Bloomingdale
Avenue
West 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
From Lancaster Avenue
to West Wayne Avenue
§ 270-29 CHARTER § 270-30
C:875
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Braxton Road East 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 2:00
p.m./Mon.
through Fri.
From North Black Friar
Road to County Line
Road
Chamounix
Road
[Repealed
9-8-2014 by
Ord. No.
2014-10]
Conestoga Road Both 30 minutes 900 Block of Conestoga
Road
County Line
Road
South 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
From Lowry's Lane to
Airdale Avenue
Creek Drive East 2 hours, except
Sat., Sun. and
holidays
From the Township line
to the exit drive of the
Township building
Cushman Road South 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sat., Sun. and
holidays
Entire length
Fairfield Lane South 2 hours; 6:00
a.m. to 12:00
p.m./Mon.
through Fri.,
except holidays
From 100 Fairfield Lane
to 118 Fairfield Lane
Gallagher Road
[Repealed
12-14-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-24]
Garrett Avenue West 2 hours From Lancaster Avenue
to Conestoga Road
Glenbrook
Avenue
[Repealed
5-23-2016 by
Ord. No.
2016-06]
§ 270-30 RADNOR CODE § 270-30
C:876
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Glenbrook
Avenue, 900
block [Added
3-12-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-03]
South 6:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m,., permit
parking only
From Beatrice Drive in a
westerly direction to
Charles Drive
Lenoir Avenue North 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sat., Sun. and
holidays
From a point 215 west of
the westerly curbline of
Bloomingdale Avenue to
a point 250 westerly
thereof
Lowry's Lane East 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 2:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
From the curbline of
Lancaster Avenue south
to 27 Lowry's Lane
Lowry's Lane West 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
From Lancaster Avenue
to County Line Road
Midland Avenue Both 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sat., Sun. and
holidays
From St. Davids Road to
Pembroke Avenue
Midland Avenue South 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sat., Sun. and
holidays
From Louella Avenue to
Aberdeen Avenue
Montrose
Avenue
West 4 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon.
through Fri.,
except holidays
Entire length
North Aberdeen
Avenue
West 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
From a point 220 feet
north of Lancaster
Avenue to the railroad
underpass
North Black
Friar Road
East 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 2:00
p.m./Mon.
through Fri.
From Lancaster Avenue
to Braxton Road
§ 270-30 CHARTER § 270-30
C:877
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
North Black
Friar Road
East 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 2:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.,
except Sat., Sun.
and holidays
From Lancaster Avenue
to Rodney Road
North Wayne
Avenue
West 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
From Poplar Avenue to
Walnut Avenue
Oak Lane West 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 p.m.,
except Sat., Sun.
and holidays
From Walnut Avenue to
the property line
between Nos. 306 and
310 Oak Lane
Overhill Road East/North 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sat., Sun. and
holidays
From West Avenue to
Eagle Road
Pembroke
Avenue
East 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sat., Sun. and
holidays
From Lancaster Avenue
to Midland Avenue
Pembroke
Avenue
West 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sat., Sun. and
holidays
From Lancaster Avenue
to Midland Avenue
Pennsylvania
Avenue
North 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except by
permit, Sun. and
holidays
From Poplar Avenue to
137 Pennsylvania Avenue
Plant Avenue North 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
p.m., except
Sat., Sun. and
holidays
From the intersection of
Pennsylvania Avenue and
Plant Avenue for 398 feet
in an easterly direction
Poplar Avenue Both 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except by
permit, Sun. and
holidays
From North Wayne
Avenue to Woodland
Avenue
§ 270-30 RADNOR CODE § 270-30
C:878
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Roberts Road West 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
From County Line Road
to Conestoga Road
Rodney Road South 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 2:00
p.m./Mon.
through Fri.
From North Black Friar
Road to Braxton Road
Runnymede
Avenue
South 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m.,
except Sat. and
Sun.
From metered area to
Lansdowne Avenue
South Wayne
Avenue
East 10 minute
parking
Beginning at a point 5
feet north of School Lane
ending 50 feet north for
a distance of 45 feet
Walnut Avenue Both 2 hours; 6:00
a.m. to 12:00
p.m., except
Sat., Sun. and
holidays
From Oak Lane to
Woodland Avenue
West Beechtree
Lane (100
block)
North 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
p.m., except Sat.
and Sun.
From 202 feet east of
North Bellevue Avenue to
a location directly
opposite the west line of
Merryville Park
Woodland
Avenue (100
block)
West 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
p.m./Mon.
through Fri.
From the northwest
corner of Woodland
Avenue at its intersection
with Plant Avenue
beginning 30 feet north
of the fire hydrant for a
distance of 115 feet
§ 270-31. Special purpose parking zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the same
to remain parked in any special purpose parking zone established below
except as specifically provided for such zone.
§ 270-30 CHARTER § 270-31
C:879
Name of
Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
Aberdeen
Avenue [Added
8-13-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-10]
West Handicapped
parking
In front of 250 North
Aberdeen Avenue on the
west side for 22 feet
along curbline
Bellevue Avenue
[Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
Space No. 33
Bellevue Avenue
[Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
Space No. 57
Brook Street South Handicapped
parking
Commencing five feet
west of the driveway to
714 Brook Street and
continuing for a distance
of 22 feet
Brook Street South Handicapped
parking
In front of 718 Brook
Street
Brook Street South Handicapped
parking
From PECO pole 3002
for a distance of 22 feet
east toward Landover
Road
Callanan
Avenue [Added
10-12-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-15]
East Handicapped
parking
In front of 217 Callanan
Avenue
David Drive
[Amended
5-11-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-05]
South Handicapped
parking
Commencing 211 feet
from Roberts Road in the
easterly direction on the
south side of David Drive
Dreer Lane
[Added
1-12-2015 by
Ord. No.
2014-20]
North Handicapped
parking
Commencing 78 feet
from Williams Road in a
westerly direction on the
north side of Dreer Lane
continuing for a distance
of 22 feet
§ 270-31 RADNOR CODE § 270-31
C:880
Name of
Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
Eachus Avenue
[Added
3-9-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-02]
West Handicapped
parking
Commencing 40 feet
from Meredith Avenue in
a north direction on the
west side of Eachus
Avenue continuing for a
distance of 22 feet
East Lancaster
Avenue [Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
108 East Lancaster
Avenue, Space No. 591
East Lancaster
Avenue [Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
163 East Lancaster
Avenue, Space No. 538
Farm Road
[Repealed
10-12-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-14]
Garrett Avenue West Handicapped
parking
Commencing 494 feet
south of East Lancaster
Avenue to the address of
40/42 Garrett Avenue
and continuing for a
distance of 42 feet
Garrett Avenue
[Amended
1-6-2014 by
Ord. No.
2013-17]
West Handicapped
parking
Commencing in front of
38 Garrett Avenue in a
southerly direction for a
distance of 18 feet
Garrett Avenue
[Added
7-17-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-10]
West Handicapped
parking
In front of 51 Garrett
Avenue
Glenbrook
Avenue
South Loading zone From the southerly
curbline of County Line
Road to a point 45 feet
westerly thereof
§ 270-31 CHARTER § 270-31
C:881
Name of
Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
Glenbrook
Avenue
South Handicapped
parking
Glenbrook Avenue
Municipal Parking Lot
(westerly space on the
north side, adjacent to
exit) at Meter No. 858
Glenbrook
Avenue
South Handicapped
parking
Commencing 254 feet
easterly from PECO pole
#2964 at the intersection
of Glenbrook Avenue and
Beatrice Drive extending
to meter space #GB24
and continuing for a
distance of 22 feet
Glenbrook
Avenue
[Repealed
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Glenbrook Lot
[Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
Space No. 769
Glenbrook
Avenue [Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
Space No. 772
Glenbrook
Avenue [Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
Space No. 833
Highland
Avenue
West Handicapped
parking
80 feet from the
intersection of Church
Street in a southerly
direction
Louella Avenue East Handicapped
parking
Next to 314 Louella
Avenue
§ 270-31 RADNOR CODE § 270-31
C:882
Name of
Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
Louella Lot
[Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
Space No. 430
Lowrys Lane East Handicapped
parking
Commencing 55.11 feet
south of the Lowrys-
Meredith intersection
(beginning of 205 Lowrys
property line) and
continue for a distance of
22 feet (end of 205
Lowrys property line)
Meredith
Avenue
South Handicapped
parking
Commencing two feet
west from the driveway
of 190 Meredith Avenue
and continuing for a
distance of 18 feet
Meredith
Avenue
West Loading zone;
6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./12 hour time
limit/Mon.
through Sat.
On Meredith Avenue 30
feet north to Conestoga
Road for a distance of 30
feet for use by 827
Conestoga Road
Moore Avenue North Handicapped
parking
723 Moore Avenue, 324
feet west of Landover
Road, for a length of 20
feet
North Wayne
Avenue [Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
128 North Wayne
Avenue, Space No. 202
North Wayne
Lot [Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
Space No. 261
North Wayne
Lot [Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
Space No. 285
§ 270-31 CHARTER § 270-31
C:883
Name of
Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
North Wayne
Lot [Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
Space No. 286
North Wayne
Lot [Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
Space No. 287
Owens Lane West Handicapped
parking
A length of 20 feet,
commencing 26 feet
south of West Wayne
Avenue
Poplar Avenue North Handicapped
parking
In front of 129 Poplar
Avenue on the north side
commencing at a point of
220 feet west of
Woodland Avenue
Rockingham
Road [Added
2-13-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-02]
West Handicapped
parking
Commencing 218
Rockingham Road, 183
feet south of Conestoga
Road, for a length of 20
feet
South Lowry's
Lane
[Repealed
2-13-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-01]
South Wayne
Lot [Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
Space No. 700
Station Road
[Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-08]
Handicapped
parking
North Wayne Lot Spaces
321 and 322
§ 270-31 RADNOR CODE § 270-31
C:884
Name of
Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
West Avenue
[Repealed
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
West Avenue
[Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
Space No. 260
West Lancaster
Avenue [Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
123 West Lancaster
Avenue, Space No. 123
West Wayne
Avenue
[Repealed
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
West Wayne
Avenue
North Handicapped
parking
For a length of 20 feet
commencing 124 feet
from South Wayne
Avenue
West Wayne
Avenue
Northeast Handicapped
parking
Parking lot of Radnor
Memorial Library, 114
West Wayne Avenue, 1st
two parking spaces on
northeast side of parking
lot
West Wayne
Avenue [Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
Space No. 598
West Wayne
Avenue [Added
7-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-07]
Handicapped
parking
Space No. 649
Williams Road East Handicapped
parking
225 Williams Road
§ 270-31 CHARTER § 270-31
C:885
Name of
Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
Williams Road East Handicapped
parking
257 Williams Road, 100
feet north of Dreer Lane,
for a length of 20 feet
§ 270-32. Obstruction prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether
principal or agent, to obstruct by vehicles or otherwise any driveway,
alleyway, passageway or other way of any kind in any of the following
specific locations below. Any vehicle so found in any fire lane posted as
a tow-away zone may be removed or caused to be removed to a nearby
garage or other place of safety by any police officer or the Fire Marshal.
Type of Way Location
Academy of Notre
Dame DeNamur 560
Sproul Road
Parking shall be prohibited on both sides of the
driveway from the south entrance pillars off
Sproul Road for a distance of 507 feet to the
south side of the parking area in front of
Alumnae Hall on both sides of the driveway
from the north side of the parking area in front
of Alumnae Hall for a distance of 980 feet to
the north exit pillars off Sproul Road and on
both sides of the connector driveway from the
main entrance driveway off Sproul Road for a
distance of 448 feet to the circle in front of the
Harron Family Building
Aisle Villanova
University Chapel
Drive
Easterly side, from Lancaster Avenue to the
Philadelphia and Western Railroad Station at
Villanova for a distance of 244 feet and on the
westerly side of said aisle for a distance of 312
feet
All driveways 30 West Avenue, Wayne, Pennsylvania
All driveways Rosemont Plaza, 1062 Lancaster Avenue,
Rosemont, Pennsylvania
All driveways The Sheldrake Arms, 517 Lancaster Avenue,
St. Davids, Pennsylvania
Alleyway Leading from Louella Avenue between
Lancaster Avenue and School Lane to a point
in the rear of 180-186 East Lancaster Avenue
Alleyway Between 119 and 121 North Wayne Avenue for
a distance of 10 feet on both sides
Anthony Wayne
Theater (front)
Lancaster Avenue, Wayne, Pennsylvania
§ 270-31 RADNOR CODE § 270-32
C:886
Type of Way Location
Around a circular
area
The Radwyn Apartment property, located at the
rear of Building F and in front of Building E,
the circle being located 255 feet east from the
center of Radwyn Drive
Cheswick Road
(Rosemont
Presbyterian Village)
Southeast side, from a point 448 feet from the
entrance extending to a point 523 feet from the
entrance
Driveway 130 West Lancaster Avenue, from the east end
of the building for a distance of 75 feet on both
the north and south sides of the driveway
Driveway Both sides, the Wessex House Apartments
situated at 505 East Lancaster Avenue, Wayne,
Pennsylvania, starting at the curb of Lancaster
Avenue for a distance of 700 feet going south,
then west and then north
Driveway South side, the main entrance to the Agnes
Irwin School from the curb of South Ithan
Avenue for a distance of 130 feet east, 90 feet
north, 90 feet east and 80 feet south, and on
the north side of the driveway for a distance of
175 feet east from the parking area to the end
of the driveway
Driveway The Home Properties of Bryn Mawr, as follows,
both sides between Apartments E and F at 108
Charles Drive, for a distance of 80 feet more or
less from Charles Drive northwardly to the
parking area
Driveway The Home Properties of Bryn Mawr, as follows,
both sides between Apartments E and F at 200
Charles Drive, for a distance of 80 feet more or
less from Charles Drive southwardly to the
parking area
Driveway The Home Properties of Bryn Mawr, as follows,
both sides on the northerly side of 201 David
Drive, for a distance of 200 feet more or less
from David Drive eastwardly to the garage
area
Driveway The Home Properties of Bryn Mawr, as follows,
both sides on the southerly side of 201 David
Drive, for a distance of 200 feet more or less
from David Drive eastwardly
§ 270-32 CHARTER § 270-32
C:887
Type of Way Location
Driveway The Home Properties of Bryn Mawr, as follows,
both sides between Apartments E and F at 204
Charles Drive, for a distance of 80 feet more or
less from Charles Drive southwardly to the
parking area
Driveway The Home Properties of Bryn Mawr, as follows,
both sides existing between Apartments A and
J at 204 David Drive, for a distance of 80 feet
more or less from David Drive northwardly to
the parking area
Driveway West side, known as Centennial Road and/or
Cowan's Alley, running from Pennsylvania
Avenue to Plant Avenue
Driveway Rear of 207-F David Drive, the west end of
garage driveway
Driveway Throughout the Delmont Village Developments
Driveway East and west side, 139 East Lancaster
Avenue, Wayne, and beginning from the north
curb of East Lancaster Avenue for 248 feet
Driveway Fronting the Shopping Center, being premises
Nos. 309-323 East Lancaster Avenue, Wayne,
Pennsylvania
Driveway Both sides, between 771 and 773 East
Lancaster Avenue, Villanova, Pennsylvania, for
a distance of 130 feet
Driveway At the second easterly driveway of 1030 East
Lancaster Avenue, Rosemont, leading to rear
parking lot by office suites, beginning from the
end of the north wing of the complex for a
distance of 41 feet at which point Fire Marshal
Zone will begin and extend to 77 feet of
parking area on west side of driveway
Driveway South side, Good Counsel Hall (girl's
dormitory) at Villanova University, from the
curb on South Ithan Avenue for a distance of
463 feet
Driveway Both sides, in front of buildings S and T at the
La Maison Apartments, for a distance of 220
feet
Driveway or alleyway Extending northwardly from Lancaster Avenue
between 191 and 193 East Lancaster Avenue,
being the Neighborhood League Shop and
Cowan's Flower Shop
§ 270-32 RADNOR CODE § 270-32
C:888
Type of Way Location
Driveway East side of Liberty Lane, between 403 and
409 West Wayne Avenue from the curb on West
Wayne Avenue to a point 90 feet north thereof
Driveway or alleyway Extending eastwardly from Louella Drive east
between 1 and 3 on the east side of Louella
Drive
Driveway or alleyway Extending westwardly from North Wayne
Avenue to a point 100 feet south of the
southerly curbline of West Avenue
Driveway Philadelphia and Western Railroad, North side
of Aldwyn Lane and from the continuation of
Aldwyn Lane on the east side of the driveway
for a distance of 134 feet
Driveway The Radcliff House Apartments, Bryn Mawr,
Pennsylvania, on the northerly side in front of
Building A (Conestoga Road side) for a
distance of 560 feet measured from the
northeasterly corner of said building
Driveway The Radcliff House Apartments, Bryn Mawr,
Pennsylvania, on the southerly side in front of
Building B (B. and W. side) for a distance of
544 feet from the southeast corner of said
building
Driveway The Radcliff House Apartments, Bryn Mawr,
Pennsylvania, on the easterly side in front of
Building C (Roberts Road side) for a distance
of 325 feet from the northeasterly corner of
said building
Driveway The Radnor Crossing Apartments, both sides,
for a distance of 690 feet from the center of
Iven Avenue going west, then north and then
east, for a distance of 490 feet
Driveway (expansion
driveway)
Radnor High School expansion driveway, 130
King of Prussia Road, which shall be along the
south side for a distance of 407 feet beginning
at the driveway entrance from the access road
and proceeding west to the end of the
driveway, and along the west side for a
distance of 25 feet, beginning at a right angle
at the west end of the driveway and proceeding
north to the sidewalk
§ 270-32 CHARTER § 270-32
C:889
Type of Way Location
Driveway
(maintenance area)
On the north side of Radnor High School, 130
King of Prussia Road, which shall cover a
distance of 254 feet beginning at the driveway
entrance from Raider Road and proceeding
east to the end of the driveway
Driveway Inside perimeter, Radnor Township School
District starting on Windermere Avenue and
continuing around the student commons for a
distance of 372 feet to South Wayne Avenue
Driveway Off Raider Road, leading to the shops and
boiler area, both sides
Driveway St. Davids Park Condominium, south side, from
the intersection of Chelmsford Drive and the
garage driveway to a point 92 feet west thereof
Driveway In front of private fire hydrant on southeast
corner of 116 St. Davids Park Condominium in
St. Davids Apartments
Driveway In front of private fire hydrant on southwest
corner of Building No. 4 in St. Davids
Apartments
Driveway North side, Stanford Hall (men's dormitory) at
Villanova University, from the curb on South
Ithan Avenue for a distance of 604 feet
Driveway Starbucks Coffee, 218 East Lancaster Avenue,
on the east side for a distance of 130 feet
beginning at the street entrance to Starbucks
Coffee and proceeding south along the exterior
wall of the Sign Studios, 226 East Lancaster
Avenue, and on the west side for a distance of
80 feet beginning at the front entrance door of
Starbucks Coffee and proceeding south to the
rear entrance door of Starbucks Coffee
Fire lane (15 feet
wide)
Around the entire perimeter of the building at
1022 East Lancaster Avenue, Rosemont
Fire lane (15 feet
wide)
The entire length of the north side of the
Wayne I.A.C. building at 301 West Wayne
Avenue, Wayne
Fire lane (25 feet
wide)
20 feet from the curb, abutting parking slots in
front of 367-385 West Lancaster Avenue in the
Strafford Shopping Center
Fire lane The parking lots serving Buildings H and J, J
and K, and K and L at the Radwyn Apartment
Property
§ 270-32 RADNOR CODE § 270-32
C:890
Type of Way Location
Fire lane 236 East Lancaster Avenue, from the East
Lancaster Avenue sidewalk commencing south
for 100 feet to the rear of the building
Fire Lane 219 Sugartown Road, Club La Maison from
Morris Road to a point 500 feet south along
frontage of building
Front Driveway North and south sides, the Brookdale
Apartments, 420 Morris Road
Garage Driveway St. Davids Park Condominium, north side, from
the exterior wall to a point 128 feet east
thereof
In front of Building D The Radwyn Apartment property, for a distance
of 25 feet in a northerly direction therefrom
In front of the
property
771 East Lancaster Avenue, Villanova,
Pennsylvania for a distance of 108 feet (Girard
Trust Company)
Lancaster County
Farmers Market
Building
Beginning at the southwest corner of the
Lancaster County Farmers Market Building No.
393 West Lancaster Avenue, Strafford, and
proceeding in an easterly direction for a
distance of 28 feet and terminating at the west
end of the truck load/unload platform area.
(From this point the truck load/unload platform
area encompasses a distance of 80 feet from
east to west on the south side of the building.)
Thence from the east end of the truck load/
unload area and proceeding in an easterly
direction for 213 feet
Mansion House
Apartments (rear)
Charles Drive in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania from
the corner of the building to a point 75 feet
west thereof
North side of
Building K (La
Maison Apartments)
In a southeasterly direction for a distance of 84
feet
North side of 201
King of Prussia Road
201 King of Prussia Road, Radnor, starting at
the west corner for a distance of 280 feet east,
thence 100 feet south, thence 156 feet east
Parking lot aisle Good Counsel Hall (Villanova University), for a
distance of 272 feet and 24 feet in width
Parking lot aisle Stanford Hall (Villanova University), for a
distance of 272 feet and 24 feet in width
§ 270-32 CHARTER § 270-32
C:891
Type of Way Location
Passageway Between properties 167 West Lancaster
Avenue and 169 West Lancaster Avenue; and in
the rear of properties 163, 165 and 167 West
Lancaster Avenue
Private alleyway Existing at the rear of stores numbered 815 to
829 inclusive, situate on the northerly side of
Lancaster Avenue in Villanova
Private driveway 101 Charles Drive, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania,
on the north side of the driveway from the curb
of Charles Drive to a point 100 feet east
thereof
Private driveway 595 East Lancaster Avenue, east side, for a
distance of 120 feet
Private driveway From the northwest point where Kromer Road
meets the Township property located at 235
East Lancaster Avenue westerly for a distance
of 60 feet along the Township property line
Private driveway East and west side, located approximately 300
feet east of the intersection of Lancaster
Avenue and North Spring Mill Road and
running from Lancaster Avenue to North
Spring Mill Road
Private driveways St. Mary's Hall, Villanova University
Private driveway The south side of the Radnor Hotel, St. Davids,
Pennsylvania, for a distance of 358 feet
Private driveway The west side of the Radnor Hotel, St. Davids,
Pennsylvania, for a distance of 128 feet
Private driveway From the northwest corner of 225 Radnor
Street south for a distance of 63 feet along the
east side of Brook Street
Private road West side of Radnor Street for a distance of 75
feet north from front property line of No. 225
Regency Apartments Around the inside and outside perimeter of all
islands except for a twenty-foot section along
the south side of the south island and the
indented parking areas; along the north, east,
south and west outer curbs of the drive circling
the building, except the indented parking
areas; around the inside perimeter of curbs of
said drive
§ 270-32 RADNOR CODE § 270-32
C:892
Type of Way Location
Regency Apartments Beginning at the north center point of the
north island and proceeding in an easterly
direction, partially along the concrete curb for
70 feet
Regency Apartments Beginning at a point 100 feet from the north
center point of the north island in an easterly
and southerly direction 150 feet
Regency Apartments Beginning at a point 164 feet from the last
point south along the existing concrete curb
and proceeding along the curb 180 feet
southwest and north to a point
Regency Apartments Beginning at the north center point of the
north island and proceeding in a westerly
direction partially along the concrete curb for
74 feet
Regency Apartments Beginning at a point 134 feet from the north
center point of the north island west and
proceeding along the concrete curb 350 feet
west, south and east to a point
St. Davids Square
550 East Lancaster
Avenue
Building A (10,000 square feet), along the
curbline on the south side of the building for a
distance of 120 feet
St. Davids Square
550 East Lancaster
Avenue
Building B (formerly B. Altman), along the
curbline on the east side of the building for a
distance of 260 feet
St. Davids Square
550 East Lancaster
Avenue
Building B (formerly B. Altman), along the
curbline on the north side of building for a
distance of 460 feet
St. Davids Square
550 East Lancaster
Avenue
Building B (formerly B. Altman), along the
curbline on the south side of the building for a
distance of 460 feet
St. Davids Square
550 East Lancaster
Avenue
Building C (50,000 square feet), along the
curbline on the east side of the building for a
distance of 40 feet
St. Davids Square
550 East Lancaster
Avenue
Building C (50,000 square feet), along the
curbline on the north side of the building for a
distance of 250 feet
St. Davids Square
550 East Lancaster
Avenue
Building C (50,000 square feet), along the
curbline on the south side of the building for a
distance of 210 feet
St. Davids Square
550 East Lancaster
Avenue
Building C (50,000 square feet), along the
curbline on the west side of the building for a
distance of 250 feet
§ 270-32 CHARTER § 270-32
C:893
§ 270-33. (Reserved)
§ 270-34. Permit parking zones.
Type of Way Location
Station Road In front of 108 Station Road for a distance of
50 feet
Villanova University
parking lot
Situated on the south side of Lancaster Avenue
east of Ithan Avenue, except in the specific
areas marked on the surface of the parking lot
for parking motor vehicles
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether
principal or agent, to construct any fence, wall or otherwise block or
impede means of ingress or egress to the private property of another to
such an extent, in such a manner or for such a period of time as to
create a hazard or impair public safety.
A. Residential parking permit zones.
(1) Legislative purpose. It is the legislative purpose of the Board of
Commissioners to assist, when feasible, residents of the area of the
Township who suffer from vehicular congestion resulting from the
existence of limited numbers of curbside parking spaces and large
numbers of nonresidents competing with residents for curbside
parking spaces and/or from parking regulations designed to control
the flow of vehicles which ultimately work a hardship on residents
of such areas. The adverse conditions include, but are not limited
to, hazardous traffic conditions, air pollution, excessive noise and
refuse, unreasonable burdens in gaining access to residences,
reduced traffic safety, reduced pedestrian safety, particularly for
children and senior citizens, reduced efficiency in the movement of
emergency vehicles and general reduction in the quality of life.
(2) As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKING PERMIT — Either a resident parking permit or a visitor
parking permit authorized by this section.
PERMIT PARKING DISTRICT — An area of the Township which
may also be described as along a specific street, which is zoned
predominantly developed for residential use, where curbside
parking either is prohibited or is limited to not more than two
consecutive hours by other provisions in this Code, from Monday
to Friday, except on legal holidays, which is designated as such a
district by an ordinance, and within which such parking restrictions
will be waived for vehicles properly displaying parking permits
authorized by this section.
§ 270-32 RADNOR CODE § 270-34
C:894
VEHICLE — An automobile, motorcycle, moped, van or jeep, but
does not mean a truck, trailer or camper.
(3) Designation of permit parking districts.
(a) The Board of Commissioners may, by ordinance, designate
permit parking districts when it determines that residents of
the proposed permit parking district are adversely affected by
entry into the area and curbside parking by nonresidents in
vehicles and/or by parking regulations in effect which are
designed to control use of curbside parking, but which work a
hardship on area residents, after taking into consideration the
following:
[1] The difficulty or inability experienced by residents of the
proposed permit parking district in obtaining curbside
parking reasonably accessible to their residences;
[2] The likelihood of alleviating such conditions by the use of
the permit parking system established by this section;
[3] The desire of the residents of the proposed parking permit
district for the institution of a permit parking system and
willingness of those residents to bear the costs incidental
to the issuance of parking permits and administration of
the permit parking system authorized by this section; and
[4] The desirability of establishing a permit parking district in
view of the proportion of actual residential use to other
uses in the proposed permit parking district.
(b) The following are hereby established as special permit parking
zones, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle except those displaying an official Radnor Township
"permit only" sticker which shall be issued by the Police
Department. Permits will be issued only to those persons who
can establish that they are full-time residents in a property
abutting the zone and that the property in which they reside
has no off-street parking.
Street Side Hours Location
Brook
Street
South 24 hours/
7 days
From Landover Road to
Radnor Street
Emlen
Tunnell
Park
Dusk to
6:00 a.m.
Entire length
Farm Road East 24 hours Commencing 48 feet
north of Lancaster
Avenue and continuing
for 504 feet until the end
of Farm Road
§ 270-34 CHARTER § 270-34
C:895
Street Side Hours Location
Garrett
Avenue
West 12:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
In front of 144 and 146
Garrett Avenue for a total
distance of 60 feet
Garrett
Avenue
West 24 hours From Lancaster Avenue
to Conestoga Road
Glenbrook
Avenue
South 6:00 p.m.
to 6:00
a.m.
From County Line Road
to Beatrice Drive
Glenbrook
Avenue Lot
24 hours Entire area
Louella
Avenue
[Added
1-6-2014
by Ord.
No.
2013-17]
Northeast 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.,
school
days only
From Midland Avenue to
Windermere Avenue
Louella
Court
East 24 hours Entire length
Louella
Park and
Walk
West 24 hours From Louella Avenue at
School Lane
Midland
Avenue
Both 24 hours From Louella Avenue to
Pembroke Avenue
Miller
Street
South 24 hours Entire length
Pennsylvania
Avenue
North 24 hours In front of properties
from Poplar Avenue to
137 Pennsylvania Avenue
Petrie
Avenue
East 24 hours From County Line Road
to Conestoga Road
Plant
Avenue
South 24 hours From 34 Plant Avenue to
Woodland Avenue
Poplar
Avenue
Southeast 24 hours From North Wayne
Avenue to Woodland
Avenue
Runnymede
Avenue
[Repealed
1-6-2014
by Ord.
No.
2013-17]
§ 270-34 RADNOR CODE § 270-34
C:896
(4) Posting of signs. Upon designation by the Board of a permit parking
district, the Township Public Works Department shall erect signs
giving notice of the restrictions.
(5) Issuance of resident parking permits.
(a) Subject to the provision of Subsections A(5)(b), (c), (d) and (e)
of this section, the Police Department shall issue to an
applicant who has submitted a permit fee of $10 and a
completed permit application form one or two parking permits
for up to two vehicles described in the application, provided
that the applicant establishes that his off-street parking space
is inadequate for such vehicles. If the applicant's property has
a driveway, that permit shall be issued only for the second
vehicle registered at that address.
(b) Except as provided in Subsection A(5)(e) of this section, no
resident parking permit shall be issued for a vehicle unless its
owner (or joint owners) and one of its principal operators
resides within the permit parking district for which the permit
is sought and the residence is in compliance with the singlefamily
provision of Chapter 280, Zoning.
(c) Except as provided in Subsection A(5)(e) of this section, a
resident parking permit shall be issued only to an owner (or
joint owners) who is also one of the principal operators of the
applicable vehicle.
(d) Except as provided in Subsection A(5)(e) of this section, a
resident parking permit shall be issued only for a vehicle which
is registered to the home address of the applicant within the
permit parking district.
(e) The provisions of Subsections A(5)(b),(c) and (d) of this section
may be waived when an applicant establishes to the
satisfaction of the Police Department that he or she is a
resident of the permit parking district for which a permit is
sought, that he or she is the principal operator of the motor
vehicle for which a permit is sought and that the vehicle is
either a leased vehicle or company car supplied to the
applicant by his or her employer for general use.
(f) Each residential parking permit shall expire on December 31 of
the year in which it was issued, unless renewed as set forth
below.
(6) Renewal of residential parking permits. Upon submission by the
holder of a resident parking permit of a renewal fee of $10 and a
completed renewal application on or before the expiration date of
the applicable permit, the Police Department shall issue a new
resident parking permit to the applicant.
§ 270-34 CHARTER § 270-34
C:897
(7) Transfer of resident parking permits.
(a) Upon submission by the holder of a resident parking permit of
a transfer fee of $10 or $5 if the application is filed after June
30 in any year, and a permit transfer application, the Police
Department shall issue a transferee who qualifies as a holder
of such permit a new resident parking permit for the same
vehicle.
(b) The transfer of a resident parking permit shall not affect its
expiration date.
(8) Issuance of visitors' parking permits.
(a) Upon application of a resident of a permit parking district and
submission of a fee of $5, the Police Department shall issue to
the applicant a visitor's parking permit valid for a period not
exceeding 90 days for use by bona fide guests of the applicant
or by a person doing business with the applicant at his
residence, provided that the applicant establishes that his offstreet
parking space is inadequate for such vehicle.
(b) No more than two visitors' parking permits shall be issued to
any one household at any one time, provided that the applicant
provides satisfactory proof of sufficient frontage of his
property on a public street to accommodate the vehicles
permitted.
(9) Use of resident parking permits and visitors' parking permits.
(a) All parking permits shall be placed on the back of the inside
rear view mirror of the vehicle or displayed in or on vehicles in
such a manner as may be prescribed by the Police Department.
(b) A parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve a parking
space within a permit parking district. A parking permit shall
not authorize the standing or parking of any vehicle in any
place (such as next to fire hydrants) where the stopping or
parking of vehicles is set aside for specific types of vehicles. A
parking permit shall not excuse the nonobservance of any
traffic regulation other than a general parking prohibition or a
two-hour maximum parking limit, as applicable, then in force
in the permit parking district.
(c) Until its expiration, surrender or revocation, a parking permit
shall remain valid for such time as the holder continues to
reside within the same permit parking district.
(d) Whenever the holder of a parking permit or the vehicle for
which the permit was issued no longer fulfills one or more of
the applicable provisions of this section, the holder shall
surrender the parking permit in the manner prescribed by the
§ 270-34 RADNOR CODE § 270-34
C:898
§ 270-35. Kiosk parking areas.
The following parking areas shall be regulated by kiosks;
Lot
Number of
Spaces Location
Hours in
Operation
Bellevue Park and
Walk
102 60 West Avenue
north of Lancaster
Avenue
24 hours
South Wayne Lot 65 South Wayne Avenue 24 hours
Waynewood
Avenue/Louella Lot
80 Waynewood Avenue/
Louella Avenue
24 hours
§ 270-36. Parking restricted in parks.
Police Department. There will be no refunds of any portion of a
fee previously paid.
(e) A parking permit shall be valid only in the permit parking
district for which it is issued.
(f) The person to whom a parking permit is issued shall be
responsible for the use or misuse of any parking permit issued
to such person.
(10) Exemption for the physically disabled. The provisions of this
section shall in no way supersede the provisions of any present or
future provisions of the Township Code relating to parking by
physically disabled persons.
(11) Rules and regulations.
(a) The Police Department shall promulgate rules and regulations
relating to the implementation and enforcement of the
provisions of this section.
(b) When promulgating rules and regulations, the Police
Department shall make every reasonable effort to devise
methods to preserve the integrity of the permit parking
system.
(12) Violations and penalties. Any person violating any provision of this
section shall be subject to revocation of his or her permit and, upon
summary conviction, be fined $15 for each violation, together with
the costs of prosecution. If the fine is paid voluntarily within five
days of the violation, then no costs shall be charged. The amount of
any fine paid within five days shall be reduced to $15, plus costs.
A. Parking is hereby prohibited in the following Township parks between
dusk and dawn, any day.
§ 270-34 CHARTER § 270-36
C:899
§ 270-37. Vehicles prohibited in parks.
All vehicles shall be prohibited, at all times, in the following Township parks,
except those authorized vehicles with written permission of the Department
of Public Works.
Park
(Reserved)
§ 270-38. Parking violations and penalties.
Park
Clem Macrone Park
Fenimore Woods
Friends of Radnor Trail Park
Harford Park
Ithan Valley Park
James C. Dittmar Park
John L. Cappelli Driving Range
North Wayne Park
Odorisio Park
Radnor Memorial Park
Radnor Trail
Saw Mill Park
Skunk Hollow Park
Warren Fillipone Memorial Park
Willows Park
B. Parking is hereby restricted from dusk to 6:00 a.m. in the following
Township parks, except for those vehicles displaying valid permit
parking stickers.
Park
Bishop Richard Allen Park
Cowan Park
Emlen Tunnell Park
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than that specified for
violation of said section.
B. Parking meter violations.
(1) Expired meter: $20.
§ 270-36 RADNOR CODE § 270-38
C:900
(2) Parked over line at meter: $20.
(3) Backed into meter space: $20.
(4) Beyond time limit (meter feeding): $20.
C. Other parking violations. All violations are payable within five days.
Coins are not accepted.
(1) Overtime parking: $20.
(2) Where signs prohibit parking: $15.
(3) In front of private drive: $10.
(4) On a crosswalk: $10.
(5) Double parking: $10.
(6) Not parallel with curb: $10.
(7) Facing against traffic movement: $10.
(8) On a sidewalk: $10.
(9) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant: $10.
(10)Within 25 feet of a street intersection: $10.
(11) Parked during snow removal: $10.
(12) Obstructing traffic: $10.
(13) Handicapped parking: $150.
(14) Other parking violation: $10.
(15) Violation of Fire Marshal ordinance (parking): $25.
D. Payment procedure. Any person who receives notice of a violation
under Subsection B or C shall pay the penalty imposed for such
violation within five days after the date of such notice. Payment for
violations shall be made by mailing the ticket along with a check or
money order in the amount specified on the ticket or payment may be
made at the Radnor Township Municipal Building.
E. Late fee procedure. If Radnor Township has not received payment for a
violation within five days after the date of violation, a late fee of $20 in
addition to the fine will be assessed. Failure to pay this fine and/or late
fee within 30 days of the violation will result in issuance of a summons
and prosecution before a District Justice.
F. Procedure to contest violation. Any person who wishes to contest a
violation under this article shall contact the Office of the District
Justice.
§ 270-38 CHARTER § 270-38
C:901
G. A notice of violation of any provision of this article shall be placed on
the vehicle parked in violation, such a notice to contain instructions to
the owner or operator of such vehicle that, if he shall report to the
Police Department of the Township of Radnor and pay the penalty
imposed for violation within five days after the time of such notice, or if
he shall place such sum within the envelope provided and mail it to the
Township within such time limit, the same shall save the violator from
prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs above.
§ 270-38 RADNOR CODE § 270-38
C:902
ARTICLE IV
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 270-39. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code
and gives authority to the Township to remove and impound vehicles that
are parked overtime on any street in the Township, or in metered and
unmetered parking lots in the Township, in violation of any provision of this
chapter.
§ 270-40. Authority to remove and impound.
The Township shall have authority to remove and impound or to order
the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 270-39 of this article and can provide that no such
vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article.
§ 270-41. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designed from time to time by
the Board of Commissioners that are bonded or have acquired liability
insurance in an amount satisfactory to the Board of Commissioners as
sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or
damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper for the
purpose of towing or storage.
§ 270-42. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed shall
be sent by the Township to the owner of record of the vehicle. The notice
shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason
for its removal and impounding and the garage in which it was impounded.
§ 270-43. Effect of payment of towing and storage fees.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice. Payment
of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 270-39 CHARTER § 270-44
C:903
§ 270-44. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded
under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to
the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 270-45. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 270-44 RADNOR CODE § 270-45
C:904
ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 270-46. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of
snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named pursuant to this article,
the Police Superintendent, in his discretion, may declare a snow and ice
emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency"). Information
on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the Township
through radio, newspaper or other available media, and information on the
termination of the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 270-47. Parking and driving restrictions.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 270-48. Snow emergency routes.
The streets or parts of streets described below are hereby designated as
snow emergency routes.
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 270-49. Snow emergency violations and penalties.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on a snow emergency route designated pursuant to this
article; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under this
article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle to
remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency route, that person
shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable as provided in § 270-38 of this chapter.
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under this
article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow emergency
route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires or chains,
that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and, upon
conviction, shall be punishable as provided in § 270-58 of this chapter.
§ 270-46 CHARTER § 270-49
C:905

ARTICLE VI
Parking Meters
§ 270-50. Designation of parking spaces.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to provide for the marking off
of individual parking spaces in the parking zones designated and described
in § 270-57, said parking spaces to be designated by lines painted or marked
on the curbing or surface of the highway. At each space so marked off, it
shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that said vehicle shall
not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated.
§ 270-51. Operation of meters.
When any vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to which a parking
meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this article, the
operator shall, upon entering the said parking space, immediately deposit
or cause to be deposited such coin or coins of the United States as is
required for such parking meter and as designated by proper instructions
on the parking meter, and failure to deposit such coin or coins shall
constitute a breach of this article and shall subject each person to the
penalty prescribed in § 270-58 hereof. Upon the deposit of such coin or
coins and placing said meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully
occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking time which has
been prescribed for the part of the highway in which said parking space is
located, and for which a coin or coins is or are deposited, as indicated, on
the parking meter. If said vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking
space beyond the parking time limit so fixed for such parking space, the
parking meter shall, by its violation signal, dial or pointer, indicate such
illegal parking, and in that event, such vehicle shall be considered as parked
overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time. The parking of a
vehicle overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time in any such part
of a highway where any such parking meter is located shall be a violation of
this article and punishable as hereinafter set forth.
§ 270-52. Manner of parking.
A. When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the
adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space
shall be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be
nearest to the parking meter; provided, however, that where double
parking meters are installed upon one standard so as to serve as two
parking spaces, any vehicle parked in the space just beyond the parking
meters shall be parked so that the rear bumper of such vehicle shall be
nearest to the parking meter. When a parking space in any parking
meter zone is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in
such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part of such
vehicle nearest to such meter.
§ 270-50 CHARTER § 270-52
C:907
§ 270-53. Violations.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person:
§ 270-54. Report of violations; citations.
It shall be the duty of police officers of the Township of Radnor, and such
other persons as may be designated and authorized by the Superintendent
of Police, acting in accordance with instructions issued by the
Superintendent of Police, to report:
B. Where lines or markings are painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk,
highway and/or paved surface adjacent to each parking meter providing
for parking at an angle and not parallel or perpendicular to the curb, it
shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to cross the
center line of the highway to enter or leave said parking area.
A. To cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of
or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period
of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein
described, or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose
of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular
parking meter zone.
B. To permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space
adjacent to any parking meter while said meter is displaying a signal
indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already
been parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking space.
C. To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking meter space
or in such a position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the
area designated by such lines or markings.
D. To deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair
the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this article.
E. To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug,
device or metal substance or other substitute for lawful coins.
F. To park or permit the parking of any vehicle in any parking meter space
where the meter does not register lawful parking.
A. The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space and adjacent to such parking meter is or
has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
B. The state license number of such vehicle.
C. The length of time during which such vehicle is parked in violation of
any provisions of this article at the time of his inspection.
§ 270-52 RADNOR CODE § 270-54
C:908
§ 270-55. Collection of coins from meters.
It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Police to designate some proper
person or persons to make regular collections of the moneys deposited in
said meters.
§ 270-56. Suspension of provisions; erection of signs; tokens.
§ 270-57. Parking meter zones established.
D. Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to obtain a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
A. Temporary suspension of provisions. The provisions of this article may
be temporarily suspended by the Township Manager, and he may
prescribe temporarily such other rules and regulations as traffic
conditions may require.
B. Suspension of provisions on designated holidays. The use of parking
meters throughout the Township of Radnor be and the same is
dispensed with on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial
Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas.
C. Erection of signs. The Superintendent of Police is authorized to erect or
cause to be erected appropriate signs notifying the operators of motor
vehicles of the provisions of this section of this article.
D. Tokens. Where the use of coin or coins is required under the provisions
of this article, it shall be permissible to use such token for that use as
shall be designated and approved by the Township.
A. Parking meter zones are hereby established upon the highway or parts
of highways described below, and parking or standing a vehicle in any
parking meter space in such zones shall be lawful only upon deposit of
the amount required for each specified period of time and only when
not in excess of the maximum parking time indicated, on all days except
Sunday and holidays. Hours in operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Name of
Street Side Rate
Time
Limit Meters Location
Bryn Mawr
Avenue
West 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 6 West side of Bryn
Mawr Avenue near
County Line Road
1 US
Quarter per
15 minutes
15
minutes
1
§ 270-54 CHARTER § 270-57
C:909
Name of
Street Side Rate
Time
Limit Meters Location
Glenbrook
Avenue
South 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 35 From a point 109
feet west of the
southerly curbline
at County Line
Road to curbline of
Beatrice Drive
1 US
Quarter per
15 minutes
15
minutes
2
Glenbrook
Avenue Lot
South 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
10
hours
34 From Glenbrook
Avenue
1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 19
Lancaster
Avenue
North 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 28 From the easterly
curbline of
Waynewood
Avenue to a point
490 feet westerly
thereof
Lancaster
Avenue
North 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 25 From the westerly
curbline of North
Wayne Avenue to a
point 582 feet
westerly thereof
Lancaster
Avenue
South 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 41 From South Wayne
Avenue to Louella
Avenue
Lancaster
Avenue
South 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 5 From the westerly
curbline of South
Wayne Avenue to a
point 110 feet
westerly thereof
Lancaster
Avenue
[Amended
6-15-2015
by Ord.
No.
2015-06]
South 1 US
Quarter per
15 minutes
15
minutes
7 From the south
side of Lancaster
Avenue, being
Meter Nos. 571,
572
§ 270-57 RADNOR CODE § 270-57
C:910
Name of
Street Side Rate
Time
Limit Meters Location
Louella
Avenue
West 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 8 From the
southerly curbline
of Lancaster
Avenue to a point
96 feet southerly
thereof
Louella
Court
East 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 7 From Lancaster
Avenue to Louella
Court
Louella
Court
West 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 7 From Louella
Court to Lancaster
Avenue
North
Wayne
Avenue
East 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 37 From a point 85
feet north of the
northerly curbline
of Lancaster
Avenue to a point
482 feet northerly
thereof
North
Wayne
Avenue
East 1 US
Quarter per
15 minutes
15
minutes
1 From a point 454
feet north of the
northerly curbline
of Lancaster
Avenue to a point
472 feet northerly
thereof
North
Wayne
Avenue
West 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 28 From a point 32
feet north of the
northerly curbline
of Lancaster
Avenue to a point
404 feet northerly
thereof
North
Wayne
Avenue
[Amended
1-6-2014
by Ord.
No.
2013-17]
West 1 US
Quarter per
15 minutes
15
minutes
2 From the west side
of North Wayne
Avenue, being
Meter Nos. NW45
and NW46
§ 270-57 CHARTER § 270-57
C:911
Name of
Street Side Rate
Time
Limit Meters Location
Runnymede
Avenue
South 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
10
hours
13 From the center
line of South
Wayne Avenue to a
point 376 feet
westerly thereof
South
Wayne
Avenue
East 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 4 From a point 239
feet south of the
center line of
School Lane to a
point 416 feet
southerly thereof
South
Wayne
Avenue
East 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 5 From a point 571
feet south of the
center line of
School Lane to a
point 667 feet
southerly thereof
South
Wayne
Avenue
West 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 4 From the
southerly curbline
of Lancaster
Avenue to a point
65 feet southerly
thereof
South
Wayne
Avenue
West 1 US
Quarter per
30 minutes
30
minutes
5 From the
southerly curbline
of West Wayne
Avenue to a point
166 feet southerly
thereof
West
Avenue
North 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 18 From a point 42
feet west of the
westerly curbline
of North Wayne
Avenue to a point
219 feet westerly
thereof
1 US
Quarter per
15 minutes
15
minutes
2
§ 270-57 RADNOR CODE § 270-57
C:912
Name of
Street Side Rate
Time
Limit Meters Location
West
Avenue
South 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 15 From a point 58
feet west of the
westerly curbline
of North Wayne
Avenue to a point
205 feet westerly
thereof
West
Avenue
South 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 6 From a point 205
feet west of the
westerly curbline
of North Wayne
Avenue to a point
223 feet westerly
thereof
West
Avenue
South 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 7 From a point 283
feet west of the
westerly curbline
of North Wayne
Avenue to a point
542 feet westerly
thereof
West
Avenue
South 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 2 From a point 542
feet west of the
westerly curbline
of North Wayne
Avenue to a point
589 feet westerly
thereof
West
Avenue
South 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
5 hours 8 From a point 649
feet west of the
westerly curbline
at North Wayne
Avenue to a point
937 feet westerly
thereof
West
Wayne
Avenue
North 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 4 From a point 47
feet west of the
westerly curbline
of South Wayne
Avenue to a point
85 feet therefrom
§ 270-57 CHARTER § 270-57
C:913
Name of
Street Side Rate
Time
Limit Meters Location
West
Wayne
Avenue
North 1 US
Quarter per
30 minutes
30
minutes
2 From a point 85
feet west of the
westerly curbline
of South Wayne
Avenue to a point
116 feet therefrom
West
Wayne
Avenue
North 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
10
hours
8 From a point 116
feet west of the
westerly curbline
of South Wayne
Avenue to a point
286 feet westerly
thereof
1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 6 286 feet westerly
thereof
West
Wayne
Avenue
South 1 US
Quarter per
30 minutes
30
minutes
4 From a point 78
feet west of the
westerly curbline
of South Wayne
Avenue to a point
180 feet westerly
thereof
West
Wayne
Avenue
South 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
2 hours 9 From a point 180
feet west of the
westerly curbline
of South Wayne
Avenue to a point
264 feet therefrom
West
Wayne
Avenue
South 1 US
Quarter per
one-half
hour
10
hours
26 From a point 264
feet west of the
westerly curbline
of South Wayne
Avenue to a point
1,126 feet
therefrom
B. Meter spaces for handicapped drivers. The parking meter zones
described below are set aside for the exclusive use of handicapped
drivers whose vehicles have an officially issued handicapped
registration and license plate. No other vehicles shall park in these
spaces. [Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-07]
§ 270-57 RADNOR CODE § 270-57
C:914
Meter No. Location
(Reserved)
C. Off-street parking meter areas are hereby established as described
below, and parking of a vehicle in such areas shall be subject to the
same provisions as for on-highway parking meter zones:
(1) Schedule 1.
Area Time Limit Location
No. 1 2 hours Between North Wayne and Waynewood
Avenue
No. 2 10 hours Between Waynewood Avenue and Louella
Court
No. 3 2 hours/5
hours/10
hours
On the west side of South Wayne Avenue
near Runnymede Avenue
No. 4 2 hours/10
hours
On the south side of Glenbrook Avenue at
the Philadelphia and Western Railroad
Station
No. 5 15 minutes/2
hours
On the south side of Bryn Mawr Avenue
near County Line Road
No. 6 10 hours Matsonford Road Lot from dead end to
entrance road of Archbishop Carroll
(2) Schedule 2.
Location Rate
Number
of Meters
Time
Allowed
Matsonford Road Lot
from dead-end to
entrance road of
Archbishop Carroll
1 US Quarter
per one-half
hour
78 10 hours
Municipal Lot No. 2 in
the rear of the Wayne
Presbyterian Church
1 US Quarter
per one-half
hour
43 2 hours
Municipal Lot No. 3
abuts No. 2 and Septa
parking
1 US Quarter
per one-half
hour
1 US Quarter
per one-half
hour
76
16
5 hours
10 hours
Municipal Lot No. 4,
access from Waynewood
Avenue and Louella
Court
1 US Quarter
per one-half
hour
44 10 hours
§ 270-57 CHARTER § 270-58
C:915
§ 270-58. Parking meter rates.
The charges for the zones established above shall be as follows:
A. In parking meter spaces with a time limit of 15 minutes, the charge
shall be $0.25 in the form of $0.25 for 15 minutes maximum.
B. In parking meter spaces with a time limit of two hours, the charge shall
be $0.25 in the form of $0.25 for each 30 minutes for two hours
maximum.
C. In parking meter spaces with a time limit of five hours, the charge shall
be $0.25 in the form of $0.25 for each 30 minutes for five hours
maximum.
D. In parking meter spaces with a time limit of 10 hours, the charge shall
be $0.25 in the form of $0.25 for each 30 minutes for 10 hours
maximum.
E. In parking meter spaces with a time limit of 30 minutes, the charge
shall be $0.25 in the form of $0.25 for 30 minutes maximum.
§ 270-58 RADNOR CODE § 270-58
C:916
ARTICLE VII
Pedestrian Regulations
§ 270-59. Pedestrians to obey traffic control signs.
At all locations in the Township where official traffic control signals are
installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestriancontrol
signals installed under § 270-60, shall obey the directions of those
traffic control signals, as follows:
§ 270-60. Pedestrian-control signal locations established.
A. Location:
Intersection
Conestoga Road at Garrett Avenue/Williams Road, east and west
County Line Road at East Lancaster Avenue
East Lancaster Avenue at County Line Road
Garrett Avenue at Conestoga Road
Haverford Road at Landover Road
King of Prussia Road at Matsonford Road
Matsonford Road at South Centennial Drive
North Wayne Avenue at Poplar Avenue
North Wayne Avenue at West Avenue/Station Road
150 Radnor Chester Road
Sproul Road at Clyde Road
Williams Road at Conestoga Road
B. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk.
C. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway.
D. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
A. At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
Intersection
Airdale Road at East Lancaster Avenue
Aldwyn Lane at East Lancaster Avenue
Bryn Mawr Avenue at County Line Road
Conestoga Road at West Wayne Avenue
County Line Road at Bryn Mawr Avenue, north and south
§ 270-59 CHARTER § 270-60
C:917
Intersection
County Line Road at Glenbrook Avenue
County Line Road at Lindsay Avenue
550/555 East Lancaster Avenue, east
East Lancaster Avenue at Airdale Road
East Lancaster Avenue at Chamounix Road/St. Davids Road
East Lancaster Avenue at Hillside Road
East Lancaster Avenue at King of Prussia Road
East Lancaster Avenue at Louella Avenue
East Lancaster Avenue at Lowry's Lane
East Lancaster Avenue at North Spring Mill Road/Aldwyn Lane
East Lancaster Avenue at North Ithan Avenue/South Ithan Avenue,
east and west
East Lancaster Avenue at Radnor Chester Road
East Lancaster Avenue at South Aberdeen Avenue/North Aberdeen
Avenue
East Lancaster Avenue at Villanova Chapel, east and west
Glenbrook Avenue at County Line Road
Glenbrook Avenue at Conestoga Road
Kenilworth Road at East Lancaster Avenue
King of Prussia Road at Radnor Chester Road
Lancaster Avenue at South Wayne Avenue/North Wayne Avenue
Lowry's Lane at East Lancaster Avenue
North Ithan Avenue at East Lancaster Avenue
North Spring Mill Road at East Lancaster Avenue
South Ithan Avenue at East Lancaster Avenue
Sugartown Road at Morris Road
West Lancaster Avenue at Banbury Way/Bloomingdale Avenue
West Lancaster Avenue at Conestoga Road/Eagle Road
West Lancaster Avenue at Old Eagle School Road/Sugartown Road
B. Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing "upraised hand" symbol
shall obey the directions of that signal, as follows:
(1) When facing a steady "upraised hand" symbol, a pedestrian shall
not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the
"walking person" symbol should proceed to a sidewalk or safety
zone while the "upraised hand" symbol is showing.
§ 270-60 RADNOR CODE § 270-60
C:918
§ 270-61. Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked
crosswalks restricted.
Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired
person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the following streets, at
the intersection with that street indicated:
Intersection
Bryn-Mawr Avenue at Mailin Road
Conestoga Road at Sproul Road
Eagle Road at Radnor Street Road
King of Prussia Road at Eagle Road/Pine Tree Road
Lancaster Avenue at Kenilworth Road
Lancaster Avenue at Villanova Center
North Wayne Avenue at Eagle Road
Sproul Road at East Lancaster Avenue
§ 270-62. Locations where pedestrians may cross only in crosswalk.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
(2) When facing a flashing "upraised hand" symbol, a pedestrian shall
not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but
any pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the
"walking person" symbol should proceed to a sidewalk or safety
zone.
C. Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of an "upraised hand"
symbol as indicated above, shall be guilty of an offense and a violation
of this article.
A. To cross any roadway in a business district within the Township, except
in a crosswalk.
B. To cross the roadway in any of the following portions of streets in the
Township, except in a crosswalk:
Location
Clyde Road at Drakes Drum Road/Arbor Place;
Conestoga Road at Brookside Avenue;
Conestoga Road at Macrone Park, east and west;
Conestoga Road at Meredith Avenue/Bailey Road, east and west;
Conestoga Road at Rockingham Road/Good Shepherd Terrace, east
and west;
Conestoga Road at South Devon Road;
§ 270-60 CHARTER § 270-62
C:919
Location
Conestoga Road at Summit Terrace;
1200 Eagle Road;
Cooper Road at Landover Road;
1001 Eagle Road;
East Lancaster Avenue at Louella Court;
290 King of Prussia Road;
King of Prussia Road at Glen Mary Road;
Landover Road at Coopertown Road;
Louella Avenue at Midland Avenue;
Louella Avenue at School Lane;
Louella Avenue at Windermere Avenue;
North Aberdeen Avenue at Aberdeen Terrace;
North Ithan Avenue at Villanova University Main Gate;
North Wayne Avenue at Walnut Avenue;
Radnor Chester Road at Chew Lane;
Rockingham Road at Dreer Lane;
Saw Mill Road at Saw Mill Park Entrance;
South Aberdeen Avenue at Midland Avenue; and
South Aberdeen Avenue at St. Davids Road/Windermere Avenue.
South Wayne Avenue at Runnymere Avenue;
South Wayne Avenue at West Wayne Avenue;
South Wayne Avenue at Windermere Avenue;
60 West Avenue;
South Wayne Avenue at School Lane;
419 West Wayne Avenue;
West Wayne Avenue at Arbordale Road;
West Wayne Avenue at Bloomingdale Avenue;
West Wayne Avenue at Crestview Road;
West Wayne Avenue at Donna Lane;
West Wayne Avenue at Dory Lane;
West Wayne Avenue at Highland Avenue;
Williams Road at Conestoga Road;
§ 270-62 RADNOR CODE § 270-63
C:920
§ 270-63. Penalty for violation.
Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$5, plus costs.
§ 270-63 CHARTER § 270-63
C:921

ARTICLE VIII
Traffic Calming Systems
§ 270-64. Intent.
The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines for the installation of
traffic calming systems on Township-owned roadways. Such systems shall
be specifically designed to reduce the speed, but not necessarily the volume
of motor vehicle traffic in residential areas, nor is their purpose to move
traffic to adjoining roadways. Traffic calming measures shall also consist of
enforcement and education activities by the Police Department.
§ 270-65. Definition.
For the purpose of this chapter, except as may otherwise be determined
under § 270-68L herein, "speed hump" shall be synonymous with "traffic
calming system" or "traffic calming measure." A speed hump shall be a
raised hump in the pavement extending across the width of the roadway at
a right angle to the direction of the flow of traffic.
§ 270-66. Policy.
It is the policy of the Township to install speed humps on streets in
accordance with the procedures and criteria listed in §§ 270-67 and 270-68
herein.
§ 270-67. Procedure.
Applicants may request that a study be conducted to construct speed humps
in a particular neighborhood. Requests shall be submitted in writing along
with a petition described below to the Superintendent of Police for
consideration at the next available meeting of the Staff Traffic Committee
(the "Committee"). Such requests shall be submitted a minimum of 30 days
before the Committee meeting at which they will be discussed.
A. Petition.
(1) All adult residents of the affected streets, pursuant to Subsection
A(2) below, must be contacted by the applicants and advised that
speed humps are being considered for their street.
(2) A signed petition must be submitted reflecting the support of a
minimum of 80% of the residents of households on the street on
which humps are proposed to be installed and a minimum of 60% of
the residents of households located on streets or cul-de-sacs whose
only access is via the street on which humps are proposed to be
installed.
(3) Only one adult signature per household, apartment, or business
will be considered on the petition.
§ 270-64 CHARTER § 270-68
C:923
§ 270-68. Criteria.
The following criteria shall be used to limit speed humps to areas where
they will be most effective and practical:
A. Speed humps will not be installed on state highways.
B. The legally posted speed limit on the street shall not exceed 25 miles
per hour (mph).
C. The average daily traffic (ADT) shall not be less than 1,000 vehicles per
day which shall be determined by a seven-day automated traffic count
conducted by the Department's Traffic Safety Unit. Manual counts may
be instituted at the Department's discretion.
D. The average vehicle speed (based upon the 85th percentile of the
speeds recorded during the traffic count) shall not be less than 10 mph
over the legally posted speed limit, which shall be determined by a
seven-day automated traffic count.
E. The Department will analyze the number of accidents on the affected
roadway over the most recent three-year period to ascertain the extent
to which excessive or unsafe speeds were a major contributing factor.
F. The distance between speed humps shall not be less than 250 feet or
greater than 600 feet apart; provided, however, that should an
intersection controlled by a stop sign or yield sign be located on the
affected roadway, the distance between humps may exceed 600 feet.
The existing stop sign or yield sign may be reevaluated to see if it
continues to meet the warrants of the State of Pennsylvania after the
installation of humps.
G. Speed humps shall not be less than 150 feet from an intersecting
roadway or within 250 feet of a signalized intersection.
H. Speed humps shall not be installed on hills or curves that could affect
the safe control of vehicles.
I. Speed humps shall traverse the entire roadway allowing one foot on
each side for the flow of stormwater.
J. Speed humps shall be no less than 12 feet in width.
K. Signs indicating HUMP shall be erected in each direction at the
location of the hump and a sufficient distance before the hump to warn
approaching motorists. For increased visibility, reflective stripes shall
be painted on the humps.
L. Other traffic calming measures:
(1) Notwithstanding whether or not a petition has been submitted
under § 270-67, nothing herein shall limit the Township's right to
unilaterally consider and install any traffic calming measures
whatsoever, including, but not limited to, speed humps, bulb outs,
§ 270-68 RADNOR CODE § 270-68
C:924
§ 270-69. Approval and installation.
chicanes, raised crosswalks, etc., as it may deem necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of a specific neighborhood or
the public in general.
(2) This section shall apply to any street within the Township,
especially streets where the Township determines there is a high
concentration of pedestrian and vehicular traffic such as those near
schools, parks and recreation areas, churches and business
districts.
(3) The Township shall notify the residents and businesses on any
streets for which such traffic calming measures are being
considered to permit their input before such measures are
approved and installed.
M. Speeding. When speeding is the primary concern, the 85th percentile
speed (or average speed) shall exceed 10 mph over the posted speed
limit before traffic calming is considered.
(1) Eighty-fifth percentile speed. The 85th percentile speed is the
speed at or below which 85% of the motorists on a street are
traveling. This speed is often used as a measure of the upper limit
of reasonable speeds for prevailing conditions.
(2) Average speed shall be used only when the number of vehicles
necessary for determining the 85th percentile speed cannot
reasonably be obtained.
A. All decisions regarding whether or not to recommend the installation of
speed humps shall be made by the Committee in accordance with the
criteria contained herein.
B. All Committee recommendations to install speed humps in the
petitioned area shall be subject to final approval by the Board.
§ 270-68 CHARTER § 270-69
C:925
Chapter 272
VEHICLES, PARKING AND STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 270. Parking and storage of vehicles — See Ch.
272.
§ 272-1. Title and purpose.
The following chapter, entitled "Vehicle Parking and Storage," is hereby
enacted for the purpose of regulating the parking and storage of trucks and
construction vehicles on private property and streets within the Township
of Radnor.
§ 272-2. Word usage and definitions.
§ 272-3. Truck and construction vehicle parking and storage
limitations. [Amended 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
Effective the date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for the owner or
operator of any truck having a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of
15,000 pounds, to park or store such vehicle on any street or residential
property located within an AC Agricultural Conservation District or an R-1,
R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, or R-5 Residential Zoning District. Parking or storage
of vehicles shall be prohibited by this chapter, provided that this provision
A. Word usage. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural
includes the singular.
B. Terms defined. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words
and phrases shall be construed throughout this chapter to have the
meanings indicated in this section:
CONSTRUCTION VEHICLE — A vehicle used for construction
purposes, including backhoes, tractors, excavators, bulldozers and
similar type vehicles.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR) — The value specified
on the federal weight certification label by the manufacturer as the
loaded weight of a single vehicle (as defined by the Vehicle Laws of
Pennsylvania).
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of Radnor Township.
STREET — Any street, public or private, intended primarily as a means
of pedestrian and vehicle traffic.
TRUCK — A motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for
the transportation of persons or property (as defined by the Vehicle
Laws of Pennsylvania, as amended).
§ 270-69 RADNOR CODE § 272-3
C:926
shall not apply to agricultural vehicles, trucks and construction vehicles
used in conjunction with a permitted agricultural or commercial use or
vehicles parked for the purpose of making deliveries or improvements to a
property or street.
§ 272-4. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department.
§ 272-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall pay a fine to the
Township of Radnor of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution.
Chapter 275
(RESERVED)
Chapter 276
WASTEWATER CONTROL
Chapter 280
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning Hearing Board — See Ch. 5, § 5-41.
Notification of zoning changes — See Ch. 5,
§ 5-8.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 19.
Building construction — See Ch. 125.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 134.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 142.
Design review — See Ch. 150.
Fees — See Ch. 162.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
Grading, excavations and fills — See Ch. 175.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 245.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 250.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 255.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 267.
§ 272-3 CHARTER § 272-5
C:927

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 280-1. Purposes and objectives. [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No.
89-18; 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-20]
The purpose and objectives of this chapter are to promote, protect and
facilitate each of the following: the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare, coordinated community development, proper density of population,
civil defense, the provision of adequate light and air, police protection,
vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, public grounds and public requirements, as well as to prevent
overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in travel and
transportation and loss of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic
or other dangers, in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan for the
Township, which sets forth the community development objectives and is
the Comprehensive Plan for the Radnor Township.
§ 280-2. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare. Where the provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any other ordinance or regulation,
the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Where the provisions of
any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than
this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall be
controlling.
§ 280-3. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Radnor Township
Zoning Ordinance."
§ 280-4. Definitions and word usage.
A. Word usage. The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall
include the singular. The present tense shall include the future tense.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated, unless otherwise expressly stated. Applicable
regulations stated in conjunction with these definitions shall be
complied with.
ACCESSORY BUILDING or ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A building
or structure that is not a principal building or structure and is used
for purposes that are entirely incidental and subordinate to those of
the principal building or structure and located on the same lot. For
the purposes of this chapter, structures such as but not limited to
tennis courts, swimming pools, bathhouses, carports and garages shall
be considered as "accessory structures." Setback measurements for
§ 280-1 CHARTER § 280-4
C:929
swimming pools shall be from the outside edge of the pool foundation
wall, coping or deck, whichever is closest to a property line or adjacent
buildings, except that a ground level patio may extend from the coping
of a swimming pool to the wall of the swimming pool owner's
residence.[Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21]
ACCESSORY USE — A use of a building, structure or land that is not a
principal permitted use but which is entirely incidental and subordinate
to the principal permitted use on the same lot.
ALTERATIONS — Any change to any portion of a building or structure
for the same or a different use.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
Within the approximated floodplain, the base flood elevation shall be
established as a point on the boundary of the approximated floodplain
which is nearest to the construction site in question.[Added 9-26-1977
by Ord. No. 77-24]
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOME — An owner-occupied single-family
house where short-term lodging rooms (guest rooms) with meals are
provided for compensation.[Added 2-27-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST USE — A portion of an owner-occupied singlefamily
house dedicated solely to the bed-and-breakfast home operation,
including, but not limited to, short-term lodging rooms (guest rooms),
bathrooms, and common areas.[Added 2-27-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-01]
BOAT — A vehicle for traveling in or on water, not exceeding 30
feet in body length, eight feet in width or 12 feet in overall height.
Height includes the trailer, if the boat is mounted on a trailer.[Added
9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21]
BUFFER PLANTING STRIP — A strip of required yard space adjacent
to the boundary of a property or district, not less in width than is
designated in this chapter, which is landscaped for the full width and on
which is placed a screen of sufficient density not to be seen through and
of sufficient height to constitute an effective screen and give maximum
protection and immediate visual screening to an abutting property
or district. The required screen shall be permanently maintained and
shall constitute a planting of dense evergreens or a compact evergreen
hedge or, where otherwise specifically designated in this chapter, an
appropriate wall, fence, suitable planting or combination
thereof.[Amended 3-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-07]
BUILDING — Any structure having enclosing walls and roof,
permanently located on the land. A vehicle built for living or camping
purposes shall not be classified as a "building."
(1) DETACHED — A building which has no party wall.
§ 280-4 RADNOR CODE § 280-4
C:930
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal crosssectional
areas of all buildings and structures on a lot above the ground
level, measured at the greatest outside dimensions, excluding cornices,
eaves, gutters, chimneys and steps, provided that they do not project
more than two feet from the building.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average grade
(the average of the grades taken at twenty-foot intervals around the
building perimeter) to the top of the highest roof beams of a flat roof
or to the mean level of a sloped roof, provided that chimneys and
spires shall not be included in measuring the height. Elevator, stair and
equipment penthouses, tanks and air-conditioning towers shall not be
included. The height shall be measured from finished grade, but such
measurement shall not be made from a point higher than eight feet
above original grade.
BUILDING LINE — The line within a lot delineating the minimum front
yard setback.[Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21]
BUILDING PERMIT OFFICER — See "Enforcement Officer."[Added
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — The main building on a lot or any building
that is not an accessory building. Each dwelling or apartment house
in a residential development and each commercial, industrial or
institutional building which houses a separate commercial, industrial
or other enterprise or a group of permitted commercial or industrial
SEMIDETACHED — A building having one shared or party wall in
common with an adjoining building.
(2)
ATTACHED — A building in a group of more than two buildings
wherein there are two or more party walls in common with the
adjoining buildings, provided that there are no more than eight
such buildings in a group.
(3)
BUILDING LINE (lot contiguous to a public or private street) — A
line parallel to the street right-of-way at a distance therefrom equal
to the depth of the front yard setback required for the district in
which the lot is located.
(1)
BUILDING LINE (interior lot not contiguous for its full width on a
public street or road) — A line parallel to the street or road rightof-
way at a distance from the property line nearest the street equal
to the depth of the front yard required for the district in which the
lot is located.
(2)
BUILDING LINE (interior lot not contiguous for its full width on
a private street) — A line parallel to the street right-of-way at a
distance from the property line nearest the street equal to the
depth of the front yard setback required for the district in which
the lot is located. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-17]
(3)
§ 280-4 CHARTER § 280-4
C:931
uses shall be construed to be a principal building for the purpose of this
chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A statement signed by a duly
authorized official setting forth that a building, structure or use legally
complies with this chapter and that the same may be used for the
purpose stated therein.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry
during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent
the passage of water and water vapor.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-04]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to the construction,
reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings
or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets
and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining;
dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and
the subdivision of land.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
DORMITORY — A building or combination of buildings used for living
quarters as an accessory use to a college, university, convent,
monastery or other similar permitted uses within a Planned
Institutional Zoning District.[Added 6-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-27]
DWELLING —
DWELLING UNIT — A building or entirely self-contained portion
thereof containing complete housekeeping facilities, including not more
than one kitchen used exclusively for the residence of one
family.[Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21]248
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Zoning Permit Officer, Building
Permit Officer, or other individual appointed by the municipality to
enforce these ordinances within the jurisdiction of the
municipality.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage;
SINGLE-FAMILY — A building on a lot, designed and occupied
exclusively as a residence for one family.
(1)
TWO-FAMILY — A building on a lot, designed and occupied
exclusively as a residence for two families living independently of
one another.
(2)
MULTIPLE-FAMILY or APARTMENT HOUSE — A building on a lot,
designed and used exclusively as a residence for three or more
families living independently of one another.
(3)
248. Editor's Note: The definition of "earth station," as added 4-28-1980 by Ord. No. 80-05,
which immediately followed this definition, was deleted 9-8-1980 by Ord. No. 80-20. See
now the definition of "satellite earth station" in this section.
§ 280-4 RADNOR CODE § 280-4
C:932
the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of
water.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying the same dwelling unit and
living and cooking as a single housekeeping unit, said unit consisting
only of individuals who are related by blood, marriage or otherwise
by law, except that such unit may also consist of foster children and
one other individual not related to others in the housekeeping unit. A
family as herein defined specifically excludes individuals and groups
occupying a boarding- or rooming house, lodging house, club,
fraternity, dormitory, hotel or other similar living
environment.[Amended 8-11-1986 by Ord. No. 86-35; 6-26-1989
by Ord. No. 89-27; 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 90-21]
FENCE or WALL — A structure designed to enclose a lot or a portion
of a lot or to separate a lot from an adjoining lot or right-ofway.[
Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21]
FLOODPLAIN CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The low area adjoining
and including any water- or drainage course or body of water subject
to a one-hundred-year-recurrence-interval flood, as delineated by the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated November 18, 2009, and shown
on the FEMA floodplain maps, or the most recent revision thereof for
the Township of Radnor, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, as prepared
by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development,
Federal Emergency Management Agency. In addition, "floodplain
conservation district" shall be defined to include all areas, not shown
on the map, which, by hydrological profile analysis, are calculated to
be inundated during a one-hundred-year frequency flood.[Amended
9-26-1977 by Ord. No. 77-24; 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08;
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
FLOODWAY — The designated area of floodplain required to carry and
discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this
chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the
one-hundred-year magnitude.[Added 11-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-29]
FLOOR AREA — Eighty percent of the sum of the horizontal floor
area(s) of a building or group of buildings on a lot, measured from the
exterior faces of the building or from the center line of party walls
separating two buildings.[Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21;
7-20-1999 by Ord. No. 99-24]:
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory structure designed, built and used
by the owner or tenant of the principal structure on a lot, in which
no business, service or industry connected directly or indirectly with
motor vehicles is conducted.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A structure, which is not a private garage, used
for the storage or parking of motor vehicles and not intended for the
sale of gasoline or other flammable products.[Amended 9-22-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-21]249
§ 280-4 CHARTER § 280-4
C:933
HELIPORT — An area to accommodate all phases of operation of rotorwing
aircraft (helicopters), with suitable space to allow development of
service facilities as desired.[Added 10-28-1974 by Ord. No. 1586]
HELISTOP — An area on a roof or on the ground to accommodate
touchdown and lift-off of rotor-wing aircraft (helicopters) for the
purpose of picking up and discharging passengers or cargo with no
service facilities.[Added 10-28-1974 by Ord. No. 1586]
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:[Added 3-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-04]
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use serving as a location for a
business conducted solely by the resident of the dwelling unit, which
is incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling. A
home occupation may include a home business or a home office for a
resident who may work for another employer, provided that no food or
material goods for sale may be located, publicly displayed or sold on
the premises.[Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21; 7-25-1983
by Ord. No. 83-22; 3-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-07; 10-26-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-09]
HOTEL, MOTEL or INN — A building arranged or used for shelter and
accommodation for compensation of more than 20 individuals.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
249. Editor's Note: The definition of "head end," as added 4-28-1980 by Ord. No. 80-05, which
immediately followed this definition, was deleted 9-8-1980 by Ord. No. 80-20.
§ 280-4 RADNOR CODE § 280-4
C:934
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — The floodplain area specifically
identified in this chapter as being inundated by the one-hundred-year
flood. Areas included are those identified as the Floodway (FW), Flood-
Fringe (FF) and General Floodplain (FA).[Added 11-27-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-29]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — Surfaces that do not absorb rainwater. All
buildings, parking areas, driveways, interior roads, sidewalks and areas
of concrete and nonporous asphalt or other areas of a lot as determined
by the Township Engineer. This definition shall not include any portion
of a lot located within the street.[Added 12-12-1977 by Ord. No.
77-33; amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-19]
INTERIOR LOT — A lot containing a narrow projecting segment which
is the sole means of access from a street, with said segment having
a minimum of 20 feet. Land which is subdivided or developed under
this definition shall require that the front yard setback be increased
by a factor of 1.4 over the minimum required for that district.[Added
1-11-1988 by Ord. No. 88-03; amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-17]
INTERIOR LOT DEVELOPMENT — In any property subdivided under
the provisions of Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the
Township of Radnor, the area of an interior lot shall not be less than
two acres. The area of any portion of the access between the street
and the interior lot line that is less than the required width for the
zoning district cannot be included in determining the lot area.[Added
9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21; amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-17]
LAND DEVELOPMENT — [Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-48]
LOT — A parcel of land on which a principal building or, where
authorized in this chapter, a unified group of buildings and any
accessory buildings are or may be placed, together with the required
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group of two or more
residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially
or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots,
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or the division
or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively,
between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants
by means of or for the purpose of streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Those activities described in Section 503(1.1) of the Municipalities
Planning Code250 shall not be considered land developments for
purposes of this chapter.
(3)
250. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 280-4 CHARTER § 280-4
C:935
open spaces, such open spaces and the area and dimensions of such
lot being not less than the minimum required by this chapter. The use
of a lot for more than one principal building or for a unified group of
buildings shall be considered as a subdivision, and the plan for any
such use shall be subject to approval in accordance with Chapter 255,
Subdivision of Land.251
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this chapter.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-04]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational
and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single
ownership, which has been planned and improved for the placement
of two or more manufactured homes for nontransient use.[Added
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — A lot with principal and
accessory buildings used for the sale of gasoline, oil and motor vehicle
accessories and the servicing of motor vehicles, including washing of
cars and minor repairs, but not for body and fender work or painting.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968 as amended and
reenacted by Act 170 of 1988, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., and any
subsequent amendments thereto.[Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No.
90-48]
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after, June 1, 1977, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A building or parts thereof lawfully
existing at the time this chapter or subsequent amendments hereto
became effective, which does not conform to the dimensional and
setback requirements of the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of land or of a building lawfully
existing at the time this chapter or subsequent amendments hereto
became effective which does not conform to use requirements of the
251. Editor's Note: The former definition of "mobile home," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04.
§ 280-4 RADNOR CODE § 280-4
C:936
district in which it is located. Any change in nonresidential occupancy
will be considered to be a change of nonconforming use under this
chapter, specifically § 280-101A.[Amended 5-12-1997 by Ord. No.
97-12]
OUTDOOR DINING — A dining area with seats and tables located
outdoors of a licensed food establishment (restaurant) that has indoor
seating and which is located entirely outside the exterior walls of a
building. These tables shall be used for the consumption of food and
beverages.[Added 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
PARKING SPACE — An outdoor space or a garage space used for
parking motor vehicles, which shall measure not less than nine feet
six inches by 20 feet, accessible from a street, alley or driveway and
surfaced with a Township-approved durable, dustproof and all-weather
surface.[Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 86-19]
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of any hearing or
meeting and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the
hearing or meeting. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days
and the second publication shall not be less than seven days prior to
the date of the hearing or meeting.[Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No.
90-48]
PUBLIC-SERVICE CORPORATION BUILDING, GROUNDS OR
FACILITY — A building, grounds or facility used for a service furnished
by a public-service or public-utility corporation.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis; not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest
horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light-duty truck; and not designed for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
travel, or seasonal use.[Added 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21;
amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.[Added
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
RIPARIAN BUFFER SETBACK — The measured distance from the edge
of a pond or from the bank of a perennial or intermittent stream, as
required for the zoning district in which the property on which said
pond or stream is located.[Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-22]
ROOMING HOUSE — A building which has a dwelling unit occupied
by the owner and which has accommodations for not more than three
roomers.[Added 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21; amended 6-25-1984
by Ord. No. 84-16]
SANITARY LANDFILL — Solid waste disposal site where waste is
spread in layers, compacted, and covered with soil or other cover
§ 280-4 CHARTER § 280-4
C:937
materials each day to minimize pest, aesthetic, disease, air pollution,
and water pollution problems.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-04]
SATELLITE EARTH STATION — A dish antenna together with all
attachments and parts, whose purpose is to receive communication
or other signals from orbiting satellites or other extraterrestrial
sources.[Added 8-8-1988 by Ord. No. 88-23]
SIGN — Any device for visual communication that is used for the
purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public,
but not including any flag, badge or insignia of any government or
governmental agency or of any civil, charitable, religious, patriotic,
fraternal or similar organization.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP OF A LOT — The ownership
of a lot by one or more persons, partnerships or corporations, which
ownership is separate and distinct from that of any abutting or
adjoining lot.
STEEP SLOPE — Land whose slope (surfaces at an angle to the plane
of the horizon) is 20% or more (a vertical difference of two feet or more
per 10 feet of the horizontal distance).[Added 12-12-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-33; amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-18]
STREET — A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, intended
primarily as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, which may also
be used to provide space for sewers, public utilities, shade trees and
sidewalks.[Added 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21]
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground including, but not limited to, buildings, sheds,
manufactured homes, and other similar items. This term includes any
man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in
land or water whether or not affixed to land.[Amended 9-22-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-21; 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
STUDENT — An individual who is enrolled or has made application and
been accepted at a university, college or trade school and is taking at
least six credit hours and whose primary occupation is as a student,
or who is on a semester or summer break from studies at a college,
university or trade school. The term "student" shall apply to both
undergraduate and graduate students alike.[Added 3-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-10]
HALF STREET — A street of less than the required right-of-way
width.
(1)
PUBLIC STREET — Streets offered or required to be offered for
dedication.
(2)
PRIVATE STREET — Streets, roads or lanes not offered or not
required to be offered for dedication.
(3)
§ 280-4 RADNOR CODE § 280-4
C:938
STUDENT HOME — A living arrangement for a maximum of two
students as defined in this chapter. Student homes shall not include
dormitories, fraternities, sororities, or apartment buildings. A "student
home" includes a dwelling located off campus from any higher
education facility or trade school in which students reside. "Student
home" does not include the home of a student that is occupied solely
by the student and his or her family members in an existing singlefamily
home. A student home shall include any combination of graduate
students, undergraduate students and/or trade school students living in
the same dwelling unit.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or
lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of
land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not
involving any new streets or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.[Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-48]
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.[Added 3-14-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-04]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage (or repetitive loss when a repetitive
loss provision is used), regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-04]
TENANT HOUSE — An accessory building on a lot, used in whole or in
part as a residence or sleeping place for one or more tenant farmers or
employees of a farm or estate.
TOURIST HOUSE — A dwelling in which nightly or weekly
accommodations are provided for transient guests for
compensation.[Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21]252
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
§ 280-4 CHARTER § 280-4
C:939
UNIFIED GROUP OF BUILDINGS — A cluster of two or more buildings
on a lot containing separate but related main uses, which is designed as
a single or common management and maintenance unit, with common
open spaces, maintenance, service and other facilities and services.
Example of a "unified group of buildings" is a shopping center in a
Planned Laboratory-Office, Planned Business or a Planned Institutional
District.[Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface
or ground water at a frequency or duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas; or as further
defined by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.[Added 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 91-40; amended
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
YARD — The required open space area around the inner periphery
of a lot, in which no principal building or structure shall be located.
The area of the lot not required to be open space shall be called the
buildable area of the lot.
FRONT YARD — The minimum open space extending the full width
of the lot from the street line or, in the case of an interior lot, from
the property line parallel or most nearly parallel to the street line
on which said lot has frontage to any structure, principal, accessory
or other, on a lot. This shall be exclusive of cornices, eaves, gutters
and chimneys projecting not more than two feet from the building.
[Amended 1-11-1988 by Ord. No. 88-03]
(1)
SIDE YARD — The minimum open space required between each
side lot line and any structure, principal, accessory or other, on a
lot, extending from the building line to the minimum rear yard open
space required on a lot, exclusive of cornices, eaves, gutters and
chimneys projecting not more than two feet from the building.
(2)
REAR YARD — The minimum open space extending the full width
of a lot, required between the rear line of the lot and the principal
building on the lot, exclusive of cornices, eaves, gutters and
chimneys projecting not more than two feet from the building.
(3)
YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR CORNER LOTS — In the case of a
corner lot having frontages on two streets, there shall be provided
two front yards, one along each street line as described under
Subsection above, one side yard as described under Subsection (2)
and one rear yard as described under Subsection (3). The rear lot
line shall be designated as that lot line towards which the rear of
the principal building is oriented.
(4)
252. Editor's Note: The definition of "townhouse," as added 11-23-1981 by Ord. No. 81-28,
which immediately followed this definition, was deleted 5-12-1982 by Ord. No. 82-12.
§ 280-4 RADNOR CODE § 280-4
C:940
ZONING PERMIT — A document issued by a governing authority
permitting land to be used for a specific purpose.[Added 3-14-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-04]
ZONING PERMIT OFFICER — See "Enforcement Officer."[Added
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
§ 280-4 CHARTER § 280-4
C:941

ARTICLE II
Classification of Districts
§ 280-5. Classes established. [Amended 5-14-1990 by Ord. No.
90-21; 12-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-22; 10-26-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-28]
The Township of Radnor is hereby divided into the following classes of
districts:
AC Agricultural Conservation District
R-1 Residence District
R-1A Residence District
R-2 Residence District
R-3 Residence District
R-4 Residence District
R-5 Residence District
R-6 Residence District
PA Planned Apartment District
CO Commercial-Office District
C-1 Local Commercial District
GH Garrett Hill District
C-2 General Commercial District
WBOD Wayne Business Overlay District
C-3 Service Commercial District
PB Planned Business District
PLO Planned Laboratory-Office District
PI Planned Institutional District
FC Floodplain Conservation District
PLU Public Land Use District Riparian Buffer Conservation District
§ 280-6. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of districts shall be as shown on the map attached to and
made a part of this chapter, which map shall be known as the "Zoning
Map of Radnor Township." Said map and all notations, references and
data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter
and shall be as much a part of this chapter as if all were fully described
herein.253
253. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 280-5 CHARTER § 280-7
C:943
§ 280-7. Interpretation of boundaries. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-13]
A. Boundaries drawn approximately following the center lines of streams,
drainageways, streets, alleys or railroad or other rights-of-way shall be
construed as following such center lines.
B. Boundaries approximately following lot lines shall be construed as
following such lot lines.
C. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be
determined by the scale of the map.
D. Where a district boundary divides a lot or runs through undivided
property, the location of such boundary, unless dimensioned by figures
on the Zoning Map, shall be determined by the use of the scale
appearing on said map.
E. Where physical features existing on the ground vary from those shown
on the Official Zoning Map or in other circumstances not covered by the
subsections above, the Zoning Hearing Board shall interpret the district
boundaries.
§ 280-7 RADNOR CODE § 280-7
C:944
ARTICLE III
AC Agricultural-Conservation District
[Added 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 90-20254]
§ 280-8. Intent; application of regulations.
The AC Agricultural-Conservation District is intended to provide primarily
for the protection of stream valleys and other environmental corridors, to
preserve natural vegetation and the semirural character of the Township
and to preserve ample and appropriate areas for agriculture, recreation,
conservation and other open space purposes. Accordingly, the district
incorporates a density standard which, among other things:
§ 280-9. Use regulations.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes:
A. Provides for farm and low-density residential uses and certain
compatible accessory uses that support the preservation of open space.
B. Provides for golf courses and recreational uses.
C. Enables the creation and maintenance of open space within the
Township by permitting a varied arrangement of dwelling units and
open space on tracts undergoing development.
D. Facilitates the conservation of agricultural and woodland areas and
surface and underground water supplies and the control of soil erosion
and surface water flooding.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Forest, game preserve, wildlife preserve, arboretum or other
conservation purpose.
C. Agricultural use, that is, the planting, growing, storing and sale of
plants and crops therefrom and the breeding, raising, keeping and/or
sale of animals and products thereof, provided that such uses shall be
conducted on a lot not less than five acres in size and shall not include a
commercial piggery, poultry hatchery or establishment for slaughtering
or processing poultry or livestock. Any building for the sheltering of
animals or the sale of farm products shall be located not less than 100
feet from any street right-of-way line and not less than 150 feet from
any other property line. Buildings utilized for sales shall conform to the
accessory use standards for the sale of farm products; see Subsection
H(5) below.
254. Editor's Note: This ordinance also deleted former Art. III, A-1 Agricultural District, as
amended and former Art. IV, A-2 Agricultural-Residence District, as amended.
§ 280-8 CHARTER § 280-9
C:945
D. Park, day camp, riding academy, golf course or other outdoor
recreational use customarily located in natural woodland and rural
areas and for public and private use, including a country club,
swimming club, hunt club or similar club or lodge in conjunction with
any permitted outdoor use, provided that:
(1) The minimum lot area of the property on which the use is
conducted shall not be less than 10 acres.
(2) The use and its design are compatible with the natural character of
the area.
(3) Each structure shall be clearly incidental to the outdoor use.
(4) Any club or lodge building and its services shall be for the use of
members and their guests only. Any associated public facilities
shall be used by those participating in club-approved activities only.
(5) No commercial activity shall be permitted except for the charging
of admission, the sale of refreshments or other purposes clearly
incidental to the permitted outdoor use.
(6) Each permitted use or activity shall be required to screen and
separate itself from an adjoining property by providing a buffer
planting strip not less than 25 feet in depth. This provision shall not
apply to a proposed golf course or where:
(a) The proposed use constitutes a similarly natural or open
outdoor use; and/or
(b) Where the existing abutting use is a predominantly natural or
open outdoor use.
(7) Each incidental commercial use permitted above shall be located or
screened so that it shall not be visible from a public street.
E. Office use for administrative and/or service purposes, to be utilized
solely by nonprofit organizations providing advice and services to
agricultural practitioners who could but need not be located within the
district, i.e., those engaged in the planting, growing, storing and/or
selling of plants and crops or horticultural plants and the breeding,
raising, keeping and/or selling of animals and products thereof.
(1) The number of persons regularly engaged in such activities at any
location shall not exceed one person for each two acres of land
owned at such location, including parcels adjacent thereto, by such
organization or its lessor or the provider of the site and facility, and
in no case shall exceed 20 individuals at any one time.
(2) No subdivision of the existing tract shall be required to
accommodate such use; however, any proposed construction of
new buildings for office use shall be considered a land development
and shall be subject to the applicable requirements of Chapter 255,
§ 280-9 RADNOR CODE § 280-9
C:946
Subdivision of Land. Alterations to, including expansion of, existing
buildings shall be minimized so as to retain the current character
and integrity of the building.
(3) Parking for such use shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of § 280-103B of this chapter.
F. The following uses, only when authorized as a conditional use by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to the requirements of Article XXIII,
Conditional Uses:
(1) Density modification development, in accordance with the
requirements of Article XIX, Density Modification Development.
G. The following uses, only when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the general standards prescribed in
§ 280-145.
(1) A stable for horses or a kennel for the keeping of dogs and cats,
provided that any building and yard for the keeping of animals shall
not be less than 200 feet from any street right-of-way line or
property line, and subject to such additional requirements as the
Zoning Hearing Board shall deem necessary to ensure that the
conduct of the use will not detract from the character of the
surrounding area.
(a) The minimum site area for such uses shall not be less than five
acres.
(b) For horses or ponies, a maximum of three animals may be kept
on a five-acre parcel. One additional such animal may be kept
for each acre of lot size or portion thereof in excess of five
acres.
(c) With regard to kennels for the keeping of dogs and cats, the
following shall also apply:
[1] There shall be sufficient facilities to enable the dogs or
cats to be sheltered indoors as necessary; such facility
shall be the preferred location during the hours of 10:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
[2] Sound baffle devices or other appropriate noise control
measures shall be installed where necessary to protect
adjacent properties from noise problems.
[3] Fencing shall be installed in a manner that prevents dogs
from leaving the property.
(2) A bed-and-breakfast use in accordance with the requirements set
forth in § 280-115.3. [Added 2-27-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01]
§ 280-9 CHARTER § 280-9
C:947
H. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of
the foregoing permitted uses. Each permitted use shall comply with the
provisions of § 280-103 relating to off-street parking. The term
"accessory use" shall not include a business, but may include:
(1) Private parking or garage space.
(2) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Article XX, Section
115.1. [Amended 10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 98-09]
(3) Tenant house, provided that the lot is not less than four acres. Such
lot shall be restricted against further subdivision in a manner
satisfactory to the Township, unless the tenant house is located on
the lot such that it could comply with Chapter 255, Subdivision of
Land.
(4) Farm buildings.
(5) The sale or display of farm products, in accordance with the
following:
(a) At least 75% of such products shall have been grown or
produced on the property on which they are offered for sale.
(b) Parking space for at least three cars shall be provided on the
lot. Where building area exceeds 600 square feet, one
additional parking space shall be provided for each additional
200 square feet of building area.
(c) Sale of farm products shall be conducted either from a
temporary stand, dismantled at the end of the growing season,
or from a permanent building, the location of which complies
with all Township setback standards for that zoning district.
Any temporary structure shall be set back at least 25 feet from
the right-of-way line of the road.
(6) Signs, as permitted in Article XXI, Signs.
(7) Private swimming pools, tennis courts and similar uses, when
illuminated by lighting fixtures attached to or mounted on
freestanding poles or standards, subject to the following standards:
[Amended 12-13-1991 by Ord. No. 91-52]
(a) The pool or tennis court is not located within the front yard
setback or closer than 25 feet to any side or rear property line.
(b) Lighting fixtures are not located within the front yard setback
and are a minimum distance of 25 feet from any side or rear
property line.
(c) The lighting fixture, including standards for mounting, do not
exceed a height of 16 feet above grade.
§ 280-9 RADNOR CODE § 280-9
C:948
§ 280-10. Area regulations.
(d) Prior to installation, a lighting plan is prepared and submitted
to the Township Engineer for approval. Such plan shall be
prepared in accordance with generally accepted engineering
standards and shall not provide for lighting intensity at any
property line in excess of 0.10 footcandles.
(e) The lighting fixtures are approved by the Township Engineer
and are designed, mounted and shielded in such a manner as
to prevent the light source from being visible off the property.
Such lighting shall also be located and positioned in such a
manner as to not illuminate adjacent properties.
(f) Lights shall be turned off by 11:00 p.m.
A. Where the density modification option, as provided for in Article XIX,
Density Modification Development, of this chapter, is to be utilized in
the AC District, the area, density and dimensional requirements of that
article applicable to the AC District shall be complied with.
B. Where conventional single-family residential development is proposed
on individual lots and for all other uses permitted under the terms of
§ 280-9 above, the following area and dimensional requirements shall
be complied with:
(1) Lot area. Except as otherwise provided in § 280-9 above, the lot
area of each lot shall be not less than two acres and no lot shall be
less than 180 feet in width at the building line.
(2) Building area. Not more than 15% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings.
(3) Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street which a lot
abuts, which shall be not less than 60 feet in depth.
(4) Side yards.
(a) For every standard single-family detached dwelling, there shall
be two side yards, each of which shall be not less than 50 feet
in width.
(b) For every building other than a dwelling and its accessory
buildings, there shall be two side yards, neither of which shall
be less than 40 feet in width.
(5) Rear yard. For every principal building, there shall be a rear yard
on each lot which shall be not less than 60 feet in depth.
(6) Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
§ 280-9 CHARTER § 280-11
C:949
§ 280-11. Height restrictions.
No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 38 feet in height,
except that no accessory building, other than a farm building, shall exceed
20 feet in height.
§ 280-12. Accessory structures.
Structures accessory to a residential use permitted herein shall be located
as designated hereunder:
A. Attached to a principal building, in which case they shall be part of the
principal building.
B. On the buildable area of a lot but not attached to the principal building,
in which case they shall be separated from the principal building by at
least 10 feet.
C. In the rear yard and/or side yard of a lot, in which case they shall be
located not closer than 20 feet from a side or rear property line and not
closer than 10 feet from the principal building.
§ 280-11 RADNOR CODE § 280-12
C:950
ARTICLE IV
R-1 Residence District
§ 280-13. Application of regulations.
In R-1 Residence Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall
apply.
§ 280-14. Use regulations. [Amended 12-8-1980 by Ord. No. 80-30;
6-8-1987 by Ord. No. 87-17; 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 90-21]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. The following uses, when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the general standards prescribed in
§ 280-145:
(1) Conversion of a dwelling to two-family or multifamily use, subject
to the provisions of § 280-108.
(2) Student home, subject to the general standards and provisions of
§ 280-115.2. [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
C. The following uses, only when authorized as a conditional use by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to the requirements of Article XXIII,
Conditional Uses:
(1) Density modification development, in accordance with the
requirements of Article XIX, Density Modification Development.
D. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of
the foregoing permitted uses. Each permitted use shall comply with the
provisions of § 280-103 relating to off-street parking. The term
"accessory use" shall not include a business but may include:
[Amended 10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 98-09; 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-17]
(1) Private parking or garage space and private home swimming pool
or tennis court.
(2) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Article XX,
§ 280-115.1.
(3) Agricultural use as follows:
(a) Private garden.
(b) On a lot five acres or larger in size, agricultural use as
permitted in § 280-9C.
(4) Signs, as permitted in Article XXI, Signs.
§ 280-13 CHARTER § 280-15
C:951
§ 280-15. Area regulations.
§ 280-16. Height restrictions.
No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height,
except that no accessory building, other than a farm building, shall exceed
20 feet in height.
§ 280-17. Accessory structures.
Accessory structures to a use permitted herein shall be located as
designated hereunder:
A. Lot area and width. Every lot shall have a lot area of not less than one
acre, and such lot shall be not less than 120 feet in width at the building
line.
B. Building area. Not more than 15% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings.
C. Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts, which shall be not less than 60 feet in depth.
D. Side yards.
(1) For every single-family detached dwelling, there shall be two side
yards, which shall be not less than 60 feet in aggregate width and
neither of which shall be less than 25 feet in width.
(2) For every building other than a dwelling and its accessory
buildings, there shall be two side yards, neither of which shall be
less than 40 feet in width.
E. Rear yard. For every principal building, there shall be a rear yard on
each lot, which shall be not less than 40 feet in depth.
F. Maximum impervious surfaces: 22%. [Added 11-22-1999 by Ord. No.
99-37; amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-19]
G. Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
A. Attached to a principal building, in which case they shall be part of the
principal building.
B. On the buildable area of a lot but not attached to the principal building,
in which case they shall be separated from the principal building by at
least 10 feet.
C. In the rear yard and side yard of a lot, in which case they shall not be
located closer than 10 feet from a side or rear property line.
D. Air-conditioning units shall in all cases be at least 15 feet from any
property line.
§ 280-15 RADNOR CODE § 280-17
C:952
ARTICLE IVA
R-1A Residence District
[Added 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-09]
§ 280-17.1. Application of regulations.
In R-1 A Residence Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall
apply.
§ 280-17.2. Use regulations.
§ 280-17.3. Area regulations.
A. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any use permitted within R-1 Residence Districts.
B. The following uses, only when authorized as a conditional use by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to the requirements of Article XXIII,
Conditional Uses:
(1) Density modification development, in accordance with the
requirements of Article XIX, Density Modification Development.
C. Accessory uses to include the following:
(1) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Article XX,
§ 280-115.1.
D. The following uses, only when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board of Radnor Township, subject to the general
standards prescribed in § 280-145: [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-10]
(1) Student home, subject to the general standards and provisions of
§ 280-115.2.
A. Lot area and width. Every lot shall have a lot area of not less than
30,000 square feet and shall not be less than 100 feet in width at the
building line.
B. Building area. Not more than 18% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings.
C. Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts, which shall be not less than 40 feet in depth.
D. Side yards.
(1) For every single-family detached dwelling, there shall be two side
yards, which shall not be less than 45 feet in aggregate width, and
neither of which shall be less than 20 feet in width.
§ 280-17.1 CHARTER § 280-17.3
C:953
§ 280-17.4. Height restrictions.
No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height,
except that no accessory building shall exceed 20 feet in height.
§ 280-17.5. Accessory structures.
Accessory structures to a use permitted herein shall be located as
designated hereunder:
(2) For every building other than a dwelling and its accessory
buildings, there shall be two side yards, neither of which shall be
less than 30 feet in width.
E. Rear yard. For every principal building, there shall be a rear yard,
which shall not be less than 40 feet in depth.
F. Maximum impervious surfaces: 30%.
G. Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet.
A. Attached to the principal building, in which case they shall be part of
the principal building.
B. On the buildable area of a lot but not attached to the principal building,
in which case they shall be separated from the principal building by at
least 10 feet.
C. In the rear yard and side yard of a lot, in which case they shall not be
located closer than 10 feet from a side or rear property line.
D. Air-conditioning units shall in all cases be at least 15 feet from any
property line.
§ 280-17.3 RADNOR CODE § 280-17.5
C:954
ARTICLE V
R-2 Residence District
§ 280-18. Application of regulations.
In R-2 Residence Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall
apply.
§ 280-19. Use regulations. [Amended 4-28-1980 by Ord. No. 80-05;
9-8-1980 by Ord. No. 80-20; 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 90-21]
§ 280-20. Area regulations.
A. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any use permitted within R-1A Residence Districts. [Amended
5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-09]
B. The following uses, only when authorized as a conditional use by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to the requirements of Article XXIII,
Conditional Uses:
(1) Density modification development, in accordance with the
requirements of Article XIX, Density Modification Development.
C. Accessory use to include the following: [Added 10-26-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-09]
(1) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Article XX,
§ 280-115.1.
D. The following uses, only when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board of Radnor Township, subject to the general
standards prescribed in § 280-145: [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-10]
(1) Student home, subject to the general standards and provisions of
§ 280-115.2.
A. Lot area and width. Every lot shall have a lot area of not less than
20,000 square feet, and such lot shall be not less than 100 feet in width
at the building line.
B. Building area. Not more than 18% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings.
C. Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts, which shall be not less than 40 feet in depth.
D. Side yards.
(1) For every single-family detached dwelling, there shall be two side
yards, which shall be not less than 45 feet in aggregate width and
neither of which shall be less than 20 feet in width.
§ 280-18 CHARTER § 280-20
C:955
§ 280-21. Height restrictions.
No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height,
except that no accessory building shall exceed 20 feet in height.
§ 280-22. Accessory structures.
Accessory structures to a use permitted herein shall be located as
designated hereunder:
(2) For every building other than a dwelling and its accessory
buildings, there shall be two side yards, neither of which shall be
less than 30 feet in width.
E. Rear yard. For every principal building, there shall be a rear yard,
which shall be not less than 40 feet in depth.
F. Maximum impervious surfaces: 30%. [Added 11-22-1999 by Ord. No.
99-37; amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-19]
G. Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
A. Attached to a principal building, in which case they shall be part of the
principal building.
B. On the buildable area of a lot but not attached to the principal building,
in which case they shall be separated from the principal building by at
least 10 feet.
C. In the rear yard and side yard of a lot, in which case they shall not be
located closer than 10 feet from a side or rear property line.
D. Air-conditioning units shall in all cases be at least 15 feet from any
property line.
§ 280-20 RADNOR CODE § 280-22
C:956
ARTICLE VI
R-3 Residence District
§ 280-23. Application of regulations.
In R-3 Residence Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall
apply.
§ 280-24. Use regulations. [Amended 12-8-1980 by Ord. No. 80-30;
5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 90-21]
§ 280-25. Area regulations.
A. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any use permitted in R-2 Residence Districts.
B. The following uses, when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the general standards prescribed in
§ 280-145:
(1) Those uses authorized under § 280-14B by special exception.
(2) Church or similar places of worship, including rectory or parish
house, provided that such rectory or parish house contains not
more than one dwelling unit.
(3) Student home, subject to the general standards and provisions of
§ 280-115.2. [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
C. The following uses, only when authorized as a conditional use by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to the requirements of Article XXIII,
Conditional Uses:
(1) Density modification development, in accordance with the
requirements of Article XIX, Density Modification Development.
D. Accessory use to include the following: [Added 10-26-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-09]
(1) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Article XX,
§ 280-115.1.
A. Lot area and width. Every lot shall have a lot area of not less than
10,000 square feet, and such lot shall be not less than 70 feet in width
at the building line.
B. Building area. Not more than 25% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings.
C. Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts, which shall be not less than 35 feet in depth.
D. Side yards.
§ 280-23 CHARTER § 280-25
C:957
§ 280-26. Height restrictions.
No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height,
except that no accessory building shall exceed 20 feet in height.
§ 280-27. Accessory structures.
Accessory structures to a use permitted herein shall be located as
designated hereunder:
(1) For every single-family detached dwelling, there shall be two side
yards, which shall be not less than 35 feet in aggregate width and
neither of which shall be less than 15 feet in width.
(2) For every building other than a dwelling and its accessory
buildings, there shall be two side yards, neither of which shall be
less than 20 feet in width.
E. Rear yard. For every principal building, there shall be a rear yard,
which shall not be less than 35 feet in depth.
F. Maximum impervious surfaces: 35%. [Added 11-22-1999 by Ord. No.
99-37; amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-19]
G. Riparian buffer setback: 30 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
A. Attached to a principal building, in which case they shall be part of the
principal building.
B. On the buildable area of a lot but not attached to the principal building,
in which case they shall be separated from the principal building by at
least 10 feet.
C. In the rear yard and side yard of a lot, in which case they shall not be
located closer than 10 feet from a side or rear property line.
D. Air-conditioning units shall in all cases be at least 10 feet from any
property line.
§ 280-25 RADNOR CODE § 280-27
C:958
ARTICLE VII
R-4 Residence District
§ 280-28. Application of regulations.
In R-4 Residence Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall
apply.
§ 280-29. Use regulations. [Amended 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 90-21]
§ 280-30. Area regulations.
A. A building may be erected and a lot may be used or occupied for any use
permitted in R-3 Residence Districts.
B. The following uses, only when authorized as a conditional use by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to the requirements of Article XXIII,
Conditional Uses:
(1) Density modification development, in accordance with the
requirements of Article XIX, Density Modification Development.
C. Accessory use to include the following: [Added 10-26-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-09]
(1) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Article XX,
§ 280-115.1.
D. The following uses, only when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board of Radnor Township, subject to the general
standards prescribed in § 280-145: [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-10]
(1) Student home, subject to the general standards and provisions of
§ 280-115.2.
A. Lot area and width. Every lot shall have a lot area of not less than 7,000
square feet, and such lot shall be not less than 55 feet in width at the
building line.
B. Building area. Not more than 30% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings.
C. Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts which shall be not less than 30 feet in depth.
D. Side yards.
(1) For every single-family detached dwelling, there shall be two side
yards, which shall be not less than 30 feet in aggregate width and
neither of which shall be less than 12 feet in width.
§ 280-28 CHARTER § 280-30
C:959
§ 280-31. Height restrictions.
No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height,
except that no accessory building shall exceed 20 feet in height.
§ 280-32. Accessory structures.
Accessory structures to a use permitted herein shall be located as
designated hereunder:
(2) For every building other than a dwelling and its accessory
buildings, there shall be two side yards, neither of which shall be
less than 15 feet in width.
E. Rear yard. For every principal building, there shall be a rear yard which
shall be not less than 30 feet in depth.
F. Maximum impervious surfaces: 40%. [Added 11-22-1999 by Ord. No.
99-37; amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-19]
G. Riparian buffer setback: 25 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
A. Attached to a principal building, in which case they shall be a part of the
principal building.
B. On the buildable area of a lot but not attached to the principal building,
in which case they shall be separated from the principal building by at
least 10 feet.
C. In the rear yard and side yard of a lot, in which case they shall not be
closer than three feet from a side or rear property line.
D. Air-conditioning units shall in all cases be at least seven feet from any
property line.
§ 280-30 RADNOR CODE § 280-32
C:960
ARTICLE VIII
R-5 Residence District
§ 280-33. Application of regulations.
In R-5 Residence Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall
apply.
§ 280-34. Use regulations. [Amended 11-22-1976 by Ord. No. 1636;
2-28-1977 by Ord. No. 77-06; 6-25-1984 by Ord. No. 84-16;
3-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-07; 10-27-1986 by Ord. No. 86-39;
1-11-1988 by Ord. No. 88-04; 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-22]
A building or, where authorized, a multiple-dwelling group may be erected
or used and a lot may be occupied for any of the following purposes:
A. Any use permitted in R-4 Residence Districts.
B. Single-family semidetached dwelling, provided that the dwelling with
which it has a party wall in common is erected at the same time.
C. Two-family detached dwelling.
D. Multiple dwelling, apartment house or townhouse as defined in
§ 280-4B.
E. Multiple-dwelling group, provided that the plan for such use is subject
to approval in accordance with the requirements governing a unified
group of buildings in § 280-4B and subject also to the requirements of
§ 280-36.
F. Accessory use to include home occupations as set forth in Article XX,
§ 280-115.1. In R-5 Districts, the term "accessory use" shall not be
construed to permit a restaurant or any commercial facility in
connection with the multiple dwelling or multiple-dwelling group.
[Amended 10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 98-09]
G. The following use, when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the general standards prescribed in
§ 280-145:
(1) Conversion of a single-family detached dwelling to a rooming house
with accommodations for not more than three roomers, provided
that:
(a) The dwelling proposed for conversion shall comply with all
established lot area and width requirements for single-family
detached dwellings within R-5 Residential Zoning Districts.
(b) Off-street parking shall comply with § 280-103 and shall be
screened from adjacent residential properties by an approved
buffer planting strip or fence of sufficient height and density
not to be seen through.
§ 280-33 CHARTER § 280-34
C:961
§ 280-35. Area and height regulations.
(c) The dwelling proposed for conversion shall be owner occupied
so long as roomers are permitted to reside there. Failure of the
owner to continue to occupy the dwelling shall terminate any
special exception granted under this section.
(d) Rental rooms shall comply with the minimum requirements of
the Property Maintenance Code,255 provided that no rental
room shall contain more than two roomers.
(e) There shall be an additional separate bathroom facility
provided solely for the use of the roomers.
(2) Student home, subject to the general standards and provisions of
§ 280-115.2. [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
A. Regulations applying to uses other than multiple dwellings. The
following area and height regulations shall apply to every building
hereafter erected or used as a single-family or two-family dwelling and
to every main building other than a dwelling:
(1) Lot area and width. Every building hereafter erected or used in
whole or in part as a dwelling shall have a lot area and lot width at
the building line of not less than the requirements set forth below,
subject also to the provisions of § 280-101 relating to
nonconforming lots: [Amended 11-23-1981 by Ord. No. 81-28;
5-12-1982 by Ord. No. 82-12]
Type of Dwelling
Minimum Lot Area
per Family
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Single-family
detached
5,500 55
Single-family
semidetached
5,445 40
Two-family
detached
5,445 80
(2) Building area. Not more than 35% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings.
(3) Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts, which shall be not less than 25 feet in depth.
(4) Side yards. Side yards shall be provided on every lot as follows:
255. Editor's Note: See Ch. 222, Property Maintenance.
§ 280-34 RADNOR CODE § 280-35
C:962
(a) For every single- or two-family detached dwelling and its
accessory buildings, there shall be two side yards, neither of
which shall be less than 10 feet in width.
(b) For every semidetached dwelling and its accessory buildings,
there shall be one side yard which shall be not less than 10 feet
in width.
(c) For every building other than a dwelling and its accessory
buildings, there shall be two side yards, neither of which shall
be less than 15 feet in width.
(5) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall be not
less than 20 feet in depth.
(6) Height. No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 35
feet in height, except that no accessory building shall exceed 20
feet in height.
(7) Accessory building exception. A private garage or other accessory
building may be erected within three feet of a rear or side yard line
or separated at least 10 feet from the main building, provided that
the distance from the main building may be reduced to not less
than three feet in the case of a lot existing at the effective date of
this chapter.
(8) Maximum impervious surfaces: 40%. [Added 11-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-37; amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-19]
(9) Riparian buffer setback: 15 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
B. Regulations applying to multiple dwellings. The following area and
height regulations shall apply to every building or group of buildings
hereafter erected or used as a multiple dwelling, apartment house or
multiple-dwelling group. In the case of a multiple-dwelling group, the
group of buildings as a unit shall comply with the provisions of this
subsection:
(1) Lot area and width. Every multiple dwelling or permitted
apartment use shall have a lot area per dwelling unit or, in the case
of a multiple-dwelling group, an average lot area per dwelling unit
of not less than 5,445 square feet and a minimum lot width at the
building line of not less than 100 feet. [Amended 11-23-1981 by
Ord. No. 81-28; 5-12-1982 by Ord. No. 82-12]
(2) Building area. Not more than 30% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings.
(3) Yards.
(a) Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which
a lot abuts which shall be not less than 50 feet in depth.
§ 280-35 CHARTER § 280-35
C:963
§ 280-36. Special regulations for multiple-dwelling groups.
(b) Side yards. There shall be two side yards for each multiple
dwelling or permitted apartment use, neither of which shall be
less than 30 feet in width.
(c) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall be
not less than 30 feet in depth.
(4) Height. No building or structure shall exceed four stories or 40 feet
in height, except that no accessory structure shall exceed 20 feet in
height.
(5) Building size. The greatest dimension in length or depth of an
apartment building shall not exceed 160 feet.
(6) Minimum room sizes. Rooms in multiple dwellings shall have the
following minimum areas, exclusive of closet space. Any floor space
exceeding 40 square feet, enclosed by partitions or walls having
cased openings or doors of any type, shall be deemed to be a room.
A basement shall not contain habitable rooms except for janitor's
living quarters, which shall be counted as a dwelling unit.
Type of Room
Floor Area
(square feet)
First bedroom 160
All other bedrooms 120
Living room 240
Dining room 160
Dinette 120
Kitchen 80
Bath 40
(7) Minimum habitable floor area. Each apartment unit shall have not
less than 600 square feet of gross habitable floor area, not
including stairs and corridors.
(8) Accessory building exception. A private garage or other accessory
building may be erected within a rear or side yard if separated at
least 10 feet from the main building, provided that no such building
shall be located less than three feet from a side lot line nor less
than three feet from a rear lot line. Where a planting strip is
required, no building shall be located therein.
(9) Maximum impervious surfaces: 36%. [Added 11-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-37; amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-19]
(10) Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
§ 280-35 RADNOR CODE § 280-36
C:964
A. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the plan for the
proposed development shall comply with the special standards of
Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land, relating to multiple-dwelling groups.
B. Along each side or rear property line which directly abuts a residence
area not devoted to apartment use in the district or in an adjoining
district or municipality, a buffer planting strip, as defined in § 280-4B, of
not less than 10 feet in width shall be provided.
C. The off-street parking, off-street loading and special requirements
relating to highway frontage prescribed in §§ 280-103, 280-104 and
280-105 shall apply in the case of the proposed use.
§ 280-36 CHARTER § 280-36
C:965

ARTICLE VIIIA
R-6 Residence District
[Added 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-24]
§ 280-36.1. Purpose; application of regulations.
The purpose of transit-oriented development (TOD) shall be to provide
for compact development or redevelopment of multiple dwellings when
located close to a public mass transit opportunity, including surface or rail
transportation. TOD shall be designed and located to encourage residents
and workers to drive their cars less, to walk more, and to utilize available
mass transit. These developments or redevelopments shall generally be
of moderate or high density, located along major corridors, and similar
in scale and density to existing structures within the area. The primary
characteristic of TOD is higher density provided by way of increased
building and coverage allowances. The following conditions shall apply for
any development or redevelopment based on TOD:
§ 280-36.2. Use regulations.
A building or unified group of buildings may be constructed or used and a
lot may be occupied for the following purposes:
A. Shall be located within 1/4 mile of a public mass transit opportunity.
B. Shall have frontage on an arterial cartway.
C. Shall be located in proximity to similar uses and densities.
D. Shall be located within 1/2 mile of a business district as defined in the
2003 Comprehensive Plan.
E. Shall be subject to land development approval and submission of a
transportation impact study, as required by Chapter 255, Subdivision of
Land.
F. Shall have a minimum lot size of not less than two acres.
A. High density multiple-family development, subject to the density, lot
area, height, setback, buffer and other requirements as set forth in this
article.
B. Accessory uses on the same lot and incidental to the foregoing
permitted use, which shall include:
(1) Management office to provide services exclusively for the
development.
(2) Private garage or required off-street parking area.
(3) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Article XX,
§ 280-115.1.
§ 280-36.1 CHARTER § 280-36.2
C:967
§ 280-36.3. Area, height, and yard regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to every building hereafter erected or
used as a multiple dwelling, apartment house or multiple-dwelling group; in
the case of a multiple-dwelling group, the group of buildings as a unit shall
comply with the provisions of this section:
§ 280-36.4. Special regulations.
(4) Signs as may be permitted by Article XXI, Signs.
C. The following uses, only when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board of Radnor Township, subject to the general
standards prescribed in § 280-145: [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-10]
(1) Student home, subject to the general standards and provisions of
§ 280-115.2.
A. Lot area and width. Every multiple dwelling or permitted apartment use
shall have a lot area per dwelling unit, or in the case of a multipledwelling
group, an average lot area per dwelling unit of not less than
2,100 square feet. No minimum lot width shall be required under this
subsection.
B. Building area. Not more than 70% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings or other impervious surfaces.
C. Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each lot of not less than 30
feet in depth, in which no building or required off-street parking spaces
shall be located.
D. Side yards. There shall be two side yards for each multiple dwelling or
permitted apartment use, neither of which shall be less than 20 feet in
width.
E. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall not be less
than 25 feet in depth.
F. Height. A building or structure shall not exceed four stories and shall
not exceed 40 feet in height, except that no accessory structure shall
exceed 20 feet in height.
G. Building size. The greatest dimension in length or depth of a building
shall not exceed 160 feet, except when such building contains visibly
offset architectural features, subject to approval by the Design Review
Board, at an angle of approximately 90°.
H. Accessory buildings. A private garage or other accessory building may
be erected within a rear or side yard if separated at least 10 feet from
the main building, provided that no such building shall be located less
than three feet from a rear or side yard. Where a buffer planting strip is
required, no building shall be located therein.
§ 280-36.2 RADNOR CODE § 280-36.4
C:968
A. Along each side or rear property line which directly abuts a residence
area not devoted to apartment use in the district or in an adjoining
district or municipality, a buffer planting strip of 10 feet as defined in
§ 280-4 shall be provided and maintained. The composition and location
of the buffer planting strip shall be subject to approval by the Shade
Tree Commission.
B. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall comply with the
requirements of § 280-103.
C. Sidewalk access shall be provided and maintained to any new
development or redevelopment of buildings. Sidewalks shall comply
with Township specifications and be located to provide pedestrian
access to an existing sidewalk to encourage use of mass transit.
D. All applicants for development under § 280-36.1 shall be subject to
review and approval by the Design Review Board.
§ 280-36.4 CHARTER § 280-36.4
C:969

ARTICLE IX
PA Planned Apartment District
[Amended 11-23-1981 by Ord. No. 81-28; 5-12-1982 by Ord. No.
82-12; 6-11-1990 by Ord. No. 90-25]
§ 280-37. Purpose; application of regulations.
PA Planned Apartment Districts are designed primarily to make special
provisions for low-density, low-lot coverage apartment development
appropriate with a predominantly single-family residential environment. PA
Districts may be established and developed only in accordance with the
special provisions of § 280-132 and subject to the regulations of this article
and any other pertinent provisions of this chapter. In PA Planned Apartment
Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall apply.
§ 280-38. Use regulations.
A building or unified group of buildings may be created or used and a lot
may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Low-density apartment development, provided that the proposed use
shall comply with the special area, height, setback, buffer and other
requirements as set forth below.
C. Accessory structures and uses on the same lot and customarily
incidental to the foregoing permitted uses, which shall include:
[Amended 10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 98-09]
(1) Rental or management office to provide services exclusively for the
development.
(2) Private garage or off-street parking lot or area.
(3) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Article XX, Section
115.1.
(4) Swimming pools and tennis courts, subject to the following
requirements:
(a) No swimming pool or tennis court shall be located within the
front yard setback or closer than 75 feet to any side or rear
property line.
(b) Light standards for illumination shall not exceed a height of 20
feet and shall be equipped with a shielding device to protect
streets and adjoining property from glare or hazardous
interference. A lighting plan shall be submitted and approved
by the Township Engineer prior to installation.
(5) Signs as permitted in Article XXI, Signs.
§ 280-37 CHARTER § 280-38
C:971
§ 280-39. Area and height regulations.
§ 280-40. Special regulations for apartment developments.
D. The following uses, only when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board of Radnor Township, subject to the general
standards prescribed in § 280-145: [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-10]
(1) Student home, subject to the general standards and provisions of
§ 280-115.2.
A. Lot area and width. Every lot on which a building or structure is
hereafter erected or used shall have a lot area of not less than five
acres, and such lot shall not be less than 300 feet in width at the
building line.
B. Density. The total number of dwelling units shall not exceed 10 units
per acre.
C. Lot coverage. Not more than 20% of the area of each lot may be covered
by buildings and accessory structures, and not less than 50% of the
total lot area, exclusive of those areas within the public right-of-way,
shall be landscaped and retained as passive open space. [Amended
4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-04]
D. Building placement. No building shall be located less than 150 feet from
a street right-of-way line nor less than 100 feet from a side or rear
property line, and no parking, loading or service area shall be located
less than 100 feet from a street right-of-way or other property line.
E. Building height. No building or structure shall exceed two stories or 38
feet in height.
F. Building size and spacing. The greatest dimension in length or depth of
a building shall not exceed 160 feet. The distance between any two
buildings shall not be less than 45 feet.
G. Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
A. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the plan for the
proposed development shall comply with the special standards of
Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land, relating to apartment
development.256
B. Along each side or rear property line which directly abuts a singlefamily
residence district in the Township or a similar district in an
adjoining municipality, a buffer planting strip, as defined in § 280-4B, of
not less than 50 feet in width shall be provided.
256. Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Subdivision of Land, § 255-40.
§ 280-38 RADNOR CODE § 280-40
C:972
C. All off-street parking and loading, access facilities and service areas
used by motor vehicles shall comply with the provisions of §§ 280-103,
280-104 and 280-105. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be
located immediately contiguous to the development.
D. All rooms shall comply with the provisions of § 280-35B(6) relating to
minimum room size. A basement shall not contain habitable rooms
except for janitor's living quarters, which shall be counted as a dwelling
unit.
§ 280-40 CHARTER § 280-40
C:973

ARTICLE X
CO Commercial-Office District
§ 280-41. Purpose; application of regulations.
CO Commercial-Office Districts are designed to make special provision
for certain areas of the Township which, by virtue of their location with
regard to existing commercial and residential areas, properly can serve as
a transition between such areas. In CO Commercial-Office Districts, the
regulations contained in this article shall apply.
§ 280-42. Use regulations. [Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21;
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 6-21-1999 by Ord. No. 99-17]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes:
§ 280-43. Area and height regulations. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-11; 4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-04; 6-21-1999 by Ord. No.
99-17]
A. Office or studio, not involving characteristics normally associated with
retail activities on the premises.
B. Bank or similar financial institution, to include a security-vault storage
building.
C. Day-care center, private kindergarten or other similar use, when
authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board
pursuant to the general standards prescribed in § 280-145.
D. Accessory uses, including:
(1) Signs as permitted in Article XXI.
A. Lot area. Every lot on which a building is erected or used shall have a
minimum lot or tract size dependent on the number of stories per
building, as follows:
(1) Two stories or less: not less than 20,000 square feet.
(2) Three stories: not less than 30,000 square feet.
B. Lot width. Every lot shall have a lot width at the building line of not less
than 100 feet.
C. Building area. Not more than 20% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings and not less than 50% of the total lot area,
exclusive of those areas within the public right-of-way, shall be devoted
to landscaping and planted in accordance with Chapter 255,
Subdivision of Land.
§ 280-41 CHARTER § 280-43
C:975
§ 280-44. Special regulations. [Amended 3-25-1985 by Ord. No.
85-07; 6-21-1999 by Ord. No. 99-17]
In addition to the applicable provisions of the other regulations of this
chapter, the following specific regulations shall apply:
§ 280-45. Conversion of dwelling to nonresidence use.
No dwelling shall be converted to a nonresidence use except in accordance
with provisions of this section, subject also to the general standards
prescribed in § 280-145. The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize as a
special exception the conversion of any dwelling existing at the effective
date of this chapter to any nonresidence use permitted in the district,
provided that:
D. Building placement. No building shall be located less than 65 feet from
a street right-of-way line, less than 20 feet from a side property line nor
less than 25 feet from a rear property line.
E. No building shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height.
F. (Reserved)
G. Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
A. Along each side and rear property line which abuts a residential district
in the Township or similar district in another municipality, a buffer
planting strip, as defined in § 280-4B, of not less than 10 feet shall be
provided and maintained.
B. Areas designated for refuse disposal shall be screened and maintained
in accordance with the following options:
(1) Six-foot-high sight-tight fence.
(2) Eight-foot-high evergreen screen of trees or shrubs, planted a
minimum of nine feet on a center in a double staggered row.
C. No products or goods shall be displayed on the exterior of the premises
or from show windows in the buildings.
D. Where there is more than one building on a lot, a minimum distance
between buildings of 25 feet shall be maintained.
E. The off-street parking, off-street loading and special requirements
relating to highway frontage prescribed in §§ 280-103, 280-104 and
280-105 shall apply in CO Commercial-Office Districts.
A. The proposed use shall comply with the yard, area, off-street parking
and other requirements covering office or commercial use in the
district, insofar as practicable.
§ 280-43 RADNOR CODE § 280-45
C:976
B. No existing yards or required open spaces shall be reduced to less than
the requirements of this district governing a permitted use.
C. No living accommodation or sleeping quarters shall be authorized
except such accessory use as is permitted in the district.
D. The proposed reconstruction and conversion shall be in keeping with
the predominant character of the district and shall not detract from the
use of an adjoining property for any permitted use.
§ 280-45 CHARTER § 280-45
C:977

ARTICLE XI
C-1 Local Commercial District
§ 280-46. Purpose; application of regulations.
C-1 Local Commercial Districts provide for the special requirements of
retail convenience-type commercial establishments which serve primarily
the day-to-day needs of the immediately surrounding neighborhood and
encourage attractive, compact retail commercial development in locations
close to the residences served. In C-1 Local Commercial Districts, the
regulations contained in this article shall apply.
§ 280-47. Use regulations.
A detached or semidetached building may be erected or used and a lot may
be used or occupied for any one combination of the following purposes,
provided that the use and conversion of any existing dwelling shall comply
with the provisions of §§ 280-45 and 280-101:
A. Retail store designed primarily to provide daily service to residents of
the immediately surrounding area and with a gross floor area not in
excess of 10,000 square feet.
B. Restaurant or similar establishment.
C. Personal service shop, such as barbershop, beautician or clothescleaning
and -pressing pickup agency, but not including laundry, drycleaning
or clothes-pressing establishment.
D. Retail service shop or custom shop, such as bakery, candy, ice cream or
similar shop; custom tailoring or millinery shop; clock, watch or jewelry
shop; radio, television or household appliance repair shop, provided
that:
(1) Any processing activity, if located on the ground floor, shall be not
less than 15 feet from the front of the building and shall be
screened by a wall or partition from the front portion of the
building used by customers.
(2) Any article made shall be sold at retail from the premises.
(3) The area devoted to processing shall constitute not more than 40%
of the gross floor area.
E. Office or studio, to include the establishment of a veterinarian.
[Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21]
F. Bank or similar financial institution.
G. Automatic self-service laundry, when authorized as a special exception
by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the general standards
prescribed in § 280-145.
§ 280-46 CHARTER § 280-47
C:979
§ 280-48. Area and height regulations. [Amended 4-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-04; 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 99-30]
H. Telephone central office, including office open to the general public;
radio broadcasting studio; and other governmental or public-service
use. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
I. Motor vehicle parking lot.
J. Accessory uses may include:
(1) Storage within a completely enclosed building in conjunction with a
permitted use.
(2) Living accommodations or sleeping quarters for the proprietor of a
store or business establishment or for a watchman or similar
employees, provided that no such dwelling accommodation shall be
located on the first floor.
(3) Signs, as permitted in Article XXI, Signs.
(4) Outdoor dining in accordance with the requirements of
§ 280-115.4. [Added 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
K. Church or similar place of worship, including rectory or parish house,
provided that such rectory or parish house contains not more than one
dwelling unit. [Added 12-8-1980 by Ord. No. 80-30]
A. Lot area and width. Every lot shall have a lot area of not less than
15,000 square feet, and such lot shall be not less than 100 feet in width
at the building line.
B. Building area. Not more than 25% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings or structures.
C. Front yards. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts, which shall be not less than 20 feet in depth.
D. Side yards. Side yards shall be provided on each street as follows:
(1) For every detached building, there shall be two side yards, neither
of which shall be less than 20 feet in width.
(2) For every semidetached building, there shall be one side yard
which shall be not less than 20 feet in width.
E. Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard on each lot, which shall be not
less than 35 feet in depth or not less than 35% of the lot depth,
whichever is the greater.
F. Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
G. Lot coverage. Not more than 60% of each lot may be occupied by
impervious surfaces.
§ 280-47 RADNOR CODE § 280-48
C:980
§ 280-49. Special regulations.
In order to encourage sound and attractive commercial development, the
following special requirements shall apply:
H. Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
A. Every use, other than a parking lot and outdoor dining, shall be
completely enclosed within a building. [Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord.
No. 2012-09]
B. Except for outdoor dining as permitted by § 280-115.3, no permanent
storage of merchandise, articles or equipment shall be permitted
outside a building, and no goods, articles or equipment shall be stored,
displayed or offered for sale beyond the front lines of a building. No
outdoor vending machine, self-serving station or similar use shall be
allowed in any required yard abutting a street or on a public sidewalk.
[Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21; 4-8-2013 by Ord. No.
2012-09]
C. Along each side or rear property line which directly abuts a residence
district in the Township or a similar district in an adjoining municipality,
there shall be a buffer planting strip as defined in § 280-4B, not less
than 15 feet in width.
D. No permanent storage of merchandise, articles or equipment shall be
permitted outside a building, and no goods, articles or equipment shall
be stored, displayed or offered for sale beyond the front lines of a
building. No outdoor vending machine, self-service station or similar
use shall be allowed in any required yard abutting a street or on a
public sidewalk.
E. The greatest dimension in length or depth of a building shall not exceed
160 feet.
F. The off-street parking, off-street loading and special requirements
relating to highway frontage prescribed in §§ 280-103, 280-104 and
280-105 shall apply in C-1 Local Commercial Districts.
§ 280-48 CHARTER § 280-49
C:981

ARTICLE XIA
Garrett Hill Zoning District
[Added 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-28]
§ 280-49.1. Legal basis.
A new Article XIA creating provisions for the Garrett Hill Zoning District
within Chapter 280, Zoning, of the Township Zoning Code is enabled
through provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, PL 805, No.
247, as reenacted and amended.257
§ 280-49.2. Purpose; intent of regulations.
Article XIA of the Zoning Code is hereby enacted to provide and manage
opportunities for development and redevelopment within the Garrett Hill
Zoning District (hereinafter "GHZD") as set forth in the Garrett Hill Master
Plan adopted by the Board of Commissioners on July 21, 2008, and revised
July 20, 2009, as set forth in Exhibit A.258 These regulations are intended to
provide for maintaining and/or improving the character of Garrett Hill, for
an appropriate mix of residential and nonresidential uses within the GHZD
and provide for enhanced vibrancy through building, site, and streetscape
design.
§ 280-49.3. Designation of district boundaries.
The GHZD shall be all properties within the boundaries designated in the
Garrett Hill Zoning District Map as set forth on Exhibit B.259
§ 280-49.4. Conflict with other Code sections.
The definitions and regulations set forth in this article shall apply to the
GHZD. Wherever there is a conflict or inconsistency between the GHZD
regulations and other definitions and regulations of the Zoning Code, those
regulations set forth in this article shall govern development and
redevelopment within the GHZD.
§ 280-49.5. Definitions.
As used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE — A use of a building, structure or land that is not a
principal permitted use but which is customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal permitted use on the same lot.
ARCHITECTURAL OFFSETS — Portions of a building wall along a street
which are offset so as to create articulation of the building wall. These
257. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
258. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
259. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 280-49.1 CHARTER § 280-49.5
C:983
offsets shall be 90° perpendicular to the building and shall be a minimum of
12 inches in depth. These offsets shall also be carried throughout the roof
planes or shall coincide with a perpendicular change in the direction of the
roof slope. (See Figure 1).
Figure 1
BAR — An establishment used for the serving of alcoholic beverages,
including liquor, beer and/or wine, by the drink to the general public,
whether or not it serves food. It may provide musical or other entertainment
as an incidental or accessory function.
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Radnor,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING — Any structure permanently located on land having enclosing
walls and a roof. This shall include a parking structure.
BUILDING LINE — The line within a lot delineating the front yard setback;
a line parallel to the street right-of-way at a distance measured from the
centerline of the cartway.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The greatest vertical distance between the mean
level at existing grade in front of a building or structure along a street
right-of-way measured to the top ridge of a sloped roof or the top of a
roof parapet. Chimneys and uninhabited spires shall not be included when
measuring height; however, elevator penthouses and stair towers shall be
included. Roof-mounted HVAC equipment shall be placed in the center
interior area of the roof, and shall be screened from visibility from the public
cartway.
BUILDING LENGTH — The linear distance in feet between the outside
exterior walls of a building measured from side to side, perpendicular to the
cartway.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL or PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — The main building on
a lot or any building that is not an accessory building. The principal building
shall contain the principal use or, in the case of a mixed use district, uses on
the lot.
BUILDING WIDTH — The linear distance in feet between the outside
exterior walls of a building measured from side to side, parallel to the
cartway.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A state-licensed and/or registered facility
in which care is provided or is intended to be provided for five or more
children at any age at any time.
§ 280-49.5 RADNOR CODE § 280-49.5
C:984
CHILD DAY-CARE HOME — A state-licensed and/or registered single-family
dwelling in which child care is provided at any time for not more than five
children under the age of 16, including any children under the age of 16
who are residents of the dwelling.
CONCRETE APRON — An extension of a slab that provides a transition from
slab to grade.
DEMOLITION — The tearing down or razing of 75% of a structure's external
walls down to the foundation. This shall not include structurally integral
party walls.
DEPARTMENT — The Community Development Department of Radnor
Township.
DOMICILIARY CARE UNIT — An existing building or structure designed for
a single-family dwelling unit for one family that provides twenty-four-hour
supervised living arrangements by the family residing therein for not more
than five unrelated persons 18 years of age or above who are dependent
physically, mentally or emotionally.
DRIVE-IN — An establishment whose business includes serving food to
the public for consumption on the premises by order from and service to
vehicular passengers outside the structure.
DRIVE-THROUGH — An establishment that dispenses products or services
to patrons who remain in vehicles.
DWELLING — A building or structure, or part of a building or structure,
designed for living quarters for one family.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED — A building containing one
dwelling unit and having two party walls in common with other buildings
(such as a rowhouse or townhouse). The end unit for each row of dwelling
units shall be a single-family semidetached dwelling unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED — A building containing one
dwelling unit and having two side yards.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, SEMIDETACHED — A building containing
one dwelling unit, having one side yard and one party wall in common with
another building.
FULL-SERVICE AUTOMOBILE REPAIR — A business that offers all aspects
of mechanical repairs or servicing of automobiles, trucks or similar motor
vehicles. Services shall not include the dispensing of fuel, quick-service
operations or body shops.
GARRETT HILL MASTER PLAN — The Garrett Hill District Master Plan as
adopted by the Board of Commissioners on July 21, 2008.
GARRETT HILL ZONING DISTRICT (GHZD) — The area defined as such in
the Garrett Hill Master Plan.
HABITABLE AREA — An interior space within a structure for living or
working.
§ 280-49.5 CHARTER § 280-49.5
C:985
HABITABLE SQUARE FOOTAGE — Areas of a building that have a minimum
vertical distance of seven feet six inches from finished floor to finished
ceiling.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of Radnor Township.
HIP ROOF — A roof with sloped sides and ends or end.
LANDSCAPED AREA — An area unoccupied by pavement or structures
and open to the sky in either a landscaped, grassed, wooded or otherwise
natural condition, which may include recreational fields and lawns.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of an individual
parcel of land, excluding any area within a street right-of-way, but including
the area of any easement.
LOT LINE (PROPERTY LINE) — A line dividing one lot from another.
LOT WIDTH — Width of a lot measured at the street right-of-way line for the
various zoning districts per this article.
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A building that permits more than one use.
OFFICE, BUSINESS — The use of space primarily for conducting affairs of
a business, profession, service industry or government activity.
OFFICE, MEDICAL — A place where medical or dental care is furnished to
persons or animals on an outpatient basis by one or more doctors, dentists
or veterinarians, without overnight boarding of animals or outside runs.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL — An office that includes accountants, attorneys,
psychologists, insurance agents, real estate agents or other professionals
providing direct services to clients.
OFF-STREET PARKING — An area other than a street or alley used
exclusively for the parking of currently registered and licensed motor
vehicles or bicycles.
ON-STREET PARKING — The space for the parking of motor vehicles
located on the street in front of a building.
PERSONAL CARE SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in
providing services involving the care of a person, such as beauty shops,
barbershops, nail salons, shoe repair, salons, and tanning. This definition
includes incidental uses and additional related cosmetic and/or beauty
services, such as facials, waxing and the retail sale of cosmetic products.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main or primary use of property or structure
measured in terms of the area occupied by such use.
RESTAURANT — An establishment primarily engaged in preparing and
serving food and beverages for consumption on or off the premises. Delivery
and catering services may also occur. Sales of alcoholic beverages shall be
ancillary to the overall establishment.
ROOF — The exterior surface on the top of a building.
SHARED PARKING — A public or private parking area used jointly by two or
more owners or uses regardless of whether they are on separate properties.
§ 280-49.5 RADNOR CODE § 280-49.5
C:986
SIGN, PROJECTING — Any sign which is attached to a building or other
structure and extends beyond the line of said building or structure and is
perpendicular to the face of the building.
STORY — That part of a building or structure between any floor and the
floor or the roof next above.
STRUCTURED PARKING — A building, or portion of a building in which
vehicles are parked or stored.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare used in or intended to be
used for passage or travel by motor vehicles. Streets are further classified
according to the functions they perform.
STUDIO — An establishment in which fine art or crafts are made or
manufactured by visual artists and craftspeople. A studio is characterized
by artists engaged in an occupation, vocation or trade requiring special
dexterity and artistic skill in the production of a unique art or craft object.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor, a home rule municipality in
Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP CODE — The Code of the Township of Radnor, Delaware
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 280-49.6. Garrett Avenue Neighborhood (GH-N).
The Garrett Avenue Neighborhood District is composed largely of singlefamily
homes, some containing home occupations. The purpose of this
District is to preserve the small-scale single-family residential character
while providing for low-impact home based business opportunities.
ARTERIALS — Major regional highways, with full or partial access
control, designed for a large volume of through traffic. An ADT count of
10,000 trips is expected.
A.
COLLECTORS — Streets which primarily serve to connect local streets
with arterials and ADT count of 651 to 3,500 trips is expected.
B.
LOCAL STREETS — Streets used primarily to provide access to more
heavily traveled streets for abutting properties in internally developed
areas. An ADT count of up to 650 trips is expected.
C.
A. Area/yard/setback/coverage/height regulations.
(1) Building line and setbacks.
(a) Front yard.
[1] Minimum: 26 feet.
[2] Maximum: 36 feet.
(b) Side (distance from side lot lines).
[1] For detached structures:
§ 280-49.5 CHARTER § 280-49.6
C:987
[a] Parking access: 10 feet.
[b] Minimum side without parking access: three feet.
[2] For semidetached structures: 10 feet.
(c) Rear (distance from rear lot line): 20 feet.
(2) Building size.
(a) Building height and rooflines. Note: Flat and hip roofs are
prohibited. The habitable square footage of the third story of
any building shall not exceed 60% of the square footage of the
second story.
[1] Not to exceed: 30 feet.
[2] Minimum roof pitch shall be 6:12.
[3] Maximum roof pitch shall be 18:12.
(b) Building dimensions.
[1] Maximum width: 30 feet.
[2] Maximum building coverage on lot: 35%.
(3) Lot development standards.
(a) Minimum lot size: 3,000 square feet.
(b) Maximum lot width: 70 feet.
(c) Maximum impervious coverage: 60%.
(d) Interior lots shall be prohibited.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Permitted primary uses.
(a) Residential.
[1] Single-family detached dwelling.
[2] Single-family semidetached dwelling.
(2) Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(a) Nontraffic home occupation.
(b) Off-street parking and loading area.
(c) Shed, greenhouse, or gazebo.
(d) Detached deck.
(e) Swimming pool.
§ 280-49.6 RADNOR CODE § 280-49.6
C:988
§ 280-49.7. Garrett Avenue (GH-GA).
The Garrett Avenue Mixed Use District contains a mix of residential and
small-scale commercial uses. The purpose of this district is to provide
for single-family residential and small-scale commercial development
integrated into and compatible with a residential neighborhood.
(3) Permitted uses by special exception.
(a) Traffic home occupation.
(b) Child day-care home.
(c) Domiciliary care unit.
C. Accessory structure height and setback regulations.
(1) Maximum height: 20 feet.
(2) Setbacks.
(a) From principal building: 10 feet.
(b) From lot line: three feet.
A. Area/yard/setback/coverage/height regulations.
(1) Setbacks.
(a) Front yard.
[1] Minimum: 26 feet.
[2] Maximum: 36 feet.
(b) Side (distance from side lot lines).
[1] Commercial and/or residential attached structures: zero
feet.
[2] For detached structures:
[a] Parking access: 12 feet.
[b] Side without parking access: five feet.
[3] For semidetached structures: 12 feet.
[4] At end of row for attached structures: 12 feet.
(c) Rear (distance from rear lot line) for primary and accessory
structures.
[1] Adjacent to residential: 15 feet. Note: An opaque
evergreen vegetated buffer at least six feet in height and
§ 280-49.6 CHARTER § 280-49.7
C:989
three feet in depth at time of planting shall be provided
and maintained.
[2] Adjacent to commercial: five feet.
(2) Building size.
(a) Building height and rooflines. Note: Cornices shall be
incorporated as a design element in buildings with flat roofs
and shall be subject to review by the Design Review Board. Hip
roofs shall be prohibited. The habitable square footage of the
third story of any building shall not exceed 60% of the square
footage of the second story.
[1] Maximum height with pitched roof: 30 feet.
[2] Maximum height with flat roof: 25 feet.
[3] Minimum roof pitch shall be 6:12.
[4] Maximum roof pitch shall be 18:12.
(b) Building dimensions.
[1] Maximum width: 65 feet. Note: Any building or set of
attached buildings more than 30 feet wide must use
architectural offsets to "read" as a series of buildings no
wider than 30 feet as seen in Figure 1.260
[2] Maximum building coverage on lot: 70%.
(3) Lot development standards.
(a) Minimum lot size: 3,000 square feet.
(b) Maximum lot width: 100 feet.
(c) Maximum impervious coverage: 80%
(d) Interior lots shall be prohibited.
B. Use regulations
(1) Permitted primary uses.
(a) Residential.
[1] Single-family detached dwelling.
[2] Single-family semidetached dwelling.
[3] Single-family attached dwelling.
(b) Commercial.
260. Editor's Note: See the definition of "architectural offsets" in § 280-49.5.
§ 280-49.7 RADNOR CODE § 280-49.7
C:990
§ 280-49.8. Conestoga Road (GH-CR).
The Conestoga Road District contains a mix of small-scale commercial uses
and residential development. The purpose of this district is to provide for
mixed use development that combines retail, office, and residential uses in
the corridor or on a single site.
[1] Personal care services.
[2] Tailor.
[3] Florist.
[4] Small appliance repair.
[5] Business office.
[6] Professional office.
[7] Surface off-street parking.
(c) Mixed use.
[1] Commercial structure containing one accessory dwelling
unit.
(2) Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(a) Nontraffic home occupation.
(b) Off-street parking and loading area.
(c) Shed, greenhouse, or gazebo.
(d) Detached deck.
(e) Swimming pool.
(3) Permitted uses by special exception.
(a) Traffic home occupation. Note: Traffic home occupations shall
also be permitted by special exception in any mixed-use
dwelling unit.
(b) Child day-care home.
(c) Domiciliary care unit.
C. Accessory structure height regulation.
(1) Maximum height: 20 feet.
A. Area/yard/setback/coverage/height regulations.
(1) Setbacks.
(a) Front building line.
§ 280-49.7 CHARTER § 280-49.8
C:991
[1] On an arterial street with perpendicular parking: 43 feet.
[2] On an arterial street without perpendicular parking: 30
feet.
[3] On a collector or local street with perpendicular parking:
43 feet.
[4] On a collector or local street without perpendicular
parking: 30 feet with parallel parking; 22 feet without
parallel parking.
(b) Side (distance from side lot lines).
[1] Commercial and/or residential attached structures: zero
feet.
[2] For detached structures:
[a] Parking access: 12 feet.
[b] Side without parking access: five feet.
[3] For semidetached structures: 12 feet.
[4] At and of row for attached structures: 12 feet.
(c) Rear (distance from rear lot line) for primary and accessory
structures.
[1] Adjacent to residential: 15 feet. Note: An opaque
evergreen vegetated buffer at least six feet in height and
three feet in depth at time of planting shall be provided
and maintained.
[2] Adjacent to commercial: five feet.
(2) Building size.
(a) Building height and rooflines. Note: Cornices shall be
incorporated as a design element in buildings with flat roofs
and shall be subject to review by the Design Review Board. The
habitable square footage of the third story of any building shall
not exceed 60% of the square footage of the second story.
[1] Maximum height with pitched roof: 35 feet.
[2] Maximum height for flat-roofed building: 30 feet.
[3] Minimum roof pitch shall be 6:12.
[4] Maximum roof pitch shall be 18:12.
(b) Building dimensions.
§ 280-49.8 RADNOR CODE § 280-49.8
C:992
[1] Maximum footprint: 7,500 square feet. Note: Any building
more than 30 feet wide must use architectural offsets to
"read" as a series of buildings no wider than 30 feet as
seen in Figure 1.261
[2] Maximum building coverage on lot: 80%.
(3) Lot development standards.
(a) Minimum lot size: 4,000 square feet.
(b) Maximum lot width: 150 feet.
(c) Maximum impervious coverage: 95%.
(d) Interior lots shall be prohibited.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Permitted primary uses.
(a) Commercial.
[1] Personal care service.
[2] Prepared food store or catering establishment.
[3] Tailor.
[4] Small appliance repair shop.
[5] Business office.
[6] Professional office.
[7] Medical office.
[8] Retail store.
[9] Restaurant.
[10] Self-service and/or full-service laundry.
[11] Dry cleaning pickup or wet cleaning.
[12] Place of worship.
[13] Beer distributor.
[14] Florist.
[15] Locksmith.
[16] Builder/contractor's office.
261. Editor's Note: See the definition of "architectural offsets" in § 280-49.5.
§ 280-49.8 CHARTER § 280-49.8
C:993
§ 280-49.9. Business Campus (GH-BC).
The Rosemont Business Campus District contains a business park. The
purpose of this district is to provide for a high-quality business campus
environment that is compatible with surrounding residential and small-scale
commercial uses.
[17]Off-street parking.
(b) Mixed-use.
[1] Commercial structure containing one or more dwelling
units.
(2) Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(a) Nontraffic home occupations.
(b) Off-street parking and loading area.
(c) Shed, greenhouse, or gazebo.
(d) Structured parking.262
(3) Permitted uses by special exception.
(a) Traffic home occupation. Note: Traffic home occupations shall
also be permitted by special exception in any mixed-use
dwelling unit.
(b) Full-service auto repair.
(c) Bar.
(d) Child day-care home.
(e) Domiciliary care unit.
C. Accessory structure height regulation.
(1) Maximum height: 20 feet.
A. Development standards:
(1) Minimum setbacks.
(a) Front building line: 90 feet.
(b) Side (distance from side lot lines): 20 feet. Note: Adjacent to
any residential district or use, an opaque vegetated buffer at
least six feet in height and 10 feet in depth at time of planting
shall be provided and maintained.
262. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2)(e), which permitted outdoor dining as a permitted
accessory use, which immediately followed this subsection, added 4-8-2013 by Ord. No.
2012-09, was repealed 8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-07.
§ 280-49.8 RADNOR CODE § 280-49.9
C:994
(c) Rear (distance from rear lot line): 25 feet. Note: Adjacent to
any residential district or use, an opaque vegetated buffer at
least six feet in height and 10 feet in depth at time of planting
shall be provided and maintained.
(d) Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet.
(2) Building size.
(a) Maximum building height.
[1] Up to three stories, not to exceed: 35 feet.
[2] Maximum building coverage on lot: 20%.
(3) Lot development standards. Note: Areas designated for refuse
disposal shall be screened and maintained in accordance to the
following options: six-foot high sight-tight fence; eight-foot high
opaque screen of evergreen trees or shrubs, planted in a double
staggered row. No products or goods shall be displayed on the
exterior of the premises or from show windows in the buildings.
(a) Minimum lot size.
[1] Two stories or less: 20,000 square feet.
[2] Three stories: 30,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum landscaped area: 50%.
(d) Minimum distance between buildings on a lot: 25 feet.
B. Land use.
(1) Primary uses.
(a) Business office.
(b) Professional office.
(c) Medical office.
(d) Bank or financial institution.
(e) Studio.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Off-street parking and loading area.
(b) Storage within a completely enclosed building in conjunction
with a permitted use. Note: Accessory storage buildings are to
be compatible with the architecture and scale of the existing
buildings located within the GH-BC District and the overall
§ 280-49.9 CHARTER § 280-49.9
C:995
§ 280-49.10. Parks and Open Space (GH-OS).
The Parks and Open Space District contains Clem Macrone Park. The
purpose of this district is to preserve the GHZD's parks for use as lowintensity
recreation and open space.
Garrett Hill Zoning District, subject to review by the Design
Review Board.
(3) Permitted uses by special exception.
(a) Day-care center, including private kindergarten.
C. Accessory structure height and regulation.
(1) Maximum height: One story, not to exceed 20 feet.
(2) Minimum setbacks.
(a) Front building line: 90 feet.
(b) Side (distance from side lot line): 20 feet. Note: Adjacent to any
residential district or use, an opaque vegetated buffer at least
six feet in height and six feet in depth a time of planting shall
be provided and maintained.
(c) Rear (distance from rear lot line): three feet. Note: Adjacent to
any residential district or use, an opaque vegetated buffer at
least six feet in height and six feet in depth a time of planting
shall be provided and maintained.
(d) Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet.
A. Area/yard/setback/coverage/height regulations.
(1) Minimum setbacks.
(a) Front building line: 85 feet.
(b) Side (distance from side lot lines): 75 feet.
(c) Rear (distance from rear lot line): 75 feet.
(d) Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet.
(2) Building size.
(a) Maximum building height: 20 feet.
(b) Maximum building coverage on lot: 5%.
(3) Lot development standards.
(a) Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum landscaped area: 85%.
§ 280-49.9 RADNOR CODE § 280-49.10
C:996
§ 280-49.11. Special regulations for the GHZD.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Permitted primary uses.
(a) Open space.
(b) Public park.
(c) Playground.
(d) Natural turf playing fields.
(e) Playing courts.
(f) Track.
(g) Trails.
(h) Picnic pavilion, with or without water supply and cooking
facilities.
(i) Nature center.
(2) Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(a) Off-street parking and loading area.
(b) Storage shed.
(c) Restrooms.
C. Accessory structure height and setback regulations.
(1) Maximum height: 20 feet.
(2) Setbacks from any lot line: 30 feet.
A. When the principal building on the property is demolished, and it is not
currently located at the front building line for each district, the new
building shall be rebuilt to the front building line. All new or relocated
buildings shall have at least 75% of the front building width meeting the
building line. For the purposes of this requirement, architectural offsets
will be considered to be located on the building line. Architectural
offsets shall not be closer to the street than the building line. This
provision shall not apply to GH-BC.
B. No permanent storage of merchandise, articles or equipment shall be
permitted outside a building. No goods, articles or equipment shall be
offered for sale in the minimum front yard setback. All items displayed
outside the premises must be stored inside the building after business
hours. No kiosks, newspaper stands or similar uses shall be allowed
outside of any building. No vending machines shall be located in the
front yard setback.
§ 280-49.10 CHARTER § 280-49.11
C:997
§ 280-49.12. On-street, off-street parking and loading
requirements.
C. No drive-through or drive-ins shall be permitted within the GHZD.
D. Every use, other than a motor vehicle or bicycle parking lot shall be
completely enclosed within a building. This shall not apply to uses
provided in the Parks and Open Space District.
E. The following standards shall apply to mixed-use structures in the
Conestoga Road (GH-CR) District:
(1) Residential uses shall be prohibited on the ground floor of any
structure containing both commercial and residential uses.
(2) There shall not be any mix of uses on the same floor. In the event a
common area is used for both residential and nonresidential
purposes, e.g., elevator lobbies, stairwells, utility areas, etc., such
area shall be permitted and not considered a use as long as it is an
unoccupiable space. There shall be no nonresidential uses located
on floors above a residential use.
F. The following standards shall apply to mixed-use structures in the
Garrett Avenue (GH-GA) District:
(1) Residential uses shall be permitted on the ground floor of any
structure containing both commercial and residential uses.
(2) There shall not be any mix of uses above the first floor. In the event
a common area is used for both residential and nonresidential
purposes, e.g., elevator lobbies, stairwells, utility area, etc., such
area shall be permitted and not considered a use as long as it is an
unoccupiable space.
(3) There shall be no nonresidential uses located on floors above a
residential use.
G. Attached buildings shall have differentiated building materials and/or
architectural offsets so that they are articulated as individual buildings,
subject to review by the Design Review Board.
H. No restaurant or bar or similar use shall be conducted where customers
and patrons are served food and/or drinks for the immediate
consumption outside of the building in which the restaurant or bar
business is conducted. All preparation, serving and consumption of food
shall be inside the building at which the business is conducted, except
for food or drink taken out for consumption off the restaurant or bar
premises. [Added 8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-07]
A. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall comply with the following
requirements:
§ 280-49.11 RADNOR CODE § 280-49.12
C:998
(1) Dwelling unit: two spaces per dwelling unit for up to two bedrooms.
All other units shall be required to provide one space per bedroom
up to a maximum of four spaces.
(2) Business, professional or medical office use: one space for each 285
square feet of floor area.
(3) Retail use: one space for each 300 square feet of floor area.
(4) Personal services: one space per 300 square feet of floor area.
(5) Place of worship: one space per 150 square feet of floor area.
(6) Restaurant: one space per three seats, plus one space per two
employees on the shift of greatest employment.
(7) Bar: one space per 75 gross square feet of floor area.
(8) Bank: one space for each 300 square feet of floor area.
(9) Automobile service: one space per 150 square feet of floor or
ground area devoted to service or repair.
(10) Studio: one space per 285 square feet of floor area.
B. All private garages shall be located to the rear of the principal
structure.
C. Vehicles in structured parking shall not be visible from the street. On
the ground floor, structured parking shall be "wrapped" with occupiable
commercial space. On upper floors, it shall be screened by an
architectural facade or occupiable residential or commercial space.
D. Section 280-104, Off-street loading, and § 280-105, Access and highway
frontage, shall apply to the GH-BC District.
E. On-street credit. All commercial properties located adjacent to a public
right-of-way where on-street parking is permitted may, at the discretion
of the Township Zoning Officer, receive credit for one off-street parking
stall for each 22 linear feet of abutting right-of-way for parallel parking,
and nine linear feet of abutting right-of-way for perpendicular parking,
excluding curb cuts. This provision shall be applied for on-street
parking on the same side of the street as the proposed land use. In
considering credit for on-street parking, all fractional spaces shall be
rounded down.
F. In the GH-N, GH-GA, and GH-CR districts, where a sidewalk is between
the street and an adjacent parking area, the parking area shall be
buffered by a masonry wall (subject to review by the Design Review
Board) not less than 18 inches high or more than 30 inches high and not
less than 12 inches in width or by an opaque vegetative buffer in the
form of a hedge or otherwise not less than 24 inches high and not to
exceed 48 inches in height.
§ 280-49.12 CHARTER § 280-49.12
C:999
G. Shared parking. The use of shared parking shall comply with the
following requirements:
(1) Applicants for the shared parking provision shall be required to
show shared parking is within walking distance as demonstrated by
traveling along the public right-of-way to each use (using the
walking distance listed in Subsection G(4) below).
(2) A shared parking agreement (two businesses and/or property
owners) or district (more than two businesses and/or property
owners), which involves contractual agreement between users, is
required. A shared parking agreement allows users an opportunity,
if they choose, to redesign parking lots to be more efficient in
serving multiple users. This may consist of making new curb cuts
between parking lots, eliminating buffer strips between lots,
restriping lots, or redesigning internal traffic circulation and
pedestrian walkways. The shared parking agreement shall:
(a) Have a minimum term of 10 years.
(b) Be approved by the Township Solicitor.
(c) Be in a form suitable for recording.
(3) The minimum amount of shared parking required shall be
calculated according to the following formula (See Table 1.):
(a) Calculate the minimum amount of parking required for each
land use as if it were a separate use.
(b) To determine peak parking requirements, multiply the
minimum parking required for each proposed land use by the
corresponding percentage in the table below for each of the six
time periods.
(c) Calculate the column total for each of the six time periods.
(d) The column (time period) with the highest value shall be the
minimum parking requirement.
Table 1: Mixed Use and Shared Parking Calculations
Uses Monday to Friday Saturday to Sunday
8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m.
to
12:00
a.m.
12:00
a.m. to
8:00
a.m.
8:00
a.m.
to
6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m. to
12:00
a.m.
12:00
a.m. to
8:00
a.m.
Residential 60% 100% 100% 80% 100% 100%
Office 100% 10% 5% 5% 5% 5%
Commercial 90% 60% 5% 100% 60% 5%
Restaurant 70% 100% 10% 70% 100% 20%
§ 280-49.12 RADNOR CODE § 280-49.12
C:1000
Table 1: Mixed Use and Shared Parking Calculations
Uses Monday to Friday Saturday to Sunday
8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m.
to
12:00
a.m.
12:00
a.m. to
8:00
a.m.
8:00
a.m.
to
6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m. to
12:00
a.m.
12:00
a.m. to
8:00
a.m.
Bar 70% 100% 100% 70% 100% 100%
Place of
worship
20% 40% 5% 100% 50% 5%
(4) Walking distance:
(a) Less than 100 feet: residences, professional services, medical
clinics, domiciliary care unit, child day-care home, laundry, dry
cleaning pickup or wet cleaning.
(b) Less than 500 feet: employees, overflow parking.
(c) Less than 200 feet: all other uses.
(5) Shared parking calculation example:
(a) Mixed use development with 3,000 square feet of retail; 5,000
square feet of office; 10 apartment dwellings. Use of shared
parking reduces required spaces from 48 to 39. (See
calculations below.)
Parking Required for Each Use Separately
Use
Parking Required
w/o Shared Parking Spaces Required
10 apartments 2/DU 20
5,000 sf office 3.5/1,000 sf 17.5
3,000 sf retail 3.3/1,000 sf 10.0
48 total
§ 280-49.12 CHARTER § 280-49.12
C:1001
§ 280-49.13. Mechanical, electrical equipment and trash.
Mechanical/electrical equipment mounted on the ground and areas for
trash disposal shall be located in the rear of buildings and screened from
view with materials that are compatible with the architecture of the
building. Trash collection areas shall be enclosed by a fence on three sides,
with gates to remove containers. Chain link fencing shall not be used as
a dumpster screen. The gate and enclosure shall be maintained by the
business operator. Where dumpsters are enclosed, the screening shall be
at least two feet taller than the dumpster but shall not exceed six feet in
height. Where topography may expose interiors of trash collection areas to
view, screening shall be correspondingly taller. Trash collection areas shall
have a concrete apron.
§ 280-49.14. Projecting signs.
In addition to the sign requirements of Article XXI of Chapter 280,
§ 280-121, Signs in residential and similar districts, and § 280-122, Signs in
commercial districts, projecting signs attached perpendicular to the facade
shall be permitted subject to the following requirements:
Parking Required Under Shared Parking Calculation
Uses Monday to Friday Saturday and Sunday
8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m. to
12:00
a.m.
12:00
a.m. to
8:00
a.m.
8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m. to
12:00
a.m.
12:00
a.m. to
8:00
a.m.
Residential
0.6
x 20
12
1
x 20
20
1
x 20
20
0.8
x 20
16
1
x 20
20
1
x 20
20
Office 1
x 17.5
17.5
0.1
x 17.5
1.75
0.05
x 17.5
0.88
0.05
x 17.5
0.88
0.05
x 17.5
0.88
0.05
x 17.5
0.88
Commercial
0.9
x 10
9
0.6
x 10
6
0.05
x 10
0.5
1
x 10
10
0.6
x 10
6
0.05
x 10
0.5
Total
Spaces
38.5 27.75 21.38 26.88 26.88 21.38
(b) Rounding up to the next whole number, a minimum of 39
parking spaces is required in this example.
A. Signs may have a backing, or be constructed of shapes, or single letter
forms, or a combination hereof.
§ 280-49.12 RADNOR CODE § 280-49.14
C:1002
§ 280-49.15. Special exception uses.
B. No projecting sign shall be lower than nine feet above street grade or
higher than 12 feet above street grade.
C. No part of a projecting sign shall extend into vehicular traffic areas, and
any part extending over pedestrian areas shall have a minimum
clearance of nine feet.
D. No projecting sign may be larger than six square feet. Only the area of
one face of the sign shall be used in determining square footage.
E. Signs shall not be wider than 36 inches and shall not be less than 12
inches tall.
F. Only one projecting sign per building face (wall) of a business property
shall be permitted.
G. Projecting signs shall be pinned away from the building wall at least
two inches and no more than six inches.
H. No projecting sign may be closer than 12 feet to any other projecting
sign.
I. Appropriate materials for projecting signs shall include:
(1) Carved, sandblasted, or painted wood.
(2) Painted placard.
(3) Painted metal.
J. Prohibited materials shall include:
(1) Plastic and vinyl.
(2) Highly reflective materials.
(3) Neon lighting.
K. Mounting brackets shall be made of nonrusting metal. No wires or
cables shall be used to support the projected sign.
L. Signs shall not be permitted to swing.
M. Signs shall not be internally illuminated.
A. A bar shall meet the following requirements: The structure housing the
bar shall be located at least 1,000 feet from the nearest property line of
land occupied by another bar. Any existing premises used as a bar shall
not be deemed a violation of these regulations and shall be regulated as
a permitted use until such time as it ceases operation as a bar for a
period of 12 months or more.
B. A full-service auto repair shall meet the following requirements:
§ 280-49.14 CHARTER § 280-49.15
C:1003
(1) The structure housing the full-service auto repair shall be located
at least 250 feet from the nearest property line of land occupied by
another full-service auto repair.
(2) Hours of operation shall not commence before 8:00 a.m. or extend
beyond 8:00 p.m. Hours shall be prohibited on Sundays.
(3) The materials, design and configuration of the building and the
operating practices of the business shall minimize and mitigate any
sound or noise propagation from the operation of the business into
residential areas and adjacent properties.
§ 280-49.15 RADNOR CODE § 280-49.15
C:1004
ARTICLE XII
C-2 General Commercial District
§ 280-50. Purpose; application of regulations.
C-2 General Commercial Districts provide for the appropriate development
and special requirements of the Township's main or general business
districts which are designed to offer Township-wide regional services. In C-2
General Commercial Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall
apply.
§ 280-51. Use regulations.
A building or a unified group of buildings may be erected or used and a
lot may be used or occupied for any one or combination of the following
purposes, provided that the use and conversion of any existing dwelling
shall comply with the provisions of §§ 280-45 and 280-101:
A. Any use permitted in C-1 Local Commercial Districts.
B. Retail store, including department store, variety store, furniture store,
specialty shop or any other retail store or shop designed primarily to
serve an area larger than the immediately surrounding neighborhood.
C. Hotel, motel or inn, on a lot not less than two acres in size.
D. Central or headquarters office building.
E. Manufacturing display room, retail outlet or display room of a
wholesale establishment.
F. Club, fraternity house or lodge.
G. Newspaper publishing, job-printing or similar establishment.
H. Mortuary.
I. Catering establishment.
J. Indoor place of amusement or recreation, including theater or bowling
alley, health spa, racquet-sports club, poolroom, billiard room or
amusement arcade. [Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21]
K. Retail service shop or custom shop, for making articles sold at retail
from the premises, provided that any processing activity, if located on
the ground floor, shall be not less than 15 feet from the front of the
building and shall be screened by a wall or partition from the front
portion of the building used by customers.
L. The following uses, when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the general standards prescribed in
§ 280-145, and provided that special consideration shall be given to the
suitability of the use in the proposed location in terms of logical land
§ 280-50 CHARTER § 280-51
C:1005
§ 280-52. Area and height regulations. [Amended 4-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-04; 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 99-30]
use pattern and the continuous and compact development of retail
frontage:
(1) An automobile sales agency (not to include a used car lot or a
trailer or truck sales agency as a main use), provided that:
(a) The lot shall be not less than 15,000 square feet in size.
(b) All facilities shall be located and all services shall be conducted
within the confines of the lot.
(c) All lubrication, repair or similar activities shall be accessory.
(2) Laundry, dry-cleaning or clothes-pressing establishment, provided
that the equipment and materials to be employed will not involve
danger from fire or explosion and that the use will not detract from
the predominant commercial character of the district.
(3) Wholesale business establishment, other than permitted above.
(4) Business school, not to include trade school.
(5) Indoor storage building or warehouse in conjunction with a retail
store or other permitted use.
(6) Any use of the same general character as any of the above
permitted uses, but not to include any use first permitted in C-3
Districts.
M. Accessory uses, as permitted in § 280-47J.
A. Lot area and width. Every lot shall have a lot area of not less than
20,000 square feet, and such lot shall be not less than 100 feet in width
at the building line.
B. Building area. Not more than 30% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings.
C. Front yards. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts, which shall be not less than 15 feet in depth.
D. Side yards. For each building or unified group of buildings erected on a
lot, there shall be two side yards, neither of which shall be less than 20
feet in width, except that where a lot abuts a residence district in the
Township or a similar district in an adjoining municipality, a side yard
shall be provided, which shall be not less than 30 feet in width.
E. Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard on each lot, which shall be not
less than 35 feet in depth or not less than 35% of the lot depth,
whichever is the greater.
§ 280-51 RADNOR CODE § 280-52
C:1006
§ 280-53. Special regulations. [Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord. No.
2012-09]
The special requirements prescribed for C-1 Local Commercial Districts in
§ 280-49 shall apply in C-2 General Commercial Districts, except as follows:
§ 280-53.1. Town center residential and mixed-use development.
[Added 10-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-36]
F. Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
G. Lot coverage. Not more than 70% of each lot may be occupied by
impervious surfaces.
H. Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
A. The requirement that a use be enclosed within a building shall not apply
to outdoor dining or a used car lot in conjunction with an automobile
sales agency.
B. No goods, articles or equipment shall be stored, displayed or offered for
sale beyond the front lines of a building, except for outdoor dining and
the display of automobiles not less than 20 feet from a street right-ofway
line.
A. Purpose; intent of regulations. it is the intent of these regulations to
provide opportunities for town center residential development, and for
mixed-use development within the Business District as defined in the
2003 Comprehensive Plan. It is the further intent of these regulations
that an appropriate mix of residential and commercial uses will
increase the choice of housing opportunities within the Township,
enhance the vibrancy of the Wayne Business District, and promote and
increase the use of mass transportation by allowing people to use their
cars less and walk more throughout the business district.
B. Town center residential. Town center residential shall provide for
midrise residential housing units within the Wayne Business District.
Where provisions of these regulations conflict with other zoning
regulations, the following shall apply.
(1) Use regulations. A building or unified group of buildings may be
constructed or used and a lot may be occupied for the following
purposes:
(a) Multiple-family dwellings.
(b) Accessory uses on the same lot incidental to the foregoing
permitted use, which shall include:
[1] Management office that provides services exclusively for
the development.
§ 280-52 CHARTER § 280-53.1
C:1007
[2] Private garage or off-street parking area.
[3] Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Article XX,
§ 280-115.1.
[4] Signs as may be permitted by Article XXI, Signs.
(2) Area, height, and yard regulations.
(a) Every lot shall have a minimum lot area of not less than 4,000
square feet and a minimum lot width of not less than 30 feet at
the lot line.
(b) No front, rear, or side yard setbacks shall be required,
provided that the building walls adjoin the sidewalk for all
primary facades.
(c) No building shall exceed a maximum height of 35 feet as
measured from the highest point on the lot. Roof-mounted
HVAC equipment shall be screened by use of a parapet wall or
other building material that shall be included in the building
height.
(d) Primary building facades shall have at least 30% but no more
than 75% fenestration. Nonprimary building facades shall have
at least 30% but no more than 75% fenestration which may
include blank windows for aesthetic appeal and continuity.
(e) One hundred percent of each lot may be occupied by building
and impervious surfaces, provided that the development
contributes to the stormwater management plan in the
watershed in which the building is located.
(3) Special regulations.
(a) No building shall be fronted along an arterial cartway as
defined in Chapter 255 (Subdivision of Land) of the Township
Code.
(b) Development under this subsection shall be permitted only on
the south side of E. Lancaster Avenue (Rt. 30) within the
business district as defined in the 2003 Comprehensive Plan.
(c) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each dwelling unit.
(d) Mechanical equipment and areas for refuse disposal shall be
located and screened from public view in a manner acceptable
to the Township.
(e) Buildings shall be located, oriented, and designed to create
architectural interest and to preserve areas of environmental
concerns and further the amenities of light, air, recreation, and
visual enjoyment.
§ 280-53.1 RADNOR CODE § 280-53.1
C:1008
(f) Building plans shall be subject to review and approval by the
Design Review Board.
C. Town center mixed-use development. Town center mixed-use
development shall provide for a mix of commercial and residential uses
within buildings in the business district. Where provisions of these
regulations conflict with other zoning or subdivision and land
development regulations, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) Use regulations. A building or unified group of buildings may be
constructed or used and a lot may be occupied for the following
purposes:
(a) All uses currently permitted in a C-2 District.
(b) Dwelling units when located above the first floor of a building.
(c) Accessory uses on the same lot incidental to the foregoing
permitted uses, which shall include:
[1] Home occupations when accessory to a dwelling unit,
subject to the provisions of Article XX, § 280-115.1.
[2] Signs as may be permitted by Article XXI, Signs.
(2) Area, height and yard regulations.
(a) Lot area and width. Every lot shall have a lot area of not less
than 20,000 square feet, and such a lot shall be not less than
100 feet in width at the building line.
(b) Front yards. No front yard setback shall be required.
(c) Side yards. For each building or unified group of buildings
erected on a lot, there shall be two side yards, neither of which
shall be less than 15 feet in width.
(d) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot, on which
shall not be less than 15 feet in depth.
(e) Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(f) Building area. Not more than 30% of each lot may be occupied
by buildings.
(g) Lot coverage. Not more than 70% of each lot may be occupied
by impervious surfaces.
(3) Special regulations. The special requirements prescribed in
§ 280-49A, B, D and E shall apply in addition to the following
regulations:
(a) The off-street parking, off-street loading and special
requirements related to highway frontage prescribed in
§§ 280-103 and 280-104 shall apply, except that a minimum of
§ 280-53.1 CHARTER § 280-53.1
C:1009
1.5 off-street parking spaces shall be required for each
dwelling unit. However, when approved by the Township, an
applicant may be permitted to reduce the parking to 1.0 offstreet
parking spaces per dwelling unit with the introduction
of a streetscape plan for the subject property.
(b) Mechanical equipment and areas for refuse disposal shall be
screened from view by use of walls, fences, plantings, or any
combination thereof, and shall not be located within any
required setback abutting an area zoned or used for residential
purposes. Enclosures shall be subject to Township approval
and shall be maintained by the owner of the property.
(c) Areas required for off-street loading shall not be located within
any rear yard setback, and shall be designed to not interfere
with areas required for off-street parking.
(d) A minimum buffer strip of five feet shall be required when any
property adjoins a residential use. Buffers shall be designed to
minimize visual and noise impact and shall consist of a
combination of fencing and evergreen vegetation. Vegetation
shall be planted at a height of not less than eight feet and shall
be of such species that expected height at maturity shall not be
less than 15 feet. Planting strips shall be maintained by the
property owner and be subject to review and approval by the
Shade Tree Commission.
(e) Building plans shall be subject to review and approval by the
Design Review Board.
§ 280-53.1 RADNOR CODE § 280-53.1
C:1010
ARTICLE XIIA
Wayne Business Overlay District
[Added 7-16-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-27]
§ 280-53.2. Legal basis.
The adoption of a new Article XIIA creating provisions for the Wayne
Business Overlay District within Chapter 280, Zoning, of the Township Code
is enabled through provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, PL
805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended.263
§ 280-53.3. Purpose; intent of regulations.
Article XIIA of the Zoning Code is hereby enacted to provide and promote
opportunities for development and redevelopment within the Wayne
Business Overlay District (hereinafter WBOD) as set forth in the Wayne
Master Plan adopted by the Board of Commissioners on September 11,
2006, as set forth in Exhibit A.264 These regulations are intended to provide
opportunities, with the goal of maintaining and/or improving the character
of Wayne, for an appropriate mix of residential and nonresidential uses
within the WBOD, establish regulations for special use areas within the
boundaries of the WBOD, promote the use of mass transportation, and
provide for enhanced vibrancy through building, site, and streetscape
design.
§ 280-53.4. Designation of District boundaries.
The WBOD shall be all properties within the boundaries designated in the
Master Plan.
§ 280-53.5. Conflict with other code sections.
The definitions and regulations set forth in this article shall apply to the
WBOD. Wherever there is a conflict or inconsistency between the WBOD
regulations and other definitions and regulations of the Zoning Code, those
regulations set forth in this article shall govern development and
redevelopment within the WBOD.
§ 280-53.6. Definitions.
As used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE — A use of a building, structure or land that is not a
principal permitted use but which is entirely incidental and subordinate to
the principal permitted use on the same lot.
263. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq., the Municipalities Planning Code.
264. Editor's Note: Said Plan is on file in the Township's offices.
§ 280-53.2 CHARTER § 280-53.6
C:1011
ARCHITECTURAL OFFSETS — Portions of a building wall along a street
wall which are offset so as to create articulation of the building wall. These
offsets shall be 90° perpendicular to the building and shall be a minimum of
12 inches in depth. Any variation shall be subject to approval by the Design
Review Board.
AMENITY — Aesthetic or other characteristics of a development that
increase its desirability to a community. Amenities include, but are not
limited to, landscape materials, sidewalks, benches, and light fixtures.
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Radnor,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
BUILD-TO LINE — The line at which the front wall of a building shall be
located and is parallel to the street right-of-way (see Figure 1 and Table
1265). Alleys shall be excluded from this definition.
BUILDING — Any structure permanently located on land having enclosing
walls and a roof. This shall include a parking structure.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance between the mean level at
existing grade in front of a building or structure along a street right-of-way
measured to the top edge of a flat roof, the top of a roof parapet, or to the
mean level of a sloped roof. Chimneys and uninhabited spires shall not be
included when measuring height; however, elevator penthouses and stair
towers are included. Roof-mounted HVAC equipment shall be placed in the
center interior area of the roof, and shall be screened from visibility from
the public cartway (see Figures 2 and 3266).
BUILDING WIDTH — The linear distance in feet between the outside
exterior walls of a building measured from side-to-side (see Figure 4267).
DEMOLITION — The tearing down or razing of 100% of a structure's
external walls down to the foundation. This shall not include structurally
integral party walls, in which case a structure adjoining another structure
shall constitute a demolition when the front and rear walls are removed
down to the foundation.
DEPARTMENT — The Community Development Department of Radnor
Township.
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD — The Design Review Board of Radnor Township.
DRIVE-IN — An establishment whose business includes serving food to
the public for consumption on the premises by order from and service to
vehicular passengers outside the structure.
DRIVE-THROUGH — An establishment that dispenses products or services
to patrons who remain in vehicles.
FOOTPRINT (BUILDING) — The outline of the total area of a building
perimeter at ground level.
265. Editor's Note: Both Figure 1 and Table 1 are included at the end of this chapter.
266. Editor's Note: Figures 2 and 3 are included at the end of this chapter.
267. Editor's Note: Figure 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 280-53.6 RADNOR CODE § 280-53.6
C:1012
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of Radnor Township.
LOT LINE (PROPERTY LINE) — A line dividing one lot from another.
MASTER PLAN — The Wayne Business District Master Plan as adopted by
the Board of Commissioners on September 11, 2006.
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A building that permits residential and
nonresidential uses.
OFFICE — A room or group of rooms used for conducting affairs of a
business, profession, or service industry.
ON-STREET PARKING — The space for the parking of an automobile
located on the street in front of a building.268
PARAPET — A low wall on the edge of a roof. Parapets shall be no higher
than 48 inches.
ROOF — The exterior surface on the top of a building.
SETBACK (FRONT, SIDE, REAR) — The minimum distance measured from
the street center line to the build-to line or from any other property line.
SHARED PARKING — A public or private parking area used jointly by two or
more owners or uses regardless of whether they are on separate properties
(see Figure 5269).
SIGN, PROJECTING — Any sign which is attached to a building or other
structure and extends beyond the line of said building or structure and is
perpendicular to the face of the building.
SPECIAL USE AREA — Those areas identified in the Master Plan that are
intended to be redeveloped primarily through private sector action and
public sector collaboration, providing a mix of land uses facilitated through
carefully considered development incentives.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a
floor and upper surface of the floor or roof next above. It is measured as the
vertical distance from top to top of two successive tiers of beams or finished
floor surfaces and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to
the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the
roof rafters. A basement shall be considered as a story above grade plane
where the exterior wall surface of the basement is more than six feet above
grade plane.
STREET, CENTER LINE OF — The center line of a street cartway that has
been fully dedicated to the required width for the passage of motorized
vehicles. Alleys not officially named by the Township shall be excluded from
this definition.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Radnor, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
268. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "outdoor dining," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-09.
269. Editor's Note: Figure 5 is included at the and of this chapter.
§ 280-53.6 CHARTER § 280-53.6
C:1013
TOWNSHIP CODE — The Code of the Township of Radnor, Delaware
County, Pennsylvania.
WAYNE BUSINESS OVERLAY DISTRICT (WBOD) — The area defined as
such in the Master Plan.
§ 280-53.7. Use regulations.
The following regulations shall govern the use of property within the
boundaries of the WBOD, not including special use areas, and shall permit
a building or unified group of buildings to be erected or used, and a lot to
be occupied, for any of the following purposes:
A. Retail uses shall be limited to the following:
(1) Department store, variety store, clothing shop, bakery, ice cream
shop, specialty shop, or similar use providing sales and services to
customers.
(2) Personal service shop, including a barbershop, beautician, shoe or
watch repair, clothes cleaning and pressing pickup agency, pickup
and dropoff dry-cleaning, but not including a laundry
establishment.
(3) Restaurant or catering establishment, including outdoor dining.
(4) Bank or similar financial institution.
(5) Indoor amusement arcade when accessory to a permitted retail
use.
B. Dwelling units, office or studio when located above a first floor retail
use and in compliance with § 280-53.10, Building use, of this article.
C. Church or similar place of worship, including not more than one
dwelling unit.
D. Public school or municipal facility.
E. Motor vehicle parking lot or structure.
F. Accessory uses on the same lot incidental to the foregoing permitted
uses, to include the following:
(1) Home occupations when accessory to dwelling unit, subject to the
provisions of Article XX, § 280-115.1.270
G. The following uses, only when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the general standards prescribed in
§ 280-145. [Added 2-27-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01]
270. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F(2), regarding outdoor dining, and which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-09.
§ 280-53.6 RADNOR CODE § 280-53.7
C:1014
§ 280-53.8. Area, yard, setback, coverage, height regulations.
§ 280-53.9. Special regulations for the WBOD.
(1) A bed-and-breakfast use in accordance with the requirements set
forth in § 280-115.3.
A. Front yard setback. Buildings and structures shall be located at the
build-to line, as set forth in Table 1271 of this article. When the principal
building on the property is demolished, and it is not currently located
on the build-to line indicated in Table 1, it shall either be relocated or
rebuilt to the build-to-line. All new or relocated buildings shall have at
least 75% of their front building length meeting the build-to line.
B. Side yard. No side yard setback shall be required except where a lot
abuts any residentially zoned district, in which case a buffer planting
strip of at least 10 feet shall be provided and maintained as defined in
§ 280-4.
C. Rear yard. No rear yard setback shall be required except where a lot
abuts any residence, in which case a buffer planting strip of at least 10
feet shall be provided and maintained as defined in § 280-4.
D. Impervious coverage. No maximum impervious coverage shall be
required, provided that the applicant shall comply with the applicable
requirements of this article and Chapter 255.
E. Building height. Except as otherwise stated in this Subsection E, no
building shall exceed a height of 42 feet and three stories, nor shall it be
less than 24 feet in height and two stories; provided, however, that
where any lot/parcel has frontage on a street 20 feet or less in width, it
may have up to four stories, so long as it does not exceed a height of 42
feet.
F. Building width. No building shall exceed a width of 50 feet, except when
designed utilizing architectural offsets (see Figure 6272).
A. A drive-through for prescription medicine only shall be permitted
within the WBOD when authorized as a special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board, provided that the Board determines that the standards
and criteria prescribed in § 280-53.9F are met. No other type of drivethrough
or drive-in shall be permitted within the WBOD. Existing drivethroughs
and drive-ins shall be allowed to remain until redeveloped or
the building use changes, but shall not be permitted to expand. Once
redeveloped or the use changes, the drive-through lane(s) shall cease to
exist. [Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-15]
B. Except for outdoor dining as permitted by § 280-115.3, no permanent
storage of merchandise, articles or equipment shall be permitted
271. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
272. Editor's Note: Figure 6 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 280-53.7 CHARTER § 280-53.9
C:1015
outside a building. No goods, articles or equipment shall be stored,
displayed or offered for sale beyond the build-to line of a building.
No vending machines, kiosks, newspaper stands, self-service station
or similar use shall be allowed outside of any building. [Amended
4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
C. Every use, other than a motor vehicle parking lot and outdoor dining,
shall be completely enclosed within a building.
D. A buffer strip shall be installed and maintained in the rear and side yard
as required by § 280-53.8 of this article along any property line which
directly abuts a residential zoning district.
E. All applications for development and redevelopment shall be subject to
review by the Design Review Board in accordance with architectural
standards set forth in Article XI of the Township Code.
F. In any instance where the Zoning Hearing Board is required to consider
a request for a special exception for a drive-though for prescription
medicine pursuant to § 280-53.9A, the Zoning Hearing Board must
determine that the following standards and criteria are met before
granting the request: [Added 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-15]
(1) The property on which the prescription medicine drive-through is
to be located shall be a corner property with frontage on at least
one street in addition to its frontage on Lancaster Avenue.
(2) The proposed drive-through shall be located on the rear or a side of
the building which does not face Lancaster Avenue and shall
generally be located so as to minimize its visibility from Lancaster
Avenue. Adequate buffering of the drive-through shall be installed
to further minimize visibility.
(3) There shall be a maximum of one drive-through lane for dropping
off and/or picking up prescription medicine, however, there may be
a bypass lane in addition to the drive-through lane.
(4) The drive-through window shall be located on the driver's side of
motor vehicles proceeding through the drive-through.
(5) The egress from the drive-through shall be to a street other than
Lancaster Avenue, unless there is no other alternative due to
physical limitations.
(6) There shall be room for a minimum of three (3) motor vehicles in
the drive-through lane.
(7) The drive-through lane shall be located so as to minimize
pedestrian/vehicular conflicts at the property.
(8) Signs shall be installed at the entrance to the drive-through lane
and at the drive-through window identifying the use of the lane for
§ 280-53.9 RADNOR CODE § 280-53.9
C:1016
§ 280-53.10. Building use.
§ 280-53.11. Rear and side elevations.
Rear elevations of buildings that are exposed to parking lots and street or
alley corners shall be architecturally similar to the primary elevation and all
sides of the building shall exhibit design continuity.
§ 280-53.12. On-street, Off-street parking and loading
requirements.
the dropping off and/or picking up of prescription medicine only.
No other products may be sold through the drive-through lane.
A. New or redeveloped buildings shall be vertically mixed in use, with
ground floor limited to retail only, and with retail, office or residential
above the ground floor in the following combinations (see Figure 7273):
(1) For two-story buildings: retail use on the ground floor and retail,
office or residential use on the second floor.
(2) For three-story buildings: retail use on the ground floor and
residential use on the second or third floors, or office use on the
second and third floors, or retail use on the second and third floors,
or a three-way combination of retail on the ground floor, office, and
residential. There shall not be any mix of uses on the same floor. In
the event a common area is used for both residential and
nonresidential purposes, for both two- and three-story buildings,
e.g., elevator lobbies, stairwells, utility areas, etc., such area shall
be permitted and not considered a use as long it is an unoccupiable
space.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any new or redeveloped building having
frontage on a road with a cartway of 20 feet or less in width shall be
permitted to have retail, office or residential uses on the ground floor,
with retail, office or residential permitted on any floor above the first
floor.
A. On-street parking. Where on-street metered parking currently exists,
parking shall remain on-street to the maximum extent possible.
B. Off-street parking. Where off-street parking is provided, parking spaces
shall be located in the rear, side, or underneath of the building, and
comply with the following requirements:
(1) Dwelling unit: one space per dwelling unit less than 800 square
feet; two spaces per dwelling unit 800 square feet or greater.
(2) Office/studio use: one space for each 250 square feet of floor area.
273. Editor's Note: Figure 7 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 280-53.9 CHARTER § 280-53.12
C:1017
§ 280-53.13. Ingress and egress.
§ 280-53.14. Mechanical, electrical equipment and trash.
Mechanical/electrical equipment mounted on the ground and areas for
trash disposal shall be located in the rear of buildings and screened from
view with materials that are integral to the architecture of the building.
Trash collection areas shall be enclosed by masonry construction on all
three sides, with gates to remove containers. Dumpster enclosures shall
match the building material of the associated structure. Chain link fencing
shall not be used as a dumpster screen. Where dumpsters are enclosed, the
screening shall be at least two feet taller than the dumpster but shall not
exceed six feet in height. Where topography may expose interiors of trash
collection areas to view, screening shall be correspondingly taller. Trash
collection areas shall have a concrete apron.274
§ 280-53.15. Projecting signs.
In addition to the sign requirements of Article XXI of Chapter 280,
projecting signs attached at an angle to the facade shall be permitted,
subject to the following requirements (see Figure 12275):
(3) Retail use: one space for each 300 square feet of floor area.
(4) Church: one space for 150 square feet of floor area.
(5) Restaurant: one space per three seating accommodations, plus one
space per two employees on the shift of greatest employment.
C. Off-street loading requirements shall be subject to the provisions in
§ 280-104.
A. Existing curb cuts may be modified, or shared with adjacent property
owners, provided there is no increase in the number of existing curb
cuts.
B. Wherever possible, ingress and egress between various properties shall
be shared in an attempt to minimize curb cuts. The Township
encourages adjacent landowners to enter into agreements providing
access easements to accomplish this goal.
A. Signs may have a backing or be constructed of shapes or single letter
forms or a combination thereof.
B. No projecting sign shall be lower than nine feet above grade or higher
than 12 feet above grade.
274. Editor's Note: See Figures 8 through 10 included at the end of this chapter.
275. Editor's Note: Figure 12 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 280-53.12 RADNOR CODE § 280-53.15
C:1018
§ 280-53.16. (Reserved)
§ 280-53.17. Special use areas.
C. No part of a projecting sign shall extend into vehicular traffic areas, and
any part extending over pedestrian areas shall have a minimum
clearance of nine feet.
D. No projecting sign may be larger than four square feet. Only the width
and length of one side of the sign shall be used in determining square
footage.
E. Signs shall not be wider than 30 inches and shall not be less 12 inches
wide.
F. Only one projecting sign per building face (wall) of a business property
shall be permitted.
G. Projecting signs shall be pinned away from the building wall at least
two inches and no more than six inches.
H. No projecting sign may be closer than 12 feet to any other projecting
sign.
I. Appropriate materials for projecting signs shall include:
(1) Carved, sandblasted, or painted wood.
(2) Painted placard.
(3) Antiqued, painted metal.
J. Prohibited materials shall include:
(1) Plastic and vinyl.
(2) Highly reflective materials.
K. Signs shall be fixed by hardware that is mounted to the building.
Mounting brackets shall be made of nonrusting metal. No wires or
cables shall be used to support the projected sign.
L. Signs shall not be permitted to swing.
M. Signs shall not be illuminated.
A. Intent and purpose.
(1) The regulations in this section shall apply to the following three
special use areas designated in the Master Plan:
(a) North Wayne Municipal Lot/Wayne Train Station;
(b) South Wayne Municipal Lot/Post Office; and
§ 280-53.15 CHARTER § 280-53.17
C:1019
(c) Bellevue Park and Walk (AT&T Parking Lot).
(2) Each of these areas has been selected for special use because they
are located close to public transit, dining, and retail opportunities,
offering the potential for unique urban residential and
nonresidential projects to meet the growing and future demand for
different uses within the WBOD. Planning techniques that allow for
an increase in building height and density, reduced setbacks,
creative parking arrangements, and other special considerations
shall be considered by the Township as necessary inducements to
assure that permitted uses in these special areas maintain high
standards of architectural design that are consistent with the
desired vision for Wayne.
B. Process. Special use areas shall be approved by the Board as a
conditional use permit consistent with the requirements of Chapter
280, Article XXIII of the Code. It is not intended that every special use
area is adaptable for all uses permitted in this section. Therefore, the
Board reserves the right to deny any application, or any part thereof,
when in its judgment alternative uses represent sound planning
practices that are in the best interest of the Township. When
considering applications, the Board shall apply, but not be limited to,
the following factors:
(1) Suitability of the site.
(2) Location of the proposed site relative to surrounding buildings and
structures.
(3) Arrangement of buildings and structures.
(4) Building mass, height and scale.
(5) Density and mix of the proposed use.
(6) Open areas/common areas for the public and landscape
improvements to accompany any project.
(7) Impact on Township and school services.
(8) Fiscal analysis of the proposed development.
(9) Infrastructure analysis and proposed improvements.
(10) Impact on traffic and proposed roadway improvements.
(11) Stormwater management improvements.
(12) Impact on adjoining residential neighborhood character.
C. Use regulations. The following uses shall be permitted within special
use areas of the WBOD:
(1) Multiple-family dwelling units.
§ 280-53.17 RADNOR CODE § 280-53.17
C:1020
(2) Retail stores and personal service shops, designed to serve
dwelling units of the development and the surrounding areas.
(3) Offices when located above the first floor.
(4) Facilities serving the general public, including a library, art gallery
or museum, post office, senior center, fire company, municipal
building, parking structures and surface parking areas, and other
civic or community uses.
(5) Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing uses, to include:
(a) Management offices providing services for on-site
development.
(b) Home occupations within a residential dwelling unit, subject to
the provisions of Article XX, § 280-115.1.
(6) All applications for development and redevelopment shall be
subject to approval by the Design Review Board in accordance with
architectural standards set forth in Article XI of the Township Code.
D. Height, setbacks, coverage, parking regulations.
(1) Front yard setback. There shall be a minimum front yard setback of
25 feet measured from the center line of the street. This
requirement may be reduced or waived by the Board when it is
demonstrated that the proposed buildings or structures are
integrated into an overall design for streetscape improvements and
other public amenities.
(2) Side and rear yard setbacks. Side yard and rear yard setbacks shall
be 15 feet.
(3) Maximum impervious coverage shall be 90%.
(4) Height. The height of any building or structure shall not exceed 55
feet or be less than 30 feet. In determining the appropriate height
for any building or structure, the Board shall consider plans,
testimony, and applicable criteria set forth in § 280-53.15B of this
article. The Board may require the height be changed where it is
demonstrated by the applicant that the increase is appropriate for
the area and will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
E. Parking, off-street parking, loading requirements.
(1) Parking requirements shall be the same as in § 280-53.12 of this
article. A Post Office shall provide two spaces for three employees
on the maximum shift, plus a minimum of 10 visitor spaces. A
library, museum, or art gallery shall provide two spaces for every
1,000 square feet.
(2) All off-street parking, loading and storage areas for use by motor
vehicles shall comply with §§ 280-103, 280-104 and 280-105.
§ 280-53.17 CHARTER § 280-53.17
C:1021
F. Special regulations. In addition to the special regulations set forth in
§ 280-53.9 of this article, the following guidelines shall be apply:
(1) Buildings that exceed 30 feet in height shall have a ten-foot
horizontal architectural offset from the front of the property before
continuing vertically. Vertical offsets shall be the same as in
§ 280-53.8 of this article (see Figure 11276).
(2) Buildings that include a level of parking within a structure that is at
street level or higher shall incorporate a facade that screens any
parking at or above street level. If the parking structure exceeds
more than one story, it shall be architecturally compatible with
traditional buildings in the surrounding area. Parking below street
level will not count toward the number of stories allowed.
(3) Buildings shall be designed to enhance the pedestrian environment
with improvements or expansions to sidewalks and crosswalks and
the inclusion of outdoor seating areas, benches or other pedestrian
amenities.
(4) Architectural offsets shall apply as defined in § 280-53.8.
G. Mechanical, electrical equipment and trash. Provisions for ground
mechanical and electrical equipment and refuse shall be the same as
those in § 280-53.14 of this article. Any roof-mounted equipment shall
be hidden from the ground floor view within 150 feet of the structure.
H. Special use application, procedural process. A special use application
shall be submitted and processed under the requirements of Chapter
255, Article IV.
276. Editor's Note: Figure 11 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 280-53.17 RADNOR CODE § 280-53.17
C:1022
ARTICLE XIII
C-3 Service Commercial District
§ 280-54. Purpose and objectives; application of regulations.
§ 280-55. Use regulations.
A detached building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or
occupied for any one of the following purposes, provided that the use and
conversion of any existing dwelling shall comply with the provisions of
§§ 280-45 and 280-101:
A. C-3 Service Commercial Districts make appropriate provision for a wide
range of highway-oriented retail, automotive and heavier service-type
business activities which ordinarily require main-highway locations and
cater to transient as well as to local customers. Among the objectives of
C-3 Service Commercial Districts are:
(1) To encourage the sound and appropriate commercial development
of compact segments of major highway frontage.
(2) To provide locations for important highway and service-type
business use convenient to central and other retail business
location.
(3) To protect major highway as thoroughfares.
B. In C-3 Service Commercial Districts, the regulations contained in this
article shall apply.
A. Any use permitted in C-2 General Commercial Districts.
B. Drive-in or automobile service establishment as follows: motor vehicle
service station (not to include a repair shop or car wash establishment
as a main use); public garage or automobile sales agency (not to include
a used car lot or a trailer or truck sales agency as a main use); and
drive-in restaurant or similar use, provided that:
(1) The lot on which such use is established shall be not less than one
acre in size.
(2) All facilities are located and all services are conducted within the
confines of the lot.
C. General service or contractor's shop, including carpenter,
cabinetmaking, furniture repair, light metalworking, tinsmith, plumbing
or similar shop, provided that the floor area devoted to such use shall in
no case exceed 10,000 square feet.
D. Wholesale business establishment.
E. Indoor storage building or warehouse.
§ 280-54 CHARTER § 280-55
C:1023
§ 280-56. Area and height regulations. [Amended 4-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-04; 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 99-30]
F. Laundry, dry-cleaning or clothes-pressing establishment, provided that
the equipment and materials to be employed will not involve danger
from fire or explosion and that the use will not detract from the
predominant commercial character of the district.
G. Public-utility corporation building, grounds or facility or any similar
use.
H. The following uses when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the general standards prescribed in
§ 280-145:
(1) Outdoor place of amusement, recreation or assembly (not including
drive-in theater), on a lot not less than two acres in area.
(2) Express, trucking or hauling station.
(3) Trailer or truck sales agency.
(4) Motor vehicle repair shop.
(5) Car wash establishment.
(6) Used car lot.
(7) Yard for the storage and sale of coal, firewood, fuel oil or building
materials, provided that: [Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No.
80-21]
(a) Such use shall be located adjacent to a railroad.
(b) The area used for such use is enclosed and suitably screened
from the surrounding area by a satisfactory fence or other
barrier, not less than six feet in height.
(8) Trade school.
(9) Commercial greenhouse or nursery.
(10) Wholesale dairy or bakery.
(11) Any use of the same general character as any of the above
permitted uses, but not to include any use that is objectionable, as
defined in § 280-107.
(12) Open-air fish or produce market, provided that no products shall be
stored, displayed or offered for sale within 40 feet of the curb or
edge of the pavement on which the lot abuts. [Added 9-22-1980
by Ord. No. 80-21]
I. Accessory uses, as permitted in § 280-47J.
§ 280-55 RADNOR CODE § 280-56
C:1024
§ 280-57. Special regulations.
A. Lot area and width. Every lot shall have a lot area of not less than
30,000 square feet, and such lot shall be not less than 150 feet in width
at the building line.
B. Building area. Not more than 35% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings.
C. Front yards. There shall be a setback on each street on which a lot
abuts, which shall be not less than 65 feet in depth.
(1) Front yard exception. Where located adjacent to a residential
zoning district, the front yard setback may be reduced to not less
than 25 feet in depth in order to maintain the general setback
characteristics of the residential zone and to provide for flexibility
in the design and location of buildings. [Added 4-12-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-9]
D. Side yards. For every building there shall be two side yards, neither of
which shall be less than 20 feet in width. [Amended 4-12-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-9]
E. Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall be not
less than 25 feet in depth or not less than 25% of the lot depth,
whichever is the greater.
F. Height regulations. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
G. Lot coverage. Not more than 65% of each lot may be occupied by
impervious surfaces.
H. Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
A. Along each side or rear property line which directly abuts a residence
district in the Township or a similar district in an adjoining municipality,
a buffer planting strip, as defined in § 280-4B, not less than 40 feet in
depth shall be provided.
B. No goods, articles or equipment shall be stored, displayed or offered for
sale beyond the front lines of a building, except for outdoor dining and
the display of automobiles not less than 20 feet from a street right-ofway
line and also in the case of a motor vehicle service station.
[Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
C. The off-street parking, off-street loading and special provisions relating
to highway frontage prescribed in §§ 280-103, 280-104 and 280-105
shall apply in C-3 Commercial Districts.
§ 280-56 CHARTER § 280-57
C:1025

ARTICLE XIV
PB Planned Business District
§ 280-58. Purpose; application of regulations.
§ 280-59. Use regulations.
A building or a unified group of buildings may be erected or used and a lot
may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes:
A. PB Planned Business Districts are designed to make special provisions
for the requirements of the modern, well-planned, integrated shopping
and business district. Among other things, the district regulations:
(1) Require that the district be developed as a group or groups of
properly related business and compatible facilities comprising a
single architectural scheme with appropriate landscaping.
(2) Contain a comprehensive set of design requirements governing
such things as access, land use, building placement, building
coverage, highway protection, off-street parking, buffering and
screening.
B. PB Districts may be established and developed only in accordance with
the special provisions of § 280-132 and subject to the regulations of this
article and any other pertinent provisions of this chapter.
C. In PB Planned Business Districts, the regulations contained in this
article shall apply.
A. A planned neighborhood or community shopping center, including the
following uses as part of an integrated retail business development:
(1) Retail store.
(2) Office or studio.
(3) Clothes-cleaning-and-pressing pickup agency, including automatic
self-service laundry.
(4) Any use permitted in C-1 Local Commercial Districts, provided that
any processing activity in conjunction with a custom shop or other
permitted use shall comply with the provisions of § 280-47D.
B. The following additional uses, when specifically authorized in
conjunction with the total development of a Planned Business District
not less than 20 acres in size for any use or combination of uses, and
their proposed location shall be consistent with a plan for the overall
development of the tract approved in accordance with the provisions of
§ 280-132:
(1) Office building.
§ 280-58 CHARTER § 280-59
C:1027
§ 280-60. Area and height regulations.
(2) Motel, hotel or inn, provided that such use clearly is designed so as
to constitute a logical and harmonious element of the overall
development plan for the district.
(3) Indoor place of amusement or recreation, including theater or
bowling alley.
(4) Community or civic center building or use, including library.
(5) Scientific or industrial research, testing or experimental laboratory
or similar establishment for research or product development,
provided that there is no commercial production or storage of any
commodity or substance except for storage necessary for scientific
research.
(6) Business school.
(7) Automobile accessories store (not including service station) or sale
agency as part of a retail shopping center.
(8) Publishing or job-printing establishment.
(9) Any use of the same general character as any of the above
permitted uses.
C. Accessory uses may include:
(1) Storage within a completely enclosed building in conjunction with a
permitted use.
(2) Living quarters for watchmen, caretakers or the staff or employees
of a permitted institution.
(3) Signs as permitted in Article XXI, Signs.
(4) Outdoor dining in accordance with the requirements of
§ 280-115.4. [Added 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
A. Lot area. The area of the lot or tract which is developed shall be not less
than three acres, except as is otherwise provided in § 280-59B above.
B. Building area. Not more than 20% of the total area of the lot or tract
devoted to a permitted use may be occupied by buildings, and not less
than 45% of the total area, exclusive of those areas within the public
right-of-way, shall be devoted to landscaping and planted in accordance
with Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-13; 4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-04]
C. Building placement. No building shall be located less than 100 feet from
a street right-of-way or other property line, and no parking, loading or
service area shall be located less than 50 feet from a street right-of-way
or other property line.
§ 280-59 RADNOR CODE § 280-60
C:1028
§ 280-61. Special regulations.
D. Height regulations. No building shall exceed three stories or 38 feet in
height. [Amended 8-7-1978 by Ord. No. 78-19; 5-12-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-13]
E. Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
A. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the plan for the
proposed development shall comply with the special standards of
Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land, relating to a shopping center or a
group of business uses on a lot.
B. Any application for development under the terms of this article shall
provide initially at least for the construction of either a minimum of
20,000 square feet of ground floor area or a minimum of 10 of the
permitted main uses.
C. Except for outdoor dining, no permanent storage of merchandise,
articles or equipment shall be permitted outside a building, and no
goods, articles or equipment shall be stored, displayed or offered for
sale beyond the front lines of a building. [Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord.
No. 2012-09]
D. Along each side or rear property line which directly abuts a residence
district in the Township or a similar district in an adjoining municipality,
a buffer planting strip, as defined in § 280-4B, of not less than 30 feet in
depth, shall be provided. Along each street line bounding a residence
district, a strip of land not less than 20 feet in depth shall be suitably
landscaped except for necessary sidewalks and accessways crossing
the strip.
E. All off-street parking, loading, access facilities and service areas used
by motor vehicles shall comply with the provisions of §§ 280-103,
280-104 and 280-105.
§ 280-60 CHARTER § 280-61
C:1029

ARTICLE XV
PLO Planned Laboratory-Office District
[Amended 8-7-1978 by Ord. No. 78-19; 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 86-12;
3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 93-06]
§ 280-62. Purpose; application of regulations. [Amended
12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
§ 280-63. Use regulations. [Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-09;
12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
A building or unified group of buildings may be erected or used and a lot
may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes:
A. PLO Planned Laboratory-Office Districts are designed primarily to
provide for selected modern laboratory, office establishments and other
compatible uses which:
(1) Provide for attractive large-site, low-lot-coverage development in
areas where traditional business development would be
inappropriate.
(2) Strengthen and diversify the Township's tax base.
(3) Are compatible with the character of the surrounding areas.
(4) Increase the effectiveness of the zoning district by providing the
capability for a mixture of complementary uses.
(5) Decrease the negative external effects of parking and traffic on
surrounding areas by providing the capability for a mixture of
complementary uses.
B. PLO Districts may be established and developed only in accordance
with the special provisions of § 280-132 and subject to the regulations
of this article and any other pertinent provisions of this chapter.
C. In PLO Planned Laboratory-Office Districts, the regulations contained
in this chapter shall apply.
A. Forty percent to 100% of the gross floor area may be used or occupied
for the following:
(1) Scientific or industrial research, testing or experimental laboratory
or similar establishment for research or product development,
provided that there is no commercial production or storage of any
commodity or substance except for storage necessary for scientific
research.
(2) Office building, including medical, dental, professional and sales.
B. Subject to the requirements of § 280-64G, up to 60% of the gross floor
area may be used or occupied for the following:
§ 280-62 CHARTER § 280-63
C:1031
(1) Hotel, including extended stay, which may contain restaurant and
banquet space. Hotel pools and indoor health/fitness/recreation
centers shall be for the use of hotel guests only.
(2) Skilled nursing and/or senior assisted living facility.
(3) Senior independent living facility.
(4) Ambulatory care facility: a health care facility or a distinct part of a
health care facility which provides preventative, diagnostic, and
treatment services to persons who come to the facility to receive
services and depart from the facility on the same day, excluding
medical and dental office uses. All land development plans
proposing an ambulatory care facility shall be limited to no smaller
than 969 square feet per patient position yielding 103 patient
positions per 100,000 square feet of gross floor area.
C. Notwithstanding the minimum lot size of § 280-64A, properties with a
total site area of less than 10 acres may be used or occupied as follows
and may not be combined with any other principal use:
(1) Skilled nursing, senior independent living, and/or senior assisted
living facility, excluding drug and alcohol rehabilitation facilities.
(2) Hotel, including extended stay, which may contain restaurant and
banquet space. Hotel pools and indoor health/fitness/recreation
centers shall be for the use of hotel guests only.
D. Accessory uses, which may include:
(1) Storage within a completely enclosed building in conjunction with a
permitted use.
(2) A cafeteria or other service facility located within the building and
operated for the exclusive use of the occupants of the building. An
accessory cafeteria may include outdoor dining as permitted by
§ 280-115.3B.
(3) A recreational area for occupants.
(4) Living quarters for watchmen, caretakers or similar employees.
(5) A parking structure, when constructed as an accessory structure
for the purpose of eliminating allowable surface parking. Parking
structures may be located wholly or partly within the principal
building, attached to and made a part of the principal building, or
constructed as a detached accessory structure. Parking spaces
within structures may be reduced to not less than nine feet in width
by 19 feet in depth, exclusive of aisles, for each motor vehicle.
(6) Restaurant accessory to a permitted principal use not including
existing nonconforming uses. Outdoor dining is permitted in
accordance with § 280-115.3B.
§ 280-63 RADNOR CODE § 280-64
C:1032
§ 280-64. Area and height regulations. [Amended 12-8-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-22; 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
A. Lot area and width. Every lot on which a building or combination of
buildings is hereafter erected or used shall have a lot area of not less
than 10 acres, and such lot shall not be less than 300 feet at the
building line.
B. Building area. Not more than 30% of the area of any lot may be
occupied by buildings and structures, and not less than 45% of the total
lot area, exclusive of those areas within the public right-of-way, shall be
devoted to landscaping and planted in accordance with Chapter 255,
Subdivision of Land. Landscaped areas shall include nonimpervious
areas devoted to stormwater management, required buffer areas, and
landscaping for parking facilities.
C. Building placement. No building or accessory structure shall be located
less than 150 feet from a street right-of-way line nor less than 200 feet
from a side or rear property line and no surface parking area, driveway,
service or interior roadway, with the exception of approved areas for
vehicular access, shall be located less than 75 feet from a street rightof-
way or other property line.
D. Building size and spacing.
(1) Except for a mixed use development permitted under § 280-64G,
the greatest dimension in length or depth of a building shall not
exceed 160 feet, and no more than three buildings may be attached
to each other, provided further that the facade of any building
attached to another building be visibly offset from the adjoining
building at an angle of approximately 90°.
(2) The distance at the closest point between any two buildings or
group of attached buildings, including accessory structures, shall
not be less than 45 feet.
(3) In no case shall the width of buildings or accessory structures or
the aggregate widths of buildings or accessory structures fronting
on a street on the same lot exceed 80% of the width of a lot.
E. Height regulations. Except for a mixed use development permitted
under § 280-64G, no building or accessory structure shall exceed three
stories or 38 feet in height.
F. Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet.
G. Mixed use. A building or unified group of buildings may include the uses
specified in § 280-63A and B and no other, subject to the following
conditions:
(1) The minimum gross floor area of the B uses shall be 30% of the
total site area. The maximum medical or dental office use shall be
30% of the gross floor area of the total site area. Ambulatory care
§ 280-64 CHARTER § 280-64
C:1033
facility uses shall be combined with a minimum 15% of gross floor
area of the total site area of one or more of the uses described in
§ 280-63B(1), (2) or (3).
(2) No building shall exceed 85 feet in height. Buildings in excess of
three stories or 38 feet in height are subject to the following
requirements:
Building
Height
(tallest
building
on site)
Maximum
Building
Area
(percent)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
(percent)
Setback to
Street
ROW Line
(feet)
Setback to
Side and
Rear
Property
Line
Adjacent
to
Residential
Zoning
District
(feet)
Setback to
Side and
Rear
Property
Line
Adjacent
to
Nonresidential
Zoning
District
(feet)
Setback to
Side and
Rear
Property
Line
Abutting
Railway
and
Limited
Access
Highway
(feet)
Less than
or equal to
55 feet
29% 50% 100 200 50 25
Greater
than 55
feet but
less than or
equal to 85
feet
28% 45% 100 200 50 25
(3) The gross floor area for all buildings on lots/properties existing as
of the date of this section shall not exceed 25,500 square feet per
acre of total site area.
(4) A parking garage or parking structure may have a height of up to
55 feet so long as such parking garage or parking structure does
not exceed the height of any building on the site.
(5) All other accessory structures shall not exceed 45 feet in height as
long as the accessory structure does not exceed the height of any
other building on the site.
(6) Financial subdivision. In connection with development of a mixed
use within the PLO District, individual lots may be created for
purposes of financing and/or conveyancing. Such individual lots
shall not be required to comply on an individual basis with the
dimensional requirements of this article, provided that the site and
uses comply with such requirements on an overall basis, and
further provided that the deeds conveying such separate lots
contain covenants requiring the purchasers to, at all times, operate
§ 280-64 RADNOR CODE § 280-64
C:1034
and maintain such lots in good order and repair and in a clean
and sanitary condition; that cross-easements for parking areas
and all appurtenant ways, pedestrian access, and utilities shall be
maintained between such lots; and that such covenants shall be
subject to the approval of the Township. The purchaser of any such
lot shall execute and file with the Township a written covenant
agreeing to the forgoing conditions prior to purchasing.
(7) In the event that development requires an expansion of the right-ofway,
setbacks shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way
line.
(8) The greatest dimension in length or depth of a building (as
specified in § 280-64D) may be up to 350 feet, provided that:
(a) The facade is constructed of brick, stone, architectural
concrete, architectural metal work, or articulated glass;
(b) Is constructed with vertical and horizontal articulation; and
(c) Is approved by the Township.
(9) The total site area for a mixed use development must be greater
than or equal to 10 acres. "Total site area" is the gross area of a lot
or lots as described in the deeds or from an actual survey but
excluding the area of any public or private street or rights-of-way
as of the date of this section.
(10) All mixed use developments shall submit a transportation impact
and mitigation report to the Township as part of the land
development application. The transportation impact and mitigation
report shall address the following components for the proposed
development:
(a) A description of all improvements proposed along the frontage
of the property, including curbs, sidewalks, drainage, and
utility additions or extensions proposed as a result of the
project.
(b) A description of all improvements to adjacent intersections or
intersections within 1/2 mile of the proposed project designed
to mitigate the impact of the proposed development
transportation at full build-out of the site.
(c) A description of all off-site transportation improvements
proposed by the developer or a description of proposed
improvements to existing public transportation facilities,
including existing rail lines adjacent to or within 1/2 mile to the
site.
(d) A description of transportation improvements proposed to be
constructed by the applicant as recommended in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 280-64 CHARTER § 280-64
C:1035
§ 280-65. Special regulations.
§ 280-65.1. Buffer and landscape requirements.
(11)No land development application shall be accepted or processed by
the Township without the submission of the foregoing
transportation impact and mitigation report.
A. The tract of land on which each permitted use is conducted shall, in its
entirety, be owned and operated as a single or common management
and maintenance unit, with common open space, parking, maintenance
and service facilities and services.
B. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the plan for the
proposed development shall comply with the special standards of
Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land, relating to a use or group of uses on
a lot.
C. Each building shall be designed so as to minimize its commercial
appearance and shall, insofar as practicable, afford minimum external
evidence of the nature of the operation conducted therein.
D. No products or goods shall be publicly displayed on the exterior of the
premises.
A. Along each street line, a landscaped strip not less than 75 feet in width
shall be provided, except for necessary sidewalks and accessways
crossing the strip.
B. Along side and rear property lines which adjoin agricultural, residential
or planned apartment zoning districts, or a similar district within an
adjacent municipality, a buffer planting strip of not less than 50 feet
shall be planted and maintained. Buffer strips shall consist of berms,
hedges, evergreens, shrubbery or other suitable vegetation approved
by the Township and be of sufficient density and height to provide an
effective visual screen to give maximum and immediate visual
screening to an abutting property or zoning district. Wherever possible,
the owner shall make every effort to retain existing natural screening,
such as vegetation and topography. Constructed berms shall have a
maximum slope of 33% with grass cover or 50% when shrubbery or
ground cover is used.
C. All evergreen vegetation to be installed shall not be less than five feet in
height at the time of planting and shall be of such species that expected
height at maturity shall not be less than 15 feet.
D. All deciduous vegetation to be installed shall not be less than eight feet
in height and two-and-one-half-inch caliper, measured six feet above
grade.
E. As an alternative to the possibly linear appearance of the minimum
requirements above, applicants are encouraged to provide innovative,
§ 280-64 RADNOR CODE § 280-65.1
C:1036
§ 280-65.2. Off-street parking and loading areas.
free-form buffers which need not be located entirely with the minimum
required width. Such alternative buffers shall be subject to approval by
the Township.
F. A landscaping plan shall be required, which shall clearly show and list
the locations, size, species and number of plant materials proposed to
be used.
A. All off-street parking, unloading and service areas shall comply with the
provisions of §§ 280-103, 280-104 and 280-105.
B. Vehicular access to any property shall be limited to streets classified in
Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land, § 255-27B, as arterial, primary
collector or secondary collector.
§ 280-65.1 CHARTER § 280-65.2
C:1037

ARTICLE XVI
PI Planned Institutional District
[Added 7-17-1989 by Ord. No. 89-26277]
§ 280-66. Territory.
The PI Planned Institutional District shall consist of that land presently
designated and zoned as Institutional.
§ 280-67. Purpose; application of regulations.
§ 280-68. Use regulations. [Amended 9-22-1997 by Ord. No. 97-26]
A building or combination of buildings may be erected or used and a lot may
be principally used or occupied for any one of the following purposes:
A. Planned Institutional Districts are designed to provide for the special
needs of regionally oriented institutional uses. Among other things,
Planned Institutional Districts are intended to:
(1) Preserve the open character of large areas of the Township which
are now dominated by or are peculiarly suited to institutional and
quasi-public uses.
(2) Encourage a harmonious pattern of institutional development
which can mutually benefit the Township, the immediate neighbors
of the institutions and the institutions themselves.
B. In Planned Institutional Districts, the regulations contained in this
article shall apply. In order to encourage the development of
institutional uses in accordance with approved standards which protect
the adjacent noninstitutional uses from adverse impacts, the following
regulations shall apply.
A. College, private or parochial elementary or secondary school or other
educational institution for academic instruction, convent, monastery,
church or similar religious institution, student infirmary, including
rectory or parish house, provided that a rectory or parish house
contains not more than one dwelling unit, not to include a business or
trade school, dance studio or similar use.
B. Any institutional use similar to a use specifically permitted above, such
as a museum or an institution or home for children, the aged, the
indigent or the handicapped, medical or health center, convalescent
home, nursing home or similar health facility, when authorized as a
special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the general
standards prescribed in § 280-145.
277. Editor's Note: This ordinance also deleted former Art. XVIII, I Institutional District, as
amended.
§ 280-66 CHARTER § 280-68
C:1039
§ 280-68.1. Comprehensive integrated college development. [Added
3-31-2014 by Ord. No. 2013-21]
C. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to the
foregoing permitted uses, and may include:
(1) A playing field or recreational facility in conjunction with a
permitted main use. Any area for play or recreation shall be fenced
or otherwise screened from an adjacent property line in
accordance with § 280-71 of this article.
(2) A dormitory, provided that every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by one occupant shall have a minimum gross floor area of
at least 70 square feet. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes
by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of
gross floor area for each occupant thereof.
(3) Townhouses, apartments or other dwelling units and
accommodations for the housing of students, faculty or staff and
employees of a permitted use, provided that the requirements of
Chapter 222, Property Maintenance, of the Township Code, are
met.
D. Comprehensive integrated college development in accordance with and
pursuant to the regulations and requirements set forth in § 280-68.1.
[Added 3-31-2014 by Ord. No. 2013-21]
A. Purpose; intent of regulations. It is the intent of these regulations to
provide and promote redevelopment of land currently used for college
or university purposes within the Township. It is the further intent of
the comprehensive integrated college development to promote a
pedestrian-friendly landscape upon existing college and university
campuses in a sensitive and planned development that preserves the
integrity of those neighborhoods in which these institutions are
situated. In conformity with the Radnor Township Comprehensive Plan,
these regulations provide for the sound planning of colleges and
universities and limit the expansion of these institutional uses to areas
within the present limits of the campus. These regulations are intended
to provide design and regulatory standards for college and university
facilities which will mutually benefit the Township and the applicant
through enhanced vibrancy of the campus areas and a pedestrianfriendly
townscape. This use provides for these benefits, while
protecting adjacent noninstitutional properties from adverse impacts.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMPREHENSIVE INTEGRATED COLLEGE DEVELOPMENT (CICD)
— The redevelopment of lands, and the buildings, structures, and/or
improvements located thereon, for any one or more of the subordinate
uses set forth in this section. A CICD can only be established upon lands
§ 280-68 RADNOR CODE § 280-68.1
C:1040
being used for college or university purposes at the time of adoption of
this section on March 31, 2014.
C. Designation of location.
(1) A comprehensive integrated college development shall only be
permitted by conditional use approval and shall be located upon a
single specified site.
(2) A CICD shall only be permitted when the total campus area of the
applicant, within the limits of the PI Planned Institutional District,
is greater than 75 acres, as described in the deeds or from an
actual survey included as part of an application for a CICD.
(3) No portion of a CICD shall be located on lands zoned other than
Planned Institutional (PI) or on lands located in other
municipalities, regardless if such other lands are currently used for
college or university purposes.
(4) Only one CICD shall be allowed on the entire campus of an
applicant, and shall only be located on that part of the campus that
existed as of the date of adoption of this section and that was being
used for college and university purposes at that time.
(5) The CICD shall be limited to a contiguous site area greater than 10
acres but no more than 15 acres.
(6) The CICD may consist of more than one contiguous parcel or lot.
For purposes of the CICD, this site area may include contiguous lots
that are separated by streets classified as local streets or minor
collectors by the Township's Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, but shall not include lots or portions of lots that are
separated from the rest of the CICD by streets classified as
arterials or major collectors by the Township's Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance or by railroad rights-of-way or
easements.
(7) Whenever there is conflict or inconsistency between this section's
regulations and other regulations of the Zoning Ordinance, the
regulations set forth in this section shall govern. All other
applicable codes and regulations of the Township of Radnor shall
remain applicable to the CICD.
(8) Any change in use or the addition of a new use(s); or the expansion
of an approved CICD shall require a new conditional use approval.
D. Regulations.
(1) Subordinate use regulations. A building, a structure, or a
combination of buildings and structures may be erected, used, or
occupied for any one or more of the following purposes as part of a
CICD when approved as a conditional use by the Board of
Commissioners in accordance with Article XXIII of this chapter. All
§ 280-68.1 CHARTER § 280-68.1
C:1041
of the proposed subordinate uses within a CICD shall meet all of
the specific standards and regulations set forth in this section.
(a) Educational subordinate uses for any of the following
purposes:
[1] Academic facilities: classrooms, research facilities, and
administrative/faculty offices.
[2] Performance facilities: athletic facilities, natatoriums,
auditoriums, performance spaces, and theatres.
[3] Social facilities: student centers; student health centers;
libraries; museums; places of worship; food preparation,
restaurant, or dining facilities; and other recreational/
social facilities designed and limited to provide services
primarily to the institution's students, faculty, and staff.
[4] Housing facilities: dormitories, townhouses, apartments,
single-family dwellings and other dwelling units and
accommodations for housing the institution's students,
faculty, and staff.
[5] Parking facilities: surface parking and parking structures.
(b) Retail subordinate uses.
[1] Retail subordinate uses are limited to the following uses
and subject to Subsection D(1)(b)[2] below:
[a] Clothing shop, book store, variety store to include
food items, bakery, ice cream shop, drug store, or
similar use providing sales and services to customers.
[b] Personal service shop, including a barbershop,
beautician, salon, or laundromat.
[c] Cafe, bistro, eatery or similar establishment owned
and/or operated by the applicant.
[d] Bank or similar financial institution.
[e] Indoor amusement arcade.
[2] Retail subordinate uses shall only be located on the ground
floor or basement of a building.
[3] Such uses may be open to the public. However, each such
retail subordinate use shall be designed to be an integral
part of the institution and to primarily serve the
institutional community, including students, faculty, staff,
alumni, and visitors.
§ 280-68.1 RADNOR CODE § 280-68.1
C:1042
[4] Those areas in the CICD devoted to retail subordinate uses
shall not exceed 5% of the total gross floor area of all the
buildings, not including parking structures, in the CICD.
The floor area, excepting related storage, devoted to each
retail use shall not exceed 10,000 square feet; provided,
the floor area devoted to all retail subordinate uses
(including storage) within the CICD shall not exceed
25,000 square feet.
(2) Dimensional regulations.
(a) Setbacks from the ultimate right-of-way for arterial streets (as
defined in the SALDO) owned on both sides by the applicant:
[1] Academic facilities: 35 feet.
[2] Performance and social facilities: 35 feet.
[3] Housing facilities: 35 feet.
[4] Parking structures: 120 feet.
[5] Surface parking lots: 60 feet.
[6] Retail subordinate uses: 35 feet.
[7] Accessory uses and structures: 35 feet.
(b) Setbacks from the ultimate right-of-way for major collector
streets (as defined in the SALDO):
[1] Academic facilities: 200 feet.
[2] Performance and social facilities: 200 feet.
[3] Housing facilities: 200 feet.
[4] Parking structures: 120 feet.
[5] Surface parking lots: 60 feet.
[6] Retail subordinate uses: 200 feet.
[7] Accessory uses and structures: 200 feet.
(c) Setbacks from the ultimate right-of-way for local and minor
collector streets (as defined in the SALDO) owned on both
sides by the applicant:
[1] Academic facilities: 30 feet.
[2] Performance and social facilities: 30 feet.
[3] Housing facilities: 30 feet.
[4] Parking structures: 20 feet.
§ 280-68.1 CHARTER § 280-68.1
C:1043
[5] Surface parking lots: 60 feet.
[6] Retail subordinate uses: 30 feet.
[7] Accessory uses and structures: 30 feet.
(d) Setbacks from railroad property lines and rights-of-way:
[1] Academic facilities: 50 feet.
[2] Performance and social facilities: 50 feet.
[3] Housing facilities: 50 feet.
[4] Parking structures: 30 feet.
[5] Surface parking lots: five feet.
[6] Retail subordinate uses: 50 feet.
[7] Accessory uses and structures: 20 feet.
(e) All types of facilities shall be set back 100 feet from the
boundary of any lot used for single-family residential purposes.
(f) Defaults and exceptions concerning setbacks.
[1] All other setbacks shall comply with the regulations
generally applicable in the PI District.
[2] Elevators and stair towers for a parking structure may be
located no closer than 10 feet to the right-of-way of a local
and minor collector street for a length of no greater than
50 feet.
[3] Where the proposed CICD consists of more than one lot or
parcel there shall be no required setbacks to buildings,
structures, or other improvements, between the lots or
parcels included in the CICD or other lands owned by the
applicant, provided an easement agreement, lot
consolidation, or declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions enables the lots or parcels comprising the
CICD to function as one integrated development.
[4] Where the proposed CICD is adjacent to other contiguous
lands owned by the applicant (that are not separated by
roads, railroad property lines, or rights-of-way) no
setbacks shall be required regardless of zoning district.
(g) Maximum building area.
[1] Total building coverage. Not more than 30% of the CICD
site shall be occupied by buildings. The total building
coverage may be increased to no greater than 45%,
subject to the land preservation standards of this section,
§ 280-68.1 RADNOR CODE § 280-68.1
C:1044
provided that in no event may the total building coverage
of the applicant's entire campus within the PI Zoning
District exceed 30%. For purposes of calculating the total
building coverage in the CICD, parking structures shall be
included in the building area.
[2] Individual building coverage. No individual building nor a
group of buildings not separated from each other by the
minimum required separation distance noted below shall
occupy more than 10% of the CICD site. Parking structures
are not required to be included in the calculation of
individual building coverage.
(h) Maximum impervious surfaces. Not more than 45% of the
CICD site may be covered by impervious surfaces (the
"impervious surface ratio"); provided, however, if the CICD is
redeveloping existing improved lands, then the maximum
allowed impervious surface ratio shall be 45% or 10% less than
the existing impervious surface ratio on the proposed CICD
site, whichever is greater. In no event may the maximum
allowed impervious surfaces on the applicant's entire campus
within the PI Zoning District exceed 45%.
(i) Height limitations from the average existing grade (the
average of the existing grades taken at twenty-foot intervals
around the proposed building perimeter) to the midpoint of a
sloped roof or to the highest roof beams of a flat roof, provided
that chimneys and spires shall not be included in measuring
the height for structures within the CICD*:
[1] Academic and performance facilities: 50 feet.
[2] Housing and social facilities: 45 feet.
[3] Parking structures: 38 feet.
[4] All other structures: 38 feet.
*NOTE: The height of a fly loft shall not exceed 65 feet.
A fly loft is limited to the area directly over the stage of
a theatre, containing overhead lights, drop curtains, and
equipment for raising and lowering sets.
(j) Building length and spacing.
[1] Building length. Building length shall measure the length
of a single facade of a building or parking structure that is
unbroken by variations/articulations in the facade for the
entire height of the building. Such variations/articulations
shall comprise a minimum six-foot horizontal offset depth.
The variations/articulations shall have a minimum width to
depth ratio of 4:1.
§ 280-68.1 CHARTER § 280-68.1
C:1045
[a] All buildings and parking structures: 180 feet.
[2] Minimum building spacing. These standards shall apply to
all existing or proposed buildings and parking structures,
either within or outside of the limits of a CICD:
[a] Between any two buildings: 45 feet.
[b] Between a building and a parking structure: 30 feet.
(3) Special regulations.
(a) Riparian buffer setback: 50 feet.
(b) Buffer planting strip. No buffer planting strip or screening
shall be required within the CICD or between the CICD and
other properties of the applicant. Where required by § 280-71,
a twenty-foot buffer planting strip shall be provided on land
owned by the applicant. In addition, a twenty-foot buffer
planting strip, in accordance with § 280-71, shall be provided
anywhere within 200 feet of the CICD, unless waived by the
Board of Commissioners. This additional buffer planting strip
shall be located on lands of the applicant and placed so as to
effectively screen the proposed CICD from any adjacent
residential uses.
(c) Requirement to preserve land. If the applicant wishes to
increase its building area within the CICD to more than 30%,
then for each square foot of building area proposed in excess of
30%, the applicant shall be required to preserve two square
feet of open space on lands owned by the applicant.
[1] The minimum area of any such preserved land shall not be
less than 10,000 square feet.
[2] The preserved lands shall be located within the CICD or
within 500 feet of the boundaries of the CICD; shall be
located entirely within Radnor Township; shall not be
separated from the CICD by an arterial or major collector
street; and when at all possible, located to provide a buffer
between the CICD and nearby residential properties.
[3] The preserved lands shall consist of one contiguous area
which is not separated or divided by other parcels, streets,
driveways, vehicular accessways, or railroad easements or
rights-of-way. The preserved lands shall not include areas
within rights-of-way or easements or areas that are
already preserved or protected.
[4] The preserved lands shall not include narrow or irregular
pieces of land which are remnants from the development
on a campus. Preserved lands shall have a minimum
horizontal dimension of 200 feet in every direction.
§ 280-68.1 RADNOR CODE § 280-68.1
C:1046
[5] Such lands shall be permanently preserved through the
placement of a recorded easement that prohibits the
construction of buildings, paving, or structures, other than
walkways and other passive park improvements.
(d) All applications for a CICD shall be subject to review by the
Design Review Board in accordance with architectural
standards set forth in Chapter 150 of the Township Code.
(e) Off-street parking and loading requirements. The number of
spaces required shall not be less than the minimum
requirements of §§ 280-103 and 280-104, except as follows:
[1] The Board of Commissioners may permit a reduction in the
number of parking spaces to be developed as required by
this chapter, provided that each of the following conditions
are satisfied:
[a] The applicant shall demonstrate to the Board using
five years of existing or projected employment,
customer, resident or other relevant data, such as
Urban Land Institute (ULI) standards, that a reduction
in the off-street parking spaces requirements of this
chapter is warranted.
[b] The applicant shall submit plans of the parking as
required by this chapter designating a layout for the
total number of parking spaces needed to comply with
this chapter. Additional plans shall also be provided
designating other contiguous areas of the entire
campus where sufficient parking is provided, or shall
provide parking agreements between the applicant
and the owners of other contiguous lands that
designate off-site parking areas intended to serve the
applicant's property.
[c] The applicant shall execute an agreement with the
Township requiring the applicant to acquire, install,
and/or construct additional off-street parking spaces
in the event that the Board finds that additional
parking is needed to service all proposed uses within
the CICD within five years of final occupancy of such
project. If additional parking is needed in accordance
with this subsection, such parking shall meet all
applicable area, dimensional, and buffering
requirements.
[2] There shall be no off-street loading requirements except
for retail subordinate uses. All off-street loading shall be
adjacent to the use being served by the space; designated
by the applicant; and approved by the Board during the
conditional use approval process. The number of berths
§ 280-68.1 CHARTER § 280-68.1
C:1047
shall be one berth for each 20,000 square feet of net floor
area, or fraction thereof, devoted to retail subordinate
uses in the CICD.
[a] Off-street loading facilities shall have adequate and
unobstructed access to a street, service drive, or alley.
Such facilities shall have adequate maneuvering space
and shall be so arranged that they may be used
without blocking or otherwise interfering with the use
of automobile accessways, parking facilities, fire
lanes, or pedestrianways, clear sight distances or
triangles, or backing out onto a public street.
[3] Except for areas of access, all driveways, off-street loading
areas, and service or interior roadways shall be permitted
within all yard setbacks with a minimum setback distance
of five feet from any public right-of-way, except that offstreet
loading areas shall not be located between a
building and the right-of-way line of an arterial or major
collector street.
[4] Surface parking spaces shall be no less than nine feet by
19 feet. Parking spaces in any parking structure shall be
no less than eight feet six inches by 19 feet. Parking
structures with seventy-five-degree angled parking and
one-way aisles shall have a minimum aisle width of 17 feet.
Handicap-accessible spaces and their size shall be
provided in accordance with the SALDO and other codes of
the Township.
[5] As specifically designated during the conditional use
approval process, the required off-street parking spaces
may be located:
[a] Within the boundaries of the CICD; or
[b] On other areas of the entire campus, exclusive of
areas within residential zoning districts.
(f) Mechanical/electrical equipment and trash.
[1] Mechanical/electrical equipment shall be located/mounted
at ground level. Areas for trash disposal shall be located in
the rear of buildings.
[2] All such elements shall be screened from view. In addition,
sound attenuation devices shall be installed on all
equipment to minimize noise pollution at any adjacent
residential property line.
[3] If, during the conditional use approval process, the
applicant can demonstrate that mechanical and/or
§ 280-68.1 RADNOR CODE § 280-68.1
C:1048
§ 280-69. Area and height regulations.
electrical equipment mounted above ground level can be
located and integrated into the overall design and
architectural character of the building in such a manner
as to be hidden or disguised from view from any adjacent
street or property, then such equipment may be located
above ground level.
(g) Site lighting. Light fixtures shall be shielded to reduce light
spillage beyond the property line of the campus; provided,
however, that at no point shall any light trespass onto adjacent
residential properties or exceed 0.5 footcandles at the
residential property line. All proposed exterior site and
building-mounted lighting shall meet the International Dark-
Sky Association (IDA) full cutoff requirements.
(h) No subordinate use shall include a drive-through/drive-in
service.
(i) Conditional use plans. As part of the conditional use
application, the applicant shall provide the following:
[1] Campus boundaries plan. A plan delineating the
boundaries of the applicant's entire campus (the "entire
campus plan"). The applicant's entire campus shall include
all contiguous lots and those lots owned by the institution
or associated entity that may be separated from each other
by parcels, streets, and/or transit authority property lines
and rights-of-way.
[2] Improvements plan: a plan delineating the boundaries of
the area covered by the CICD. This shall include a
preliminary layout of all of the improvements proposed
within the entire CICD; whether proposed to be completed
in one or multiple phases.
(j) Pedestrian circulation. In order to ensure safe and efficient
pedestrian circulation, the Board of Commissioners may
require, as part of the conditional use approval, pedestrian
improvements, including, but not limited to, signalization, road
crossings, pedestrian bridges, and the like. Improvements
associated with pedestrian circulation shall not be subject to
any dimensional, building coverage, and building/structure
length and separation requirements of the CICD and the
Zoning Code, as amended.
A. Lot area and width. Every lot on which a building or combination of
buildings is erected or used shall have an area of not less than 10 acres,
and such lot shall be not less than 300 feet in width at the building line.
§ 280-68.1 CHARTER § 280-69
C:1049
B. Building area. Not more than 30% of the total lot area may be occupied
by buildings, and not less than 55% of the total tract area, exclusive of
that area within the public right-of-way, shall be devoted to landscaping
and planted in accordance with Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land.
Required buffers shall be provided in accordance with § 280-71 of this
article. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 4-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-04]
C. Height regulations. No building or structure shall exceed three stories
or 38 feet in height.
D. Setbacks from streets. No building or permanent structure, other than
a guardhouse or facility which provides controlled access to a property,
shall be located less than 120 feet from a street right-of-way line, and
no surface parking area, driveway, service or interior roadway, with the
exception of approved areas for vehicular access, shall be located less
than 60 feet from a street right-of-way line.
E. Rear and side yard setbacks.
(1) For the purposes of determining setbacks from side and rear
property lines, uses and structures permitted within this district
are classified according to the nature of the activity and potential
impacts on adjacent properties. The following table includes many
of the projected uses of the Planned Institutional District. If a
building contains a mix of uses or includes features which are
covered by more than one classification, the entire building shall
meet the requirements of the highest classification which applies to
any of the uses or structures.
Category 1 Uses
Academic classroom building
Academic research building
Administrative building
Medical services building for academic institutions
Religious services building
Single-family house
Monastery
Convent
Convalescent home
Life-care residence
Children's home
Surface parking lot
§ 280-69 RADNOR CODE § 280-69
C:1050
Category 2 Uses
Dormitory
Food service
Maintenance building
Groundskeeping building
Field house
Stadium
Field sport area
Utility structure
Service, utility, maintenance and storage areas
Club or fraternity house
Theater
Auditorium
Hospital
Medical research facility
Medical treatment facility
Medical office
Hospice
Cemetery
Parking structure
Any use permitted in a Planned Institutional District and not
listed in Category 1 uses above
(2) In the case of a hospital (general, medical or surgical), sanatorium,
medical or health center, convalescent home, nursing home or
similar health facility, no more than 50 beds shall be permitted on a
lot of not less than five acres, except that one additional bed may be
added for each 2,500 square feet of a lot area in excess of five
acres.
(3) Uses and structures shall be set back from rear and side property
lines in accordance with the following table:
Category of Use
Adjacent District
1
(feet)
2
(feet)
Any residential, agricultural, or
public land use district
125 200
All other districts 75 75
§ 280-69 CHARTER § 280-69
C:1051
§ 280-70. Special regulations.
F. When land zoned institutional completely surrounds land zoned
residential, agricultural or public land use, and to the extent that the
property on both sides of a zoning boundary is owned by the institution,
at the effective date of this article the above rear and side yard setback
requirements shall be 75 feet.
G. Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
A. The tract of land on which each permitted use is conducted shall, in its
entirety, be owned and operated as a single or common management
and maintenance unit, with common open space, parking, utility,
maintenance and service facilities and services.
B. Building size and spacing.
(1) The greatest dimension in length or depth of a building shall not
exceed 160 feet, and no more than three buildings may be attached
to each other, provided further that the facade of any building
attached to another building be visibly offset from the adjoining
building at an angle approximately 90°.
(2) The distance at the closest point between any two buildings or
groups of attached buildings, including accessory buildings, shall
be not less than 45 feet.
(3) In no case shall the width of a building or the aggregate widths of
buildings fronting on a street on the same lot exceed 80% of width
of a lot.
C. Service, utility, maintenance and storage areas, including solid waste
containers, loading and unloading areas and heating, ventilating and
air-conditioning equipment, shall be screened from view from public
streets and abutting properties. This may be accomplished by means of
enclosing walls, stone, brick or wood fences or a buffer planting strip.
Visual screening so provided shall be of sufficient density so as not to be
seen through and of sufficient height to constitute an effective screen.
D. Storage of vehicles.
(1) Vending trucks and other vehicles similarly used for selling,
retailing or wholesaling materials, goods, wares or merchandise
shall not be parked overnight on a lot.
(2) Any vehicle with length exceeding 18 feet parked overnight on a lot
shall be screened from view from public streets and abutting
properties in a manner consistent with Subsection C above.
E. Off-street parking and service areas.
§ 280-69 RADNOR CODE § 280-70
C:1052
§ 280-71. Buffer requirements.
Along rear and side property lines, a buffer planting strip, as defined in
§ 280-4B of this chapter, shall be provided in accordance with the following
regulations, except when uses in a proposed development shall abut uses of
a similar type and density.
(1) All off-street parking, unloading and service areas shall comply
with the provisions of §§ 280-103, 280-104 and 280-105.
(2) Areas designated for off-street parking on any property which
adjoins an agricultural, residential or planned apartment zoning
district shall be screened from such district by use of a visual
barrier consisting of natural topography, existing vegetation, dense
plantings and berms. Berms shall be constructed to a minimum
height of four feet with a maximum slope of 33%, and shall be
covered with grass, evergreens, shrubbery and other forms of
dense vegetation Berms shall not be required if existing
topographical features meet or exceed the requirements of this
section.
(3) Vehicular access to any property shall be limited to streets
classified in Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land, § 255-27B, as
arterial, primary collector or secondary collector.
A. The owner shall place and continually maintain a planting area not less
than 20 feet in width containing berms, hedges, evergreens, shrubbery
or suitable vegetation of sufficient planted density to produce a visual
screening not to be seen through and of sufficient height to constitute
an effective screen and give maximum protection and immediate visual
screening to an abutting property or district. Wherever possible, the
owner shall make every effort to retain existing natural screening, such
as vegetation and topography. Constructed berms shall have a
maximum slope of 33% with grass cover or 50% when shrubbery or
ground cover is used. Fencing may be used in combination with berms
and/or vegetation to achieve the buffer, but may not be used alone.
B. All evergreen vegetation to be installed shall not be less than five feet in
height at the time of planting and shall be of such species that expected
height at maturity shall not be less than 15 feet.
C. All deciduous vegetation to be installed shall not be less than eight feet
in height and two-and-one-half-inch caliper, measured six feet above
finished grade.
D. As an alternative to the possibly linear appearance of the minimum
requirements above, applicants are encouraged to provide innovative,
free-form buffers which need not be located entirely within the
minimum required width. Such alternative buffers shall be subject to
approval by the Township.
§ 280-70 CHARTER § 280-71
C:1053
§ 280-72. Institutional long-range development plans.
E. A landscaping plan shall be required, which shall clearly show and list
the locations, size, species and number of plant materials proposed to
be used.
A. Purposes. The principal purposes of the requirements for institutional
long-range development plans contained in this section are:
(1) To provide notice and information to the Township, community and
neighborhood organizations, other public and private agencies and
the general public as to the plans of each affected institution at an
early stage, and to give an opportunity for early and meaningful
involvement of these groups in such plans prior to substantial
investment in property acquisition or building design by the
institution.
(2) To enable the institution to make modifications to its plan prior to
the more detailed planning and prior to any request for
authorization by the Township of new development proposed in the
long-range development plan.
(3) To provide the Township, community and neighborhood
organizations, other public and private agencies, the general public
and other institutions with information that may help guide their
decisions with regard to use of and investment in land in the
vicinity of the institution, provisions of public services and
particularly the planning of similar institutions.
B. When required.
(1) Each application for a land development plan approval or
application to establish a Planned Institutional District to any
property not already in the district shall be accompanied by
submission to the Township of Radnor of a current institutional
long-range development plan describing the existing and
anticipated future development of the institution as provided in
Subsection C below.
(2) Upon submission of an initial institutional long-range development
plan, thereafter, at intervals of two years, each educational,
religious and similar institutional establishment or each medical or
health facility should file a report with the Township describing the
current status of its institutional long-range development plan. In
addition, any substantial revisions to the institutional long-range
development plan already on file with the Township shall be filed
with the Township as soon as such revisions have been formalized
by the management of the institution.
(3) The institutional long-range development plans, reports and
revisions described in this section shall, upon filing, be available for
public review at the Township offices.
§ 280-71 RADNOR CODE § 280-72
C:1054
C. Format and substance of plan. The plan shall consist of text and graphic
materials similar in kind to those required in Chapter 255, Subdivision
of Land, § 255-20. Information required shall include graphics drawn at
a scale of not less than 150 feet to the inch and shall be suitable for
display to the public at meetings held by the Township Planning
Commission and Township Commissioners. The institutional long-range
development plan shall, at a minimum, contain textual and graphic
descriptions of:
(1) The nature of the institution, its history of growth and physical
changes in the neighborhood which can be identified as having
occurred as a result of such growth, the services provided and
service population, employment characteristics, all ownership by
the institution of properties throughout the Township and any other
relevant information pertaining to the institution and its services.
(2) The present physical plant of the institution, including the location
and bulk of buildings, land uses on adjacent properties, the location
and classification of all streets, internal driveways, parking lots,
loading berths, rights-of-way, easements, water and sewer lines,
surface and subsurface drainage facilities and property lines,
traffic circulation patterns, parking in and around the institution
and open space and other amenities.
(3) The development plans for the institution for a future period of not
less than 10 years and the physical changes in the institution
projected to be needed to achieve those plans. Any plans for
physical development during the first five years shall include the
site area, ground coverage, building bulk, approximate floor area
by function, off-street parking, circulation patterns, area for land
acquisition and timing for the proposed construction. In addition,
with respect to plans of any duration, the submission shall contain
a description and analysis of each of the following:
(a) The conformity of proposed development plans to the Township
Comprehensive Plan.
(b) The anticipated impact of any proposed development by the
institution on the surrounding neighborhood, including but not
limited to the effect on existing housing units, relocation of
housing occupants and commercial and industrial tenants,
changes in traffic levels and circulation patterns, transit
demands and parking availability and the character and scale
of development in the surrounding neighborhood.
(c) Any alternatives which might avoid or lessen adverse impact
upon the surrounding neighborhood, including location and
configuration alternatives, the alternative of no new
development and the approximate costs and benefits of each
alternative.
§ 280-72 CHARTER § 280-72
C:1055
(d) The mitigating actions proposed by the institution to lessen
adverse impacts upon the surrounding neighborhood.
(4) A projection of related services and physical development by
others, including but not limited to office space and medical
outpatient facilities, which may occur as a result of the
implementation of the institution's long-range development plan.
(5) Any other items as may be reasonably required by the Township
Commissioners or the Township Planning Commission.
D. Compliance with plan. Upon submission of a long-range development
plan for institutional development as set forth herein, no development
plan shall be approved unless such is in compliance with the provisions
of this article and substantially in accordance with the submitted longrange
development plan or subsequent amendments thereto.
Determination of a development plan's accord with the submitted longrange
development plan or subsequent amendments thereto shall be
made by the Zoning Officer.
§ 280-72 RADNOR CODE § 280-72
C:1056
ARTICLE XVII
FC Floodplain Conservation District
§ 280-73. Application of regulations.
In the Floodplain Conservation District, the regulations contained in this
article shall apply.
§ 280-74. Intent.
Pursuant to the powers and authority granted by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act No. 247, effective January 1, 1969,278
and in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, the regulations
of the Floodplain Conservation District are intended to protect areas of
the Township which are located in a floodplain subject to periodic flooding
waters. In advancing this principal and the general purposes of this chapter
and the Comprehensive Plan, the specific intent of this article is:
§ 280-75. Designation of district; boundaries. [Amended 9-26-1977
by Ord. No. 77-24]
A. To regulate or prevent the erection of buildings and other structures in
areas unfit for development by reason of periodic flooding.
B. To protect public health, by preventing pollution of surface and
subsurface water supplies and providing surface area to absorb and
retain runoff for maintenance of the subsurface water supply.
C. To protect public safety, by preserving natural floodplains and valley
flats which are subject to periodic flooding in order to:
(1) Prevent the increase in flood volume and rate of flow which results
from covering the floodplains with impervious surfaces and from
constricting natural drainage channels.
(2) Provide areas for the deposition of sediment.
D. To prevent added downstream damage from increased flood volume
and rate of flow and to permit uses of the floodplain compatible with the
preservation of natural conditions and the maintenance of the stream
flow throughout the year.
E. To minimize the financial burden imposed on the community,
governmental bodies and individuals by floods.
A. The Floodplain Conservation District, as defined in § 280-4B, shall be
those areas of Radnor Township that are subject to the one-hundredyear
flood, as identified on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated
November 18, 2009, and shown on the FEMA floodplain maps, or the
most recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency
278. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 280-73 CHARTER § 280-75
C:1057
Management Agency. In addition, "floodplain conservation district"
shall be defined to include all areas, not shown on the map, which,
by hydrological profile analysis, are calculated to be inundated during
a one-hundred-year frequency flood. The Floodplain Conservation
District shall comprise three subdistricts, as follows: [Amended
11-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-29; 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-05;
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
(1) FW (Floodway Area): the area identified as floodway in the AE Zone
in the Flood Insurance Study prepared by FEMA. The term shall
also include floodway areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those floodplain
areas where no floodway has been identified in the Flood Insurance
Study.
(2) FF (Flood-Fringe Area): the remaining portions of the one-hundredyear
floodplain in those areas identified as an AE Zone in the Flood
Insurance Study, where a floodway has been delineated. The basis
for the outermost boundary of this area shall be the one-hundredyear
elevations as shown in the flood profiles contained in the Flood
Insurance Study.
(3) FA (General Floodplain Area): the areas identified as Zone A in the
FIS for which no one-hundred-year-flood elevations have been
provided. When available, information from other federal, state and
other acceptable sources, including those areas shown as alluvial
soils in the Chester and Delaware Counties Soil Survey, shall be
used to determine the one-hundred-year elevation, as well as a
floodway area, if possible. When no other information is available,
the one-hundred-year elevation shall be determined by using a
point on the boundary of the identified FIRM which is nearest the
construction site in question. In lieu of the above delineation
method, the Township may require the applicant to determine the
elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications
approved by the Township who shall certify that the technical
methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical
concepts. Studies, analyses and computations shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
Township.
(4) Special requirements for FW and FA areas: Within an FW
(Floodway Area) or FA (General Floodplain Area), the following
provisions apply:
(a) Any new construction, development, use, activity, or
encroachment that would cause any increase in flood heights
shall be prohibited.
§ 280-75 RADNOR CODE § 280-75
C:1058
§ 280-76. Permitted uses. [Amended 9-26-1977 by Ord. No. 77-24;
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
Within any designated Floodplain Conservation District, no construction,
development, use, activity or encroachment of any kind shall be allowed
except where the effect of such proposed activity on flood heights is fully
offset by accompanying stream improvements.
(b) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
B. In the case of any dispute concerning the boundaries of a Floodplain
Conservation District, an initial determination shall be made by the
Township Engineer. Such determination shall be based upon the
criteria established in this article. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to supply all the necessary plans and maps in sufficient detail
to allow the Township Engineer to make the determination. [Amended
4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 84-13]
C. Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Township Engineer as to the
boundaries of the Floodplain Conservation District, as defined in
Subsections A and B above, which may include the grounds that the
data referred to therein is or has become incorrect because of changes
due to natural or other causes or because of changes indicated by
future hydrologic and hydraulic studies, may appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board, in making such
determination, shall use criteria established in this article. The burden
of proof in such an appeal shall be on the appellant.
D. The Floodplain Conservation District shall be deemed an overlay of any
zoning district now or hereafter applicable to any lot. Should the
Floodplain Conservation District be declared inapplicable to any tract
for any reason, the zoning applicable to such tract shall be deemed to
be the district in which it is located without consideration of this article.
E. The identified Floodplain Conservation District may be revised or
modified by the Board of Commissioners where studies or information
provided by a qualified agency or person document the need for such
revision. Prior to the change, however, approval must be obtained from
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. [Amended 11-27-1995
by Ord. No. 95-29; 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
F. Any application submitted to the Township that would cause the
elevation of the one-hundred-year floodplain to change shall require the
Township to notify the immediate neighbors within 500 feet of the
property under review (upstream and downsteam). [Added 3-14-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-04]
§ 280-75 CHARTER § 280-76
C:1059
A. Subject to such limitation, the following uses and no other are
permitted in the Floodplain Conservation District, provided that the use
is permitted by the applicable zoning of the property:
(1) Customary agricultural operations, excluding structures.
(2) Pastures, grazing land, outdoor plant nursery and orchard,
excluding structures.
(3) Wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserve and arboretum, excluding
structures.
(4) Recreation use such as park, day camp, picnic grove, golf course,
hunting, fishing and boating club, excluding structures.
(5) Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(a) All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and
systems shall be located, designed and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of
floodwaters.
(b) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(c) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within
any Floodplain Conservation District except in strict
compliance with all state and local regulations for such
systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be located so
as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a
flood.
(6) Other utilities.
(a) All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and telephone
systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a
flood.
(7) Placement of buildings and structures.
(a) All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow
of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon
the flow and height of floodwater.
(8) Anchoring.
(a) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(b) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
§ 280-76 RADNOR CODE § 280-76
C:1060
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
(c) The design and construction requirements of the UCC
pertaining to this subsection, as referred to in 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) and contained in the
2003 IBC (Sections 1605.2.2, 1605.3.1.2, 1612.4 and Appendix
G501.3), the IRC (Sections R301.1 and R323.1.1) and ASCE
24-98 (Section 5.6), shall be utilized.
(9) Floors, walls and ceilings.
(a) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing
structural damage to the building.
(b) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a "marine" or water-resistant variety.
(c) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are water
resistant and will withstand inundation.
(d) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
water-resistant material.
(e) The provisions of the UCC pertaining to this subsection and
referenced in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as
amended) and contained in the 2003 IBC (Sections 801.1.3,
1403.2, 1403.4, 1403.6 and 1404.2), the 2003 IRC (Sections
R323.1.7 and R501.3) and ASCE 24-98 (Chapter 6).
(10) Paints and adhesives.
(a) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of "marine" or water-resistant quality.
(b) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a "marine" or water-resistant variety.
(c) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a "marine" or water-resistant paint or other
finishing material.
(d) The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405, as amended), the 2003 IBC
(Sections 801.1.3, 1403.7 and Appendix G) and the 2003 IRC
(Sections R323.1.7).
(11) Electrical components.
§ 280-76 CHARTER § 280-76
C:1061
§ 280-77. Prohibited uses. [Added 6-23-1986 by Ord. No. 86-24;
amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
Under no circumstances will the following activities and/or development be
located, enlarged or expanded within the Floodplain Conservation District,
since they present a special hazard to the health and safety of the public.
(a) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(b) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(c) The provisions pertaining to the above provisions and
referenced in the UCC and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through
405, as amended) and contained in the 2003 IBC (Section
1612.4), the IRC (Section R323.1.5), the 2000 IFGC (Sections
R301.5 and R1601.3.8) and ASCE 24 (Chapter 8) shall be
utilized.
(12) Equipment.
(a) Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units,
and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood
elevation.
(b) The provisions pertaining to the above provision and
referenced in the UCC and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through
405, as amended) and contained in the 2003 IBC (Section
1612.4), the 2003 IRC (Sections R323.1.5), the 2000 IFGC
(Sections R301.5 and R1601.3.8) and ASCE 24 (Chapter 8)
shall be utilized.
(13) Boundary fences, subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
(14) Dams, culverts and bridges approved by the commonwealth.
(15) Storm sewers, subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
B. (Reserved)
C. Where parking lots and/or driveways are required by the regulations for
the district applicable to the lot previously, parking lots and driveways
shall be required.
A. Hospitals (public or private).
B. Nursing homes (public or private).
C. Jails or prisons.
D. Individual manufactured homes, new manufactured home parks,
manufactured home subdivisions and substantial improvements
§ 280-76 RADNOR CODE § 280-77
C:1062
§ 280-78. Grading, filling and storage of materials.279
thereto, as well as individual manufactured homes. [Amended
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
E. The production, storage or maintenance of a supply of hazardous
materials and substances as defined under the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act (Act 166 of 1978), Section 207 (32 P.S. § 679.207).
F. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any regulatory flood elevation area that would, together with all
other existing and anticipated development, increase the one-hundredyear
flood elevation more than one foot at any point. [Added
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
A. A change in grade by either cut or fill, or a combination of both, may be
permitted only upon the following conditions:
(1) The effect is not to alter the cross-sectional area of the profile of the
floodplain; and
(2) The effect is not to increase the elevation of the one-hundred-yearfrequency
flood.
B. No storage of any material that may be hazardous to the health and
welfare of the surrounding population or which is in violation of the
Clean Streams Law280 or regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection shall be permitted within the Floodplain
Conservation District as herein defined. [Amended 3-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-04]
C. Fill. If fill is used, it shall: [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points, unless approved otherwise by the Township Engineer;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and
approved by, the Township Engineer; and provisions contained in
the 2003 IBC (Sections 1801.1 and 1803.4) shall be utilized.
279. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 175, Grading, Excavations and Fills.
280. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 280-77 CHARTER § 280-79
C:1063
§ 280-79. Municipal liability.
The grant of a zoning approval or approval of a subdivision plan in the
Floodplain Conservation District shall not constitute a representation,
guaranty or warranty of any kind by the Township or by an official or
employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed uses and
shall create no liability upon the Township, its officials or employees; nor
shall such grant or approval imply in any way a waiver of the requirements
of this article or compliance with any federal or state law governing streams
and other bodies of water.
§ 280-80. Conflicts with other regulations.
In the event of any conflict with other Township ordinances, rules, building
codes or regulations, the provisions of this Floodplain Conservation District
Article shall prevail.
§ 280-81. Review of applications for variance. [Amended 9-26-1977
by Ord. No. 77-24]
A. Standards and criteria. In any instance where the Zoning Hearing
Board is required to consider a request for variance from the provisions
of this article, the Board shall determine that the standards and criteria
enumerated in § 280-145 of this chapter and Section 912 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code are met before granting the
request. A variance shall be required for any construction,
development, use, or activity within any regulatory flood elevation area
that would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the one-hundred-year flood elevation more than
one foot at any point. [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
(1) In addition to the standards and criteria enumerated in said
§ 280-145 and Section 912, the Board shall meet the following
standards:
(a) An affirmative decision shall not be issued by the Zoning
Hearing Board within the designated floodway if any increase
in the flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(b) Affirmative decisions shall only be issued by the Zoning
Hearing Board upon:
[1] A showing of good and sufficient cause.
[2] A determination that failure to grant the appeal would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
[3] A determination that the granting of an appeal will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety and extraordinary public expense; create
nuisances; cause fraud on or victimization of the public; or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
§ 280-79 RADNOR CODE § 280-81
C:1064
(c) Affirmative decisions shall be issued only upon determination
that it is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(2) The Board shall also consider the following factors:
(a) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to avoid causing disease,
contamination and unsanitary conditions.
(b) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain or stormwater management program for
the area.
(c) The safety of access to the property in times of flood by
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(d) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
(e) Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
article, including compliance with any state and federal laws
and regulations relating to Floodplain Conservation District.
B. Procedure; streams and other bodies of water. Upon receiving an
application for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall, prior to
hearing, require the applicant to furnish such of the following material
as the Township Engineer shall deem necessary for a complete
consideration of the matter by the Board:
(1) Plans, in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevation of the lot and existing and proposed uses;
photographs showing existing uses and vegetation; soil types; and
other pertinent information.
(2) A series of cross sections at twenty-five-foot intervals along the lot
shoreline, showing the stream channel or the lake or pond bottom
and the elevation of adjoining land areas to be occupied by the
proposed uses, and high-water information.
(3) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel, lake or
pond.
(4) Specifications for building materials and construction,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, storage, water supply and
sanitary facilities.
C. Conditions.
(1) Any structure permitted by variance shall include floodproofing
measures according to the following criteria:
(a) All structures shall be:
§ 280-81 CHARTER § 280-81
C:1065
[1] Firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering
practices to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement.
[2] Constructed so as to prevent the entrance of floodwaters
into the water supply and waste treatment systems as well
as other utility and facility systems. In addition, waste
treatment systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate discharges from the systems into the
floodwaters.
(b) All new construction shall have the lowest floor, including the
basement, elevated to one foot above the one-hundred-yearflood
elevation.
(c) Space below the lowest floor. [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-04281]
[1] Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) is prohibited.
[2] Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a
vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area
other than a basement shall be designed and constructed
to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for
the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior
walls. The term "partially enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
[3] Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
[a] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed space.
[b] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade.
[c] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc.,
or other coverings or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(d) All improvements to existing structures shall be constructed so
that:
281. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
C(1)(c) as Subsection C(1)(d).
§ 280-81 RADNOR CODE § 280-81
C:1066
[1] Improvements to residential structures shall be elevated
to the greatest extent possible. Any portion of the
structure not elevated to one foot above the one-hundredyear-
flood elevation shall meet the requirements of
Subsection C(1)(c)[2] below.
[2] Improvements to nonresidential structures shall be
floodproofed according to the classification W1-W4 of the
Floodproofing Regulations, United States Army Corps of
Engineers, pamphlet EP 1165 2 314.
(2) In addition, upon consideration of the purposes of this article, the
Board may attach such conditions to the granting of a variance as it
deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. Among
such conditions, without limitation because of specific
enumeration, may be included:
(a) Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
(b) Limitations on periods of use and operation.
(c) Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed
restrictions.
(d) Floodproofing measures such as the following, without
limitation because of specific enumeration:
[1] Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement.
[2] Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters.
[3] Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures.
[4] Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of
water through walls.
[5] Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation.
[6] Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
[7] Pumping facilities for subsurface external foundation wall
and basement floor pressures.
[8] Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water
pressure or floating debris.
[9] Cutoff valves on sewer lines.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board shall notify the applicant, in writing, that:
(1) The issuance of a decision to allow construction of a structure
below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
§ 280-81 CHARTER § 280-81
C:1067
§ 280-82. Variance conditions.
In any case where the Zoning Hearing Board shall grant a variance to
permit the erection of a structure in the floodplain or a variance to permit
a change in nonconforming use of a structure already existing in the
floodplain, the Board shall, for the protection of prospective purchasers and
lessees, impose the following conditions:
(2) Such construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to
life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a
record of all decisions, as required in Subsection E of this section.
E. The Zoning Hearing Board shall:
(1) Maintain a record of all decisions, including justification for their
issuance.
(2) Report such decisions issued in its annual report submitted to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. [Amended 3-14-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-04]
A. Require the applicant to advise prospective purchasers and/or lessees
that the lot is located either entirely or partially, as the case may be, in
the floodplain.
B. Require that, before settlement or change in use, as the case may be,
the purchaser or lessee shall signify, in writing, that he has been
advised that the premises lies partially or entirely in the floodplain, and
a signed copy of such signification shall be delivered to the Township by
the applicant.
C. A deed restriction shall be created and placed on record to run as a
covenant with the land, which restriction shall contain the following
provision: "This lot is entirely (partially) within the floodplain as defined
by Article XVII of Chapter 280, Zoning, of the Code of Radnor Township,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania, as amended."
§ 280-81 RADNOR CODE § 280-82
C:1068
ARTICLE XVIII
PLU Public Land Use District
[Added 5-22-1989 by Ord. No. 89-21]
§ 280-83. Establishment; purpose.
A new zoning classification, hereinafter referred to as the Public Land Use
District (PLU), is established along with standards for use and development
within such district, which shall be designed to make special provisions for
facilities and uses which are noncommercial, public-service oriented and
which are owned by the Township, school district, county, state or federal
government, other public authorities or public agencies or public oriented
non-sectarian community groups. Many of these uses are necessary for
the service to the general public and have unique locational or physical
requirements.
§ 280-84. Territory. [Amended 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-20]
The land included within the Public Land Use District created by this article,
and the Township Engineer shall prepare appropriate legal descriptions of
land which shall be designated in Appendix A of this article.282
§ 280-85. Use regulations. [Amended 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-23]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be occupied for any of the
following purposes:
A. Municipal, county, state or federal buildings or uses. This use is limited
to facilities of Radnor Township, Delaware County, the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, or the federal government and may include
administration buildings, police facilities, recreation facilities, libraries,
road maintenance facilities and emergency management facilities.
B. Public schools. This use includes facilities of the Radnor Township
School District and school-related uses in support of or accessory to the
school district.
C. Public education facilities. This use includes adult educational centers
or other similar facilities operated by an educational, civic or
philanthropic institution.
D. Public parks and recreation facilities or nonprofit community recreation
facilities open to the public.
E. Public transportation facilities.
F. Public utility facilities.
G. Post office.
282. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Township Secretary.
§ 280-83 CHARTER § 280-85
C:1069
§ 280-86. Area and height regulations.
H. Public art gallery.
I. Public parking facilities.
J. Private library: operated by an educational, historic, or other nonprofit
organization.
K. Office uses of existing Radnor Township buildings for governmental,
educational, civic, philanthropic, or other nonprofit organizations.
L. Accessory uses on the same lot which shall be incidental to a permitted
use, including the following:
(1) Accessory residential or caretaker use within existing Radnor
Township buildings.
(2) Accessory agricultural or agricultural retail, provided that at least
50% of such products shall have been grown or produced on the
property on which they are offered for sale.
(3) Accessory catering or accessory concession operation to a
permitted use.
M. The following uses, when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the general standards as prescribed
in § 280-145, and provided that the Board shall determine that the
placement of such use is of a public necessity and that planting,
buffering or other measures are taken to safeguard the character of
existing and enjoining districts.
(1) Radio and television towers and other telecommunication facilities
when operated only by a Township agency, governmental agency,
public utility corporation, or federally licensed telecommunications
company.
A. Lot area and width. A minimum lot area and width shall not be required
within this district.
B. Building area. Not more than 30% of the total lot area may be occupied
by buildings and not less than 55% of the total lot area, exclusive of
those areas within the right-of-way, shall be devoted to landscaping.
[Amended 4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-04]
C. Front yard. All buildings shall have a minimum front yard setback of at
least equal to that of the most restrictive and adjoining zoning districts,
provided that where such district adjoins an agricultural, residential or
planned apartment zoning district, the minimum front yard setback
shall be 120 feet.
D. Side and rear yard setbacks. All buildings shall have a minimum side
and rear yard setback of 25 feet or no less than the required minimum
§ 280-85 RADNOR CODE § 280-86
C:1070
§ 280-87. Special regulations.
side or rear yard setback of the adjoining zoning district, provided that
where the adjoining district is zoned agricultural, residential or planned
apartment, the setback shall be 120 feet.
E. Building height. No building or structure shall exceed three stories or
38 feet, except for sports field lighting on Township property which has
been approved by the Board of Commissioners, at its discretion, and is
subject to the following: [Amended 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-11]
(1) Maximum height of the light standard shall not exceed 85 feet.
(2) Lights shall not exceed a maximum footcandle reading at the
property line in excess of 0.2 fc (footcandles) unless otherwise
approved by the Board of Commissioners.
(3) Light fixtures shall be shielded to reduce light spillage beyond the
extent of the property line.
(4) Light fixtures shall be positioned so that the emanating light does
not shine into streets in such a manner as to interfere with or
distract a driver's vision and/or directly onto adjacent properties.
(5) Lights shall be turned on no earlier than dusk and turned off no
later than 10:30 p.m., unless otherwise approved by the Township.
(6) Notice of any proposed field lighting project shall be provided to
adjacent property owners within 500 feet of the subject site.
F. Accessory building exception. The regulations applicable to building
placement shall apply to accessory buildings, except when authorized
as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board in the case of a
small accessory building which is incidental to the permitted use.
G. Riparian buffer setback: 35 feet. [Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
A. The owner shall be required to place and maintain along both rear and
side property lines a buffer planting strip as defined in § 280-4B of this
chapter. The minimum width shall be 10 feet, except that when
adjoining an agricultural, residential or planned apartment zoning
district, the minimum width shall be increased to 20 feet containing
berms, hedges, evergreens, shrubbery or suitable vegetation of
sufficient planted density to produce a visual screening not to be seen
through and of sufficient height to constitute an effective screen and
give maximum protection and immediate visual screening to an
abutting property or district. Wherever possible, the owner shall make
every effort to retain existing natural screening, such as vegetation and
topography. Constructed berms shall have a maximum slope of 33%
with grass cover or 50% when shrubbery or ground cover is used.
§ 280-86 CHARTER § 280-87
C:1071
§ 280-88. Off-street parking, loading and storage areas.
§ 280-89. Changes in ownership or use.
Any land within a Public Land Use District which, because of its ownership
or use, at any time is not fully subject to the Township's regulatory powers
under this article shall be covered by this article without further action
by the Township immediately upon any change in ownership or use which
makes such Article fully applicable to such land.
Fencing may be used in combination with berms and/or vegetation to
achieve the buffer, but may not be used alone.
B. All evergreen vegetation to be planted shall not be less than five feet in
height at the time of planting and shall be of such species that the
expected height at maturity shall not be less than 15 feet.
C. All deciduous trees to be planted shall not be less than eight feet in
height with a two-inch caliper.
D. As an alternative to the possible linear appearance of the minimum
requirements above, applicants are encouraged to provide innovative,
free-form buffers which need not be located within the minimum
required width. Such alternative buffers shall be subject to approval by
the Township.
E. A landscaping plan shall be required which shall be subject to Township
approval.
A. Requirements. All off-street parking, loading and storage areas for use
by motor vehicles shall comply with §§ 280-103, 280-104 and 280-105.
B. Setbacks.
(1) Front yard. A minimum front yard setback shall be maintained of
not less than the required setback for the most restrictive and
adjoining zoning district, but in no case shall be less than 20 feet.
Landscaping shall be required within the setback area consisting of
trees, shrubbery, berms and other ground cover of sufficient
density and height as to create an effective visual screen.
(2) Side and rear yard. A side and rear yard setback of 10 feet shall be
required, except when such use adjoins an agricultural, residential
or planned apartment zoning district, the setback shall be
increased to 20 feet. The owner of any property shall make every
effort to ensure that all off-street parking, loading and storage
areas as required by this section are effectively screened by use of
natural topography berms, hedges or other approved dense
vegetation so as to provide maximum protection for adjacent zones
which may be designated for residential use.
§ 280-87 RADNOR CODE § 280-89
C:1072
ARTICLE XVIIIA
Riparian Buffer Conservation District
[Added 12-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-22]
§ 280-89.1. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Riparian Buffer Conservation
Ordinance of the Township of Radnor (the "Township"), Delaware County,
Pennsylvania."
§ 280-89.2. Authority.
This article is established in accordance with the Pennsylvania Constitution,
Art. 1, Sec. 27 (the "Environmental Rights Amendment"), and Sections
301(b), 603(b)(5), 603(d), 604(1) and 605(2)(ii & vii) of the Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 280-89.3. Intent and objectives.
It is the purpose of this article to establish requirements for the
establishment, maintenance, and preservation of riparian buffers, as
defined herein,283 to protect the streams and ponds within the Township,
and to limit the surface areas of buildings and structures within these areas.
§ 280-89.4. Background.
Buffers adjacent to stream systems and other water resources (riparian
buffers) provide numerous environmental and resource management
benefits, including restoring and maintaining chemical, physical and
biological integrity of the water resources; removing pollutants from urban
stormwater, reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation, stabilizing
stream banks, providing a natural impediment to floods, contributing
organic material that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic
ecosystem, maintaining stream temperatures and therefore the aquatic
ecosystems by providing tree canopy, providing riparian wildlife habitat,
and furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunities. To achieve these
ends, it is necessary that development within the Township take place in
such a manner so as to limit the amount of buildings and structures within
riparian buffer areas; owners whose properties include riparian buffers
be educated as to desirable riparian buffer maintenance practices; and
riparian buffers be established where such buffers do not presently exist.
§ 280-89.5. Applicability.
This article is intended to modify the location of certain new development
in relation to streams and ponds, but not to modify said development's
overall density. The provisions herein shall provide for the location of any
building or accessory structure located within the riparian buffer setback
283. Editor's Note: See § 280-48, Definitions.
§ 280-89.1 CHARTER § 280-89.5
C:1073
on any property in the Township; provided, however, that they shall not
be applicable on properties on which streams are enclosed by man-made
channels or are underground.
§ 280-89.6. Permitted land disturbance in riparian buffer setback.
The following land disturbances shall be permitted without limitation when
located within the riparian buffer setback:
§ 280-89.7. Boundary determination.
A. Detached accessory buildings and accessory structures subject to the
requirements of the underlying zoning district; provided, however, that
a minimum distance of 10 feet shall apply when such building or
accessory structure is located adjacent to any stream bank or pond in
the AC Agricultural Conservation or R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 Residential
Zoning District.
B. Vegetation management or open space management plan, which
provides for the maintenance of streambanks, pond edges, and water
quality.
C. Customary agricultural practices when permitted by the applicable
zoning for the property, in accordance with a soil conservation plan
approved by the Delaware County Conservation District.
D. Activities regulated by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (such as
permitted stream or wetland crossings or other encroachments).
E. Installation of pervious-surfaced trail providing access to a stream,
pond or other water resource, or an impervious-surfaced trail access
when required or authorized by federal, state or local regulations.
F. Gardening and exterior yard maintenance.
G. Temporary construction attendant to construction activities occurring
within the riparian buffer setback; provided, however, that such
temporary construction shall be removed and any land disturbance
within the riparian buffer setback be remedied within a time period
approved by the Township.
A. The Township Engineer shall be responsible for determining the
location of the riparian buffer setback, as applicable to any specific
permit or approval subject to review by the Township. An applicant
shall provide all necessary plans, maps, and other information as
required by the Engineer to make such determination.
B. The Engineer shall review the information provided and shall either
approve or disapprove the riparian buffer setback and applicable
permit application, citing the reasons for such disapproval. Any party
who is aggrieved by the decision of the Township Engineer as to the
§ 280-89.5 RADNOR CODE § 280-89.7
C:1074
§ 280-89.8. Zoning Hearing Board appeals.
§ 280-89.9. Inapplicability.
This article shall not apply to any development or land disturbance
occurring after its effective date or to a development or land disturbance
that:
boundaries of the riparian buffer setback may appeal such decision to
the Zoning Hearing Board (ZHB).
A. In any instance in which the ZHB is required to consider an appeal from
the provisions of this article, such appeal shall be authorized as a
special exception pursuant and subject to the provisions of § 280-145.
B. Applications filed with the ZHB shall contain the basis for the appeal of
the Engineer's decision and a description of the relief requested. Plans
submitted shall be prepared by a licensed professional acceptable to
the ZHB and shall include the following:
(1) Location of streams, ponds, or other water resources on the
property to be developed;
(2) Species, location and size of trees within the riparian buffer
setback;
(3) Location of any proposed building or structure; and
(4) Any other information deemed relevant by the applicant.
C. In addition to the standards and criteria enumerated in § 280-145 of the
Zoning Code, the following shall be considered by the ZHB in rendering
affirmative decisions where applicable:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(2) Whether strict application of this article would deny the applicant
reasonable use of the property, or whether the ordinance would
have severe impact and would render the property unusable or
unsuitable for development.
(3) Whether plan modifications or conditions of approval can achieve
conservation objectives of this article.
(4) That the relief granted is the minimum necessary and does not
conflict with any Township, state, or federal regulations.
A. Is covered by a valid, unexpired plan in accordance with development
regulations;
B. Is covered by a current, executed public works agreement; or
C. Is covered by a valid, unexpired ZHB approval or building permit.
§ 280-89.7 CHARTER § 280-89.10
C:1075
§ 280-89.10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or that has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this article shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, in addition to all
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township
as a resultthereof. No judgments shall commence or be imposed, levied
or be payable until the date of determination of a violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there has
been a violation further determines that there was a good-faith basis for
the person, partnership or corporation violating this article to have believed
that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination by the District Justice. Thereafter, each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and
reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this article shall be
paid to the Township.
§ 280-89.10 RADNOR CODE § 280-89.10
C:1076
ARTICLE XIX
Density Modification Development
§ 280-90. Objectives; interpretation.
§ 280-91. Common open space.
A. It is the intent of this article to provide for modification of lot area, yard
and use requirements in certain zoning districts in connection with
single-family dwelling development for the purpose of accomplishing
the following objectives:
(1) To encourage conservation and use of open space in new
residential development.
(2) To encourage land development which preserves trees and natural
topography, prevents soil erosion and promotes the best interests
of the Township from an aesthetic, ecological and natural resource
standpoint.
(3) To encourage attractive arrangements of dwellings by permitting
the design and layout of dwellings to be closely related to the
physical characteristics of the site in harmony with surrounding
tracts.
B. The means of accomplishing such objectives shall be made only on the
basis of subdivision and/or land development plans approved by the
Board of Commissioners which meet the purposes and requirements of
this article. It is not intended that every tract of land is adaptable to the
purposes of this article, and therefore the Board of Commissioners may
disapprove an application upon any tract which, in its judgment, should
be developed under the other provisions of this chapter. [Amended
10-28-1975 by Ord. No. 1613]
C. This article is based upon and shall be interpreted in relation to the
Comprehensive Plan adopted by the Board of Commissioners.
[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 89-18; 11-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-20]
D. This article is not adopted pursuant to Article VII of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, entitled "Planned Residential
Development,"284 nor intended to provide for planned residential
development as described therein.
A. Not less than 15% of the tract area shall be designated in the
subdivision or development plan as common open space. [Amended
10-28-1975 by Ord. No. 1613]
B. Common open space shall be land which is appropriate and in suitable
condition for recreation, park site, school grounds, woodland
284. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10702.1 et seq.
§ 280-90 CHARTER § 280-91
C:1077
§ 280-92. Applicable districts; tract size.
conservation, floodplain or other similar recreation or open-space
purpose.
C. The common open space shall be contiguous to the development and
not be separated from the tract by existing roads. [Amended
10-28-1975 by Ord. No. 1613]
D. Consideration shall be given to the arrangement and location of
common open space to take advantage of physical characteristics of the
site and to place common open space within easy access and view of
dwelling units, at the same time preserving and enhancing natural
features. Areas set aside for common open space shall contain no
structure other than a structure related to outdoor recreational use.
E. Common open space shall be made subject to such agreement with the
Township and such deed restrictions duly recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds in Delaware County as may be required by the Board
of Commissioners for the purpose of preserving the common open
space for such use.
F. Common open space, within the meaning of this article, shall consist of
a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land
or water, within a development site, designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents of the development or the public, not
including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public
facilities.
G. There shall be a buffer of 25 feet along all property lines which abut
residentially zoned districts which shall not contain any roads,
structures, parking areas, etc., and shall be planted in accordance with
a plan which shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners at the
time of final approval. This buffer strip shall not be counted as part of
the common open space. [Added 10-28-1975 by Ord. No. 1613]
A. The zoning districts to which this article is applicable, the minimum
tract size, the maximum gross density and the minimum building
setbacks from the perimeter streets and property permitted under this
article shall be as follows: [Amended 10-28-1975 by Ord. No. 1613;
8-7-1978 by Ord. No. 78-22]
(1) In AC and R-1 Districts, the minimum tract size must be at least 20
acres. The density will be computed in relation to the common open
space and at a rate of 3% of common open space to 1% increase in
density over that allowed in the zoned district. The maximum
density increase will be 14% based on 42% or more of common
open space. There shall be no building within 75 feet of an existing
street right-of-way line and 50 feet from any adjacent property line.
[Amended 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 90-21]
§ 280-91 RADNOR CODE § 280-92
C:1078
§ 280-93. Use regulations.
The use provisions of the above-mentioned zoning districts applicable to the
tract shall apply, except that in R-3 and R-4 Districts, townhouses shall be a
permitted use when authorized under the provisions of this article.
(2) In R-1A and R-2 Districts, the minimum tract size must be at least
15 acres. The density will be computed in relation to the common
open space, at a rate of 3% of common open space to 1% increase
in density over that allowed in the zoned district. The maximum
density increase will be 14% based on 42% or more of common
open space. There shall be no building within 60 feet of an existing
street right-of-way line and 40 feet from any adjacent property line.
[Amended 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19]
(3) In R-3 Districts, the minimum tract size must be at least 10 acres.
The density will be computed in relation to the common open
space, at a rate of 4% of common open space to 1% increase in
density over that allowed in the zoned district. The maximum
density increases will be 10% based on 40% or more of common
open space. There shall be no buildings within 50 feet of an existing
street right-of-way line and 25 feet from any adjacent property line.
(4) In R-4 Districts, the minimum tract size must be at least five acres.
The density shall be at a maximum of 5.5 units per acre. There shall
be no buildings within 40 feet of an existing street right-of-way line
and 25 feet from any adjacent property line.
B. Tract area, for the purpose of this article, shall consist of all that total
area proposed for development, but shall exclude all portions of the
tract subject and servient to easements and legal rights-of-way to which
the dominant portion of the tract is not afforded access and use directly
from the interior road system of the dominant tract.
C. In computing maximum gross density, there shall be excluded from the
determination of tract size 1/2 of all land situate in the floodplain and 1/
2 of all land situate on slopes over 22%. [Amended 10-28-1975 by
Ord. No. 1613; 2-27-1978 by Ord. No. 78-02]
A. Townhouses shall be authorized only when constructed, owned and
operated under single ownership or under the Pennsylvania Unit
Property Act.285
B. Not more than eight townhouses shall be attached in a single group,
and each group of townhouses shall be separated from each other
group by at least 20 feet. No more than two contiguous townhouses in
any group may be constructed in line, and each townhouse shall have at
least one plan element on any floor which projects or recedes within the
285. Editor's Note: For current provisions, see the Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa. C.S.A.
§ 3101.
§ 280-92 CHARTER § 280-93
C:1079
§ 280-94. Area and height regulations. [Amended 10-28-1975 by
Ord. No. 1613; 1-11-1988 by Ord. No. 88-03]
§ 280-95. Site considerations.
wall plane of the facade a minimum dimension of two feet. [Amended
10-28-1975 by Ord. No. 1613]
C. For the purpose of this article, a "townhouse" is defined as a singlefamily
dwelling consisting of two or more floors, attached to one or
more similar structures as part of a unified development.
A. The building area coverage and height regulations of the zoning district
in which the property is located shall apply, except that the total area
covered by building and impervious surfaces, excluding streets, shall
not exceed the percentage of building coverage and impervious
surfaces established for the zoning district plus an additional 5%.
[Amended 9-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-28]
B. All provisions in other sections of this chapter not in conflict with this
article shall apply.
A. Every effort must be made in connection with each subdivision and
development plan to avoid excessive earth moving, undue tree
clearance and destruction of natural features. The following are priority
requirements:
(1) Lakes, streams and wooded slopes shall be preserved.
(2) The development plan must specify the means for protecting trees
and other natural features during construction.
(3) The location of trees and other natural features must be given first
consideration in planning common open space, location of
dwellings, walks, paved areas and finished grade levels.
(4) Landscaping shall be regarded as essential to every development
plan. Not only must natural features, trees and slopes of the site be
preserved, but careful attention must be given to landscaping of
parking areas and providing for street trees.
(5) Seeding, sodding and other planting shall be applied to stabilize
topsoil on steep slopes and to enhance the appearance of open
areas.
(6) Streetlighting shall not shine directly into habitable dwelling
windows located inside or outside the development.
B. All site provisions of Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land, shall also apply.
§ 280-93 RADNOR CODE § 280-96
C:1080
§ 280-96. Utilities.
Every development under this article shall be served by sanitary sewers and
public water supply.
§ 280-97. Yards.
A. It is the intention of this section to allow the placement of dwellings in
the development in such a way as to best use the land and maintain the
natural features insofar as possible. [Amended 10-28-1975 by Ord.
No. 1613]
B. In all developments except those covered by Subsection C, the yards
will be as follows: [Amended 10-28-1975 by Ord. No. 1613]
(1) Front yard. No dwelling shall be located less than 35 feet from the
edge of the outside of the curb or, in the case of an interior lot, the
required setback shall be measured from the property line parallel
or most nearly parallel to the street line on which said lot has
frontage. [Amended 1-11-1988 by Ord. No. 88-03]
(2) Side yard. Each side yard shall be 25 feet in AC and R-1 Districts,
20 feet in R-1A and R-2 Districts and 15 feet in R-3 and R-4
Districts. [Amended 5-14-1991 by Ord. No. 90-21; 11-14-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-19]
(3) Rear yard. The rear yard shall be 30 feet in all districts.
(4) Accessory structures. No accessory structure shall be located in
the required front yard. No accessory structure shall be located
closer than 10 feet to a rear or side yard line.
C. When it is in the best interests of the Township, in that a particular tract
of land has such natural features as to warrant special consideration to
preserve these natural features, any applicant may request a deviation
from Subsection B above. [Amended 10-28-1975 by Ord. No. 1613]
(1) The deviation request must contain the following:
(a) The area on the property within which each dwelling and
accessory structures must be constructed.
(b) The location of all trees over six inches in diameter.
(c) The proposed lot lines if any of each lot.
(d) The substance of deed restrictions pertaining to each lot as
they may pertain to fences, swimming pools, patios, walls, plan
approval, etc.
(2) The Township may grant approvals to this type of yard
requirement, provided that there is a finding that such a
development will preserve the natural features of the land.
§ 280-96 CHARTER § 280-97
C:1081
§ 280-98. Housing.
§ 280-99. Ownership and maintenance of common open space.
(3) The Township may impose such other conditions as may be in the
best interest of the Township and the future residents of the
development.
D. If a tract is developed and operated under the Unit Property Act of
Pennsylvania or under any similar form of development and operation,
the minimum side yard distances between dwellings or groups of
townhouses, in lieu of the foregoing yard requirements, shall be 40 feet
in AC and R-1 Districts and 30 feet in R-1A, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts.
[Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21; 4-9-1984 by Ord. No.
84-10; 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 90-21; 11-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-19]
E. No accessory buildings or structures shall be located in the required
perimeter yard areas.
A. All housing shall be designed with regard to topography and natural
features of the site. The effects of prevailing winds, seasonal
temperature and hours of sunlight on the physical layout and form of
the proposed land use and buildings shall be taken into account.
B. Variations in setbacks shall be provided, when practicable, for housing
fronting on streets.
C. Adequate vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas shall be
provided without creating nuisances or detracting from privacy.
A. Land development plans shall describe the plan for ownership and
maintenance of common open space.
B. The plan may provide for:
(1) Dedication to and maintenance by the Township if acceptable to the
Board of Commissioners; and/or [Amended 10-28-1975 by Ord.
No. 1613]
(2) Private ownership and maintenance.
C. The Board of Commissioners may require dedication, easements and/or
deed restrictions covering all or portions of the common open space
and may require the applicant to provide for and establish an
organization for the maintenance of the common open space, organized
under or similar to that required by the Unit Property Act of July 3,
1968, P.L. 196, and agree that such organization or the group of unit
owners holding undivided interest in the common open space shall not
dispose of the common open space by sale or otherwise (except to a
similar organization or group conceived and established to own and
maintain common open space). In determining whether the
§ 280-97 RADNOR CODE § 280-99
C:1082
§ 280-100. Application for development.
organization described in the plan is adequate, the Board of
Commissioners shall consider the type and structure of the
organization from the standpoint of its capacity to raise revenue, meet
obligations and properly maintain facilities.
D. In the event that the common open space is, in the judgment of the
Board of Commissioners, permitted to deteriorate or not maintained in
reasonable condition in accordance with the plan, the Township shall
have the option of taking whatever steps are afforded by law to require
compliance with the plan.
E. In addition to any other remedies afforded by law, the Township shall
have the right, which may be made part of the agreement with the
applicant, to enter upon the common open space and maintain the same
for a period not to exceed one year. The purpose of such action by the
Township shall be to preserve the taxable values of the property within
the development and prevent the common open space from becoming a
public nuisance.
F. Prior to entering upon the property, the Board of Commissioners shall
give written notice of the condition complained of to the property owner
and afford the latter a period of not less than 30 days to remedy and
correct the same.
G. The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed ratably
against the properties within the development which have a right of
enjoyment of the common open space and shall become a lien upon said
properties upon filing thereof as required by law.
A. Any application for conditional use approval of a proposed density
modification development as provided for in this article shall be
submitted in accordance with the terms of Article XXIII, Conditional
Uses, of this chapter and reviewed for compliance with the standards
and criteria of that section. [Amended 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 90-21]
B. In addition, the following information shall be submitted to the
Township:
(1) The nature of the landowners' interest in the land to be developed.
(2) The density of land use to be allocated to the site to be developed.
(3) Location and size of common open space and the form of the
organization proposed to own and maintain the common open
space.
(4) The use and the approximate height, bulk and location of dwellings
and other structures.
(5) The feasibility of proposals for the disposition of sanitary waste and
stormwater and provision of public water supply.
§ 280-99 CHARTER § 280-100
C:1083
(6) The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other
restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land,
buildings and structures, including proposed easements or grants
for public utilities.
(7) A provision for parking of vehicles and the location and width of
proposed streets and public ways.
(8) A statement which will show the ecological and economic impact of
the development on the Township and especially as to the
surrounding areas. [Added 10-28-1975 by Ord. No. 1613]
(9) The results of traffic studies taken on the surrounding and nearby
roads. [Added 10-28-1975 by Ord. No. 1613]286
286. Editor's Note: Former § 135-95C and D, concerning the filing of applications with the
Planning Commission, as amended 10-28-1975 by Ord. No. 1613; § 135-96, Public hearing;
§ 135-97, Determination by Board of Commissioners, as amended 10-28-1975 by Ord. No.
1613; and § 135-98, Failure of applicant to act upon application, which immediately
followed this subsection, were deleted 5-14-1990 by Ord. 90-21.
§ 280-100 RADNOR CODE § 280-100
C:1084
ARTICLE XX
General Regulations
§ 280-101. Nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
The following regulations shall apply to existing lawful buildings, lots and
uses which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter or to the
provisions of any subsequent amendment hereto:
A. Nonconforming uses. Except as hereinafter provided in this article, the
lawful use of a building or structure or any land or premises existing at
the time of the effective date of this chapter or any subsequent
amendment or at the time of a change in the Zoning Map may be
continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof
or of any subsequent amendment. Any change in nonresidential
occupancy shall be deemed to be a change of use for purposes of
§ 280-101A(1). [Amended 5-12-1997 by Ord. No. 97-12]
(1) A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use by grant of special exception only upon determination by the
Zoning Hearing Board, after public hearing, that the proposed new
use will be no more detrimental to its neighborhood and
surroundings than is the use it is to replace. In determining relative
detriment, the Zoning Hearing Board shall take into consideration,
among other things, traffic generated; nuisance characteristics,
such as emission of noise, dust and smoke; fire hazards; and hours
and manner of operation.
(2) The nonconforming use of a building shall not be extended or
enlarged, and a nonconforming building shall not be extended or
structurally altered, except insofar as is required by law to assure
the structural safety of the building, unless the Zoning Hearing
Board shall, as a special exception, authorize the extension of a
nonconforming use of a portion of a building throughout the
building or the limited extension of a building on a lot. The Zoning
Hearing Board may grant such special exception, provided that:
(a) It is clear that such extension is not materially detrimental to
the character of the surrounding area or the interests of the
Township.
(b) The area devoted to the nonconforming use shall in no case be
increased by more than 50%.
(c) Any extension of a building shall conform to the area, height
and setback regulations of the district in which it is situated.
(d) No more than one extension to a nonconforming building shall
be granted.
(3) Where a nonconforming use is conducted entirely on an unenclosed
premises, no structure to house or enclose such use, whether or not
§ 280-101 CHARTER § 280-101
C:1085
§ 280-102. Reduction of lot.
No lot area shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or the dimensions of
the open spaces shall be smaller than herein prescribed.
§ 280-103. Off-street parking.
such structure would otherwise conform to zoning regulations,
shall be permitted to be erected on the premises.
(4) Whenever a nonconforming use of land, premises, building or
structure or any part or portion thereof has been discontinued for a
period of one year, such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be
reestablished, and all future uses shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Nonconforming buildings. The continuation, alteration or extension of a
nonconforming building shall be in compliance with the following
requirements:
(1) A nonconforming building being used or proposed to be used for a
conforming purpose may continue and may be altered or enlarged
if the alteration or enlargement does not increase the
nonconformity of the building or structure with respect to the
setback, land coverage and density requirements of this chapter or
any subsequent amendment in effect at the time such alteration or
enlargement is proposed to be made.
(2) A nonconforming building or structure which has been damaged or
destroyed by fire or other casualty may be reconstructed in its
former location and to its former dimensions and used for the same
purpose for which it was used before its damage or destruction,
provided that such reconstruction shall be commenced within one
year from the date of damage or destruction and shall be completed
within one year thereafter.
C. Nonconforming lots. A lot held in single and separate ownership at the
effective date of this chapter or of any subsequent amendment hereto
which is not of the required minimum area or width may be used for the
construction, alteration, reconstruction of a building or may be
otherwise used if the construction, alteration, reconstruction or other
use itself is in compliance with the use, yard, setback, density and other
pertinent provisions of this chapter.
A. As a general requirement, each use in the Township shall provide
sufficient off-street parking area to serve its users.
B. Minimum standards. Subject to the general requirement for off-street
parking, off-street parking space with proper access from a street, alley
or driveway shall be provided in all districts in the amounts indicated
below. Such parking space shall be provided on any lot on which a
dwelling is hereafter erected or converted or, in the case of any other
§ 280-101 RADNOR CODE § 280-103
C:1086
use, on the lot on which any main building is hereafter erected or
converted. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent
the collective provision of off-street parking facilities for two or more
buildings or uses on the same lot, provided that the total of such offstreet
parking facilities provided collectively shall be not less than
the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses computed
separately. In no case shall the number of parking spaces provided or
the area devoted to parking, be less than the minimum requirements of
this subsection. [Amended 6-8-1987 by Ord. No. 87-17]
(1) Dwellings: two spaces per dwelling unit.
(2) Dormitory: one space per three residents.
(3) Tourist, rooming or boarding house: one space for each rental
room, plus normal requirements for the dwelling unit.
(4) Hotel, motel or inn: one space for each guestroom, plus one space
for each three employees on the shift of greatest employment. The
parking requirements for other facilities, such as restaurants, shall
be in addition.
(5) Theater, auditorium, stadium, assembly hall, gymnasium,
community recreation center: one space per four fixed seats in the
largest assembly room or area or for each 40 square feet of floor
area available for the accommodation of movable seats in the
largest assembly room or one space per 150 feet of floor area,
whichever is applicable to the facility. [Amended 7-20-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-24]
(6) Indoor and outdoor commercial recreation: one space for each 150
square feet of building floor area or ground area devoted to such
use or one space per four sets of facilities available for patron use,
whichever is applicable to the facility. [Amended 7-20-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-24]
(7) Restaurant, diners and nightclubs: one space per three seating
accommodations, plus one space per two employees on the shift of
greatest employment.
(8) (Reserved)287
(9) (Reserved)288
(10) Retail stores, all other types: one space per 200 square feet of floor
area on the ground floor, plus one space per 300 square feet of floor
area on other floors, plus one space for each two employees on the
287. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(8), department stores, was repealed 7-20-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-24.
288. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(9), furniture and appliance stores, was repealed
7-20-1999 by Ord. No. 99-24.
§ 280-103 CHARTER § 280-103
C:1087
shift of greatest employment. [Amended 7-20-1999 by Ord. No.
99-24]
(11)Office buildings or banks: one space for each 200 square feet of
floor area for the first 50,000 square feet, plus one space for each
300 square feet of floor area over 50,000 square feet. Drive-in
banking facilities shall provide for the stacking of 12 automobiles.
[Amended 7-20-1999 by Ord. No. 99-24]
(12) Wholesale establishment or industrial building: one space per two
employees on the shift of greatest employment, plus one space per
200 square feet of floor area. [Amended 7-20-1999 by Ord. No.
99-24]
(13) Motor vehicle service station or public garage: two spaces for each
200 square feet of floor or ground area devoted to repair, sales or
service facilities.
(14) Hospital, sanitorium or nursing home: one space per three beds
intended for patients (except bassinets or beds in student nurses
quarters), plus one space per medical staff member, plus one space
for each two employees on the shift of greatest employment.
(15) Car wash establishment: a waiting or stacking area on the lot for
incoming automobiles, accessible to the entrance end of the
washing equipment, to accommodate at least 25 automobiles for
each lane provided in the washing area, plus an area on the lot
beyond the exit end of the washing equipment for at least 10
automobiles for each lane provided in the washing area; also, one
parking space for each three employees based on the maximum
number of employees at any one time.
(16) Bowling alley: five spaces for each alley.
(17) Social, fraternal, social service, union and civil organization
buildings: one space per 100 square feet of assembly area.
(18) Funeral home: one space for each 60 square feet of floor area
available for seating or public assembly, plus one space per
employee.
(19) Private kindergarten, child institutional or day-care center: one
space per attendant, plus one space per 500 square feet of floor
area. [Amended 7-20-1999 by Ord. No. 99-24]
(20) Building or use other than specified above: at least one space for
each 300 square feet of floor area or lot area devoted to such use,
whichever is larger, except when authorized as a special exception,
consistent with standards set forth herein for comparable buildings
or uses. [Amended 7-20-1999 by Ord. No. 99-24; 8-20-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-06]
§ 280-103 RADNOR CODE § 280-103
C:1088
§ 280-104. Off-street loading.
No building or structure shall be erected in any district for the uses listed
below unless loading space for the accommodation of trucks is provided on
the premises in accordance with the following regulations:
§ 280-105. Access and highway frontage.
In order to minimize traffic congestion and hazard, control street access in
the interest of public safety and encourage the appropriate development of
street or highway frontage, the following shall apply:
C. Change in requirements. Whenever there is an alteration of a structure
or an expansion of a use which increases the parking requirements
according to the standards of § 280-103, additional parking shall be
provided for the alteration or expansion in accordance with the
requirements of that section. Whenever there is a change of use which
increases the parking requirements according to the standards of
§ 280-103, the total amount of parking required for the new use shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of that section. [Added
8-20-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-06]
A. Each space shall be not less than 12 feet in width and 30 feet in length
with adequate access from a street which does not block or interfere
with the required parking as required in § 280-103B.
B. For retail stores, markets, wholesale and jobbing establishments and
storage warehouses, the number of berths based on net floor area
devoted to such use is as follows:
(1) Two thousand to 8,000 square feet of net floor area: one berth.
(2) Eight thousand to 20,000 square feet of net floor area: two berths.
(3) Each additional 20,000 square feet or major fraction thereof up to a
maximum of 60,000 square feet of net floor area: one additional
berth.
C. For office buildings and hotels or motels, the number of berths based on
net floor area devoted to such use is as follows:
(1) Five thousand to 20,000 square feet of net floor area: one berth.
(2) Each additional 50,000 square feet or major fraction thereof up to a
maximum of 120,000 square feet of net floor area: one additional
berth.
D. All other uses with a total of 5,000 square feet or more of net floor area
devoted to such use shall provide loading spaces adequate, in the
opinion of the Director of Licenses and Inspection, to accommodate the
normal demands for loading and unloading incidental to the type of use
proposed on the premises.
§ 280-103 CHARTER § 280-105
C:1089
A. No parking lot or area for off-street parking or for the storage or
movement of motor vehicles shall abut directly a public street or
highway unless separated from the street or highway at least five feet
by a raised curb, barrier planting strip, wall or other effective barrier
against traffic, except for necessary accessways, and each parking lot
shall have not more than two accessways to any one public street or
highway for each 500 feet of frontage. Where practicable, access to
parking areas shall be provided by a common service driveway or minor
street in order to avoid direct access on a major street or highway. No
such accessway shall be more than 35 feet in width.
B. In the case of a planned development in a Planned Laboratory-Office,
Planned Apartment, Planned Business District or Planned Institutional
District constructed as part of an integrated plan, and in any other case
where practicable: [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
(1) All parking, loading or service areas used by motor vehicles shall
be located entirely within the lot lines of the property.
(2) All buildings shall front upon a marginal street, service road,
common parking lot or similar area and not directly upon a public
street or highway.
(3) All accessways to a public street or highway shall be located not
less than 100 feet from the intersection of any street lines.
(4) All streets and accessways shall be designed in a manner conducive
to safe exit and entrance and shall conform to the highway
specifications and subdivision requirements of the Township.289
C. In any case where a planned development in a Planned Business,
Planned Laboratory-Office District or Planned Institutional District or
an apartment development in a PA or R-5 District containing 20 or more
dwelling units abuts a state highway, a traffic survey shall be conducted
and plans for access streets to the development must be previously
approved by the Pennsylvania State Department of Transportation,
otherwise the development cannot be constructed. All streets in the
vicinity of the development shall be adequate to serve probable
increases in traffic volume, and adequate deceleration lanes and similar
facilities shall be provided in the vicinity of a shopping center or in any
other location where desirable. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
D. All driveways, aisles, maneuvering spaces, vehicular service areas or
spaces between or about buildings, other than those relating to a
dwelling, shall be adequately illuminated.
E. All outside lighting, including sign lighting, shall be directed in such a
way as not to create a nuisance in any agricultural, institutional or
residential district, and in every district all such lighting shall be
289. Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Subdivision of Land.
§ 280-105 RADNOR CODE § 280-105
C:1090
§ 280-106. Minimum lot size where public sewer and water is
unavailable. [Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-48]
§ 280-107. Prohibited uses; performance standards.
arranged so as to protect the street or highway and adjoining property
from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind. Any luminary
shall be equipped with some type of glare shielding device approved by
the Township Engineer. The height of any luminary shall not exceed 25
feet.
F. No parking, loading or service area shall be located within front yard
setbacks except as is permitted in the case of PI, PA, PB and PLO
Districts or unless authorized as a special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board in a Commercial or Commercial-Office District, provided
that the restriction against such use is clearly impracticable. In no case,
however, shall the distance between the street right-of-way line and the
portion of a lot used for parking be less than 20 feet. [Amended
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
A. When both public sewer and water are unavailable, the minimum lot
size shall be 60,000 square feet and the minimum width at the building
line shall be 150 feet.
B. When either public sewer or public water is unavailable, the minimum
lot size shall be 43,560 square feet and the minimum width at the
building line shall be 120 feet.
A. No use shall be permitted which is noxious or offensive in the
immediately surrounding area by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas,
vibration, illumination or noise or which constitutes a public hazard,
whether by fire, explosion or otherwise. In determining whether a
proposed use is noxious, hazardous or offensive, the following
standards shall apply. The proposed operation shall not:
(1) Constitute any nuisance whatsoever beyond the boundary of the
site on which the use is located by reason of dissemination of
noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes, smoke, odor or dust. All
equipment shall be operated by electric power, oil, gas or other
smokeless fuel.
(2) Result in noise or vibration exceeding the average intensity of noise
or vibration occurring from other causes at the boundary line.
(3) Endanger surrounding areas by reason of fire or explosion.
(4) Produce objectionable heat, glare or radiation beyond the property
line.
(5) Result in electrical disturbance in nearby residences or adversely
affect the operation of equipment other than on the property on
which the disturbance is located.
§ 280-105 CHARTER § 280-107
C:1091
§ 280-108. Conversion of dwellings to two-family or multiple-family
use. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize as a special exception the
conversion of a dwelling in an AC, R-1 or R-2 District from single-family
to two-family or multiple-dwelling occupancy, subject to the following
requirements:
(6) Discharge any untreated sewage or industrial waste into any
stream or otherwise contribute to the pollution of surface or
underground waters.
(7) Create any other objectionable condition in an adjoining area
which would endanger public health and safety or be detrimental to
the proper use of the surrounding area.
B. Where requested by the Township, an applicant for a proposed use shall
demonstrate as a condition of approval that adequate provisions will be
made to reduce and minimize any objectionable elements to the degree
necessary to ensure that the proposed use will not be noxious,
hazardous or offensive as defined above. If required, the applicant shall
submit supplemental information, plans and impartial expert judgments
and the Township may require the expert advice of official agencies or
private consultants and such reasonable tests as are deemed necessary,
the costs of which shall be borne by the applicant.
C. Trailer camps and automobile graveyards shall not be permitted in any
district, and no manufactured home may be used for living or
housekeeping purposes within the Township. An unoccupied
manufactured home shall not be parked on a lot unless such
manufactured home is parked so as not to be visible from a street or
other property line or is suitably screened. [Amended 3-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-04]
A. The lot area per dwelling unit shall not be reduced below the required
lot area applying to a single-family dwelling in the district in which the
lot is located; except that for dwellings which have a gross square
footage of 10,000 square feet or more, the lot area per dwelling unit
shall be 75% of the required lot area for the district. [Amended
3-14-1983 by Ord. No. 83-04]
B. Each family unit shall have not less than 600 square feet of gross
habitable floor area, not including stairs and corridors.
C. A separate means of access to each living unit shall be provided without
passing through any other living unit.
D. There shall be no extension or structural alteration of the building
exterior except as may be necessary for reasons of safety.
E. All applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor
and Industry, the Radnor Township Board of Health, Chapter 125,
§ 280-107 RADNOR CODE § 280-108
C:1092
§ 280-109. Fences and walls. [Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No.
80-21; 5-12-1997 by Ord. No. 97-11]
§ 280-110. Lot averaging.
Building Construction; Chapter 222, Property Maintenance; and this
chapter shall apply. [Amended 7-26-1976 by Ord. No. 1631]
F. The Zoning Hearing Board may prescribe such further conditions with
respect to the conversion and use of buildings or property as it deems
appropriate.
A. No fence or wall, except for retaining walls or the walls of a building as
permitted under the terms of this chapter, shall exceed a height of six
feet, provided further that within R-4 and R-5 Districts, no fence or wall
erected within the required front yard setback shall exceed a height of
four feet.
B. All fences shall be erected with the finished side facing adjacent
properties. The finished side shall be considered the side without the
structural members.
C. Barbed wire or electrified fences shall be permitted only in AC Districts
on lots used for agricultural purposes exceeding five acres in size.
A. In order to permit a more varied, more efficient and more economical
development pattern in a specific location, preserve stream valleys and
other natural features and provide for a better and more attractive
arrangement of homes and open space than is possible under the usual
district zoning requirements, the requirements of an AC Agricultural
Conservation District or an R-1 or R-2 Residence District may be
modified when approved by the Board of Commissioners in accordance
with the provisions of this section. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
B. In the case of a plan for a development which involves a tract of land not
less than five acres in size and which is subject to review by the
Planning Commission and approval by the Board of Commissioners in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land,
the requirements of this chapter relating to such plan may be modified
in the following respects, provided that approval of a plan under the
provisions of this section shall be granted only where it is determined
by the Board of Commissioners that the plan clearly conforms to the
intent, standards and requirements of this section and is in the general
public interest:
(1) The minimum lot area per family and lot width requirements
relating to an individual lot in the district in which the lot is located
may be reduced by not more than 25%, provided that the median
lot area per family requirement for the entire tract shall be not less
§ 280-108 CHARTER § 280-110
C:1093
§ 280-111. Heliports and helistops. [Added 10-28-1974 by Ord. No.
1586]
than the minimum required for the district. [Amended 9-22-1980
by Ord. No. 80-21]
(2) No lot of such size as to be capable of further subdivision under the
district regulation shall be included in determining the average lot
area unless the possibility of such further subdivision is eliminated
by a deed restriction or agreement in form acceptable to the
Township Solicitor and duly recorded in the office of the Recorder
of Deeds of Delaware County.
(3) All other requirements of the zoning district in which the
development is located shall apply.
A. Helistops are a permitted use in PB, PLO and PI Districts upon approval
by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Radnor, subject to
the following provisions: [Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21;
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
(1) The proposed helistop would not be detrimental to the health,
welfare and safety of the Township residents and their property.
(2) The landing pad must be at least 60 feet square or a circle with a
sixty-foot diameter. This pad must be paved, level and maintained
dirt free. Rooftop pads shall be free of all loose stone and
aggregate.
(3) There must be a four-foot fence around the helistop, except for
those helistops on a rooftop. The fence shall be so located as not to
obstruct the glide angle of a helicopter using the helistop.
(4) At least two approach lanes to each landing pad shall be provided
and maintained free of obstructions and shall be located not less
than 90° apart. Each approach lane shall be located within 45° left
or right of the prevailing winds and shall fan out at an angle of 10°
from the width of the landing pad to a width of 1,000 feet, and shall
have a glide angle slope of eight to one (8:1) measured from the
outer edge of the pad.
(5) Clear area for emergency landings of the helicopter in the event of
mechanical failure shall be available. These emergency landing
areas shall be located within the normal glide range of the
helicopter with one engine off when operating in the approved
takeoff or landing lane from the helistop.
(6) An application for a helistop on a roof shall be accompanied by a
certification by a registered engineer that the loads imposed by the
helicopter will be supported by the structure.
§ 280-110 RADNOR CODE § 280-111
C:1094
§ 280-112. Slope controls. [Added 12-12-1977 by Ord. No. 77-33]
(7) The helistop shall be used only for personal or executive use by a
firm or individual.
(8) No helicopter over 12,000 pounds' gross weight shall use any
helistop.
(9) Upon the granting of approval by the Board of Commissioners of
Radnor Township, the Zoning Officer shall issue a permit for a
helistop, and this permit shall be for a one-year period of time and
must be renewed annually. If at any time the conditions of the
approval or any other conditions imposed by the Board of
Commissioners are violated, the permit may be revoked by the
Zoning Officer.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to land, discharge, load or take off in
a helicopter any place within the Township of Radnor other than at a
helistop except:
(1) In conjunction with a special event, such as an athletic contest, a
holiday celebration, parade or similar activity, after seven days'
advance notice has been given to the Zoning Officer and permission
obtained to make such landing and takeoff.
(2) When necessary for law enforcement purposes and for
emergencies.
(3) In connection with a construction project where a helicopter is to
be used to lift equipment in connection with such project.
C. Heliports are not permitted in any zoning districts.
A. It is the intent of the section to control the development of land in areas
containing steeply sloped land for the following purposes:
(1) To limit erosion and sedimentation.
(2) To protect watersheds and limit increases in stormwater runoff.
(3) To prevent an increase in the possibilities of landslides and soil
subsidence.
(4) To maintain adequate foliage cover on hillsides.
(5) To protect streams from increases in sediment and pollution.
B. Any applicant for a building permit, preliminary subdivision plan
approval or preliminary land development plan approval on land which
contains areas with a grade or slope of 14% or more shall be required to
have the limits of such areas defined by a registered professional
engineer.
§ 280-111 CHARTER § 280-112
C:1095
C. Areas of a tract containing slopes steeper than 14% shall be outlined as
follows: [Amended 9-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-21; 1-11-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-03; 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-18]
(1) Areas containing slopes steeper than 14% but less than 20% shall
be distinguished from areas containing slopes of 20% and steeper.
(2) Areas containing slopes of 20% and steeper shall be separately
identified.
D. The following uses and no others shall be permitted on steep slope
areas where such uses are permitted in the zoning district containing
such tracts:
(1) Grazing, pasturing and tilling of the soil, using sound soil
conservation techniques.
(2) Forestry and wood production, excluding storage and mill
structures.
(3) Outdoor plant nurseries and flower and vegetable gardens, using
sound soil conservation techniques.
(4) Buffer areas or screen plantings.
(5) Parks and recreation uses, such as skiing, sledding, hiking,
equestrian and bicycle trails, scenic overlooks and outdoor
education areas. Swimming pools shall be prohibited.
(6) Roads, streets or drives, but only when no viable alternative
alignment or location is feasible upon determination by the
Township Engineer. Such roads must meet Township standards for
grade and design.
(7) Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of Article XXI, Signs.
(8) Structures customarily associated with the above uses, such as
retaining walls, railings, erosion control structures and park
shelters.
E. No vegetation shall be removed from land on steep slopes except as
necessary for:
(1) The operation of permitted uses in accordance with approved plans
and sound conservation practices.
(2) Woodland sanitation and management operations.
(3) The replacement of undesirable plant material with desirable
landscape plant material.
(4) The construction of permitted structures and facilities in
accordance with approved plans.
§ 280-112 RADNOR CODE § 280-112
C:1096
F. Any plan for a development of a tract of land other than a single lot, as
defined in Subsection J, which contains slopes in excess of 14%, will be
subject to review by the Planning Commission and approval by the
Board of Commissioners in accordance with the requirements and
purposes of Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land, and this chapter. The
applicant shall supply the Township with the necessary data to enable
the Township to determine whether the application is in compliance
with Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land.
G. In approving final plans, the Board of Commissioners may require
conditions which, in its opinion, are necessary to protect the public
safety, health and welfare. Furthermore, all developments on steep
slopes shall:
(1) Be oriented so that grading and other site preparations are kept to
an absolute minimum.
(2) Where grading is essential, shape and grade to complement the
natural land form.
(3) Be staged where necessary to complete construction of each stage
during a season so that large areas of disturbed land are not left
bare and exposed during the winter-spring runoff period.
(4) Accomplish all paving as rapidly as possible after grading.
(5) Allocate to open space and recreation uses those areas least suited
to development, as evidenced by competent soil, geology and
hydrology investigations.
(6) Landscape areas around structures to blend them with the natural
landscape.
(7) Take measures to minimize erosion and sedimentation and to limit
increases in stormwater runoff in accordance with related
regulations of the Township and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
H. All applications for building permits for structures located, in whole or
in part, on tracts with areas containing steep slopes shall submit, along
with the application, a site plan. Such application shall also include a
stormwater runoff plan and a copy of the erosion and sedimentation
control plan as required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP). [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-04]
I. This section does not apply to steep slopes created as a result of
compliance with § 175-11A and B of the Code of the Township of
Radnor. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
J. Single lots existing at the date of addition of this section to this chapter
and which are not of sufficient size to be subdivided because of the
§ 280-112 CHARTER § 280-112
C:1097
zoning district lot size limitation are exempted from the provisions of
this section except for Subsections B, C, E and H.
K. No lot may be created by subdivision which, because of the widespread
existence of steep slopes, does not allow the placement of residences or
commercial buildings in conformity with the zoning district yard
setbacks.
L. (Reserved)290
M. (Reserved)291
N. The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize, as a special exception, the
following uses upon submission of an erosion and sedimentation plan:
(1) Sealed public water supply wells, with the approval of the Township
Engineer and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP). [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
(2) Sanitary and storm sewers, with the approval of the Township
Engineer and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP). [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
(3) Underground utility disposal systems, when constructed in
compliance with the Act 208 amendments to Act 537, the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.292
O. Neither the approval of any proposed subdivision by any officer,
employee or agency of the Township of Radnor nor the grant of any
subdivision approval by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of
Radnor shall constitute a representation, guaranty or warranty of any
kind by the Township of Radnor or by any of its officers, employees,
agencies or members of its agencies of the safety or practicality of the
proposed subdivision and use, and such approval or grant of approval
shall create no liability on the part of the Township of Radnor or its
officers, employees, agencies or members of its agencies.
P. Nothing in this section or in this chapter, as hereby amended, revised
and supplemented, shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing under this chapter, as
amended, prior to this amendment and revision; nor shall any just or
legal right, remedy or restriction of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this section.
290. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, pertaining to lot size requirements, was repealed
7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-18.
291. Editor's Note: Former Subsection M, pertaining to lot area requirements, as amended
1-11-1988 by Ord. No. 88-03, was repealed 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-18.
292. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 280-112 RADNOR CODE § 280-113
C:1098
§ 280-113. Recreational vehicles and boats. [Added 9-22-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-21]
In all residential zones provided for in this chapter, it is permissible to park
a recreational vehicle or boat and boat trailer in the following manner:
A. Parking is permitted inside any enclosed structure, which structure
otherwise conforms to the zoning requirements of the particular zone,
where located.
B. Parking is permitted outside in the side or rear yard, provided that it is
not nearer than 10 feet to the lot line.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize, as a special exception, the
parking of a recreational vehicle or boat outside on a driveway,
provided that:
(1) Space is not available in the rear yard or side yard or there is no
reasonable access to either the side yard or rear yard. A corner lot
is always deemed to have reasonable access to the rear yard; a
fence is not necessarily deemed to prevent reasonable access.
(2) Inside parking is not possible.
(3) The unit is parked perpendicular to the front curb.
D. The closest part of the recreational vehicle or boat must be at least 13
feet from the face of any curb.
E. No part of the unit may extend over the public sidewalk or public
thoroughfare (right-of-way).
F. Parking is permitted only for storage purposes, and any recreational
vehicle or trailer shall not be:
(1) Used for dwelling purposes, except for overnight sleeping for a
maximum of seven days in any one calendar year. Cooking is not
permitted at any time.
(2) Permanently connected to sewer lines, waterlines or electricity.
The recreational vehicle may be connected to electricity
temporarily for charging batteries and other purposes.
(3) Used for storage of goods, materials or equipment other than those
items considered to be part of the unit or essential for its
immediate use.
G. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection C above, a unit may be
parked anywhere on the premises during active loading or unloading,
and the use of electricity or propane fuel is permitted when necessary
to prepare a recreational vehicle for use.
H. The unit shall be owned by the resident on whose property the unit is
parked for storage.
§ 280-113 CHARTER § 280-114
C:1099
§ 280-114. Satellite earth stations. [Added 8-8-1988 by Ord. No.
88-23]
Satellite earth stations may be allowed as an accessory use within all zoning
districts of Radnor Township, when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board subject to the applicable conditions of § 280-145 and
the following provisions:
A. Satellite earth stations may not exceed one per lot and are restricted in
use to the property on which it is located, provided further that no
cable, wire or other device used and necessary for the operation of an
earth station may occupy or cross a Township right-of-way without the
express approval from the Board of Commissioners. Any person,
partnership, corporation or association maintaining a satellite earth
station on a lot occupied by multiple tenants, condominiums and/or
homeowners, whether residential or commercial in use, shall make
these satellite earth stations available to serve all such occupants.
B. Ground-mounted satellite earth stations are permitted only on that side
of the principal building where the rear yard is located, but shall not be
located within any required yard area for the principal building or
landscaped area as required by this chapter. Satellite earth stations
must be set back from the side and rear property lines a minimum
distance equal to the height of the satellite earth station, but the
setback shall in no case be less than 10 feet.
C. The diameter of a satellite dish shall not exceed 11 feet, with the
maximum height of a station being limited to 13 feet. Height of the
apparatus shall include all poles, supports and related apparatus and
shall be measured vertically from the ground to the maximum point
when positioned for operation.
D. Satellite earth stations shall be of a color which blends with the
surrounding environment and have an open mesh rather than solid
surface to reduce visual blockage. Ground-mounted earth stations shall
also be screened from adjoining properties by a dense growth of
evergreens or shrubs which shall be to a minimum height of six feet. No
writing, figure representation or other form of advertisement may be
affixed to the apparatus.
E. Satellite earth stations may be roof mounted only on multifamily
dwellings within R-5 Residential and Planned Apartment Zoning
Districts and on buildings within Commercial, Commercial Office,
Planned Business, Planned Laboratory Office and Planned Institutional
Zoning Districts. To the greatest extent possible, roof-mounted stations
shall not be visible from the street and shall not be attached to the
exterior walls of a building or extend beyond the leading edge of the
roof. In no case shall a roof-mounted station extend 10 feet above a flat
roof or exceed the highest point of a ridge or similar type roof.
[Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 280-114 RADNOR CODE § 280-114
C:1100
§ 280-115. Conservation of wetlands. [Added 10-15-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-40]
F. A building permit shall be required prior to the installation of a satellite
earth station. Application for a permit shall include two sets of
construction drawings, prepared and sealed by a registered engineer,
which shall be consistent with Township construction standards and
detail the method and adequacy of construction.
G. Every satellite earth station must be adequately grounded for
protection against lightning.
A. Should the existence of wetlands be indicated by one or more of the
following: the National Wetlands Inventory maps, as prepared by the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service or any other governmental
agency having jurisdiction; hydric soils or soils with hydric inclusions,
as depicted in the Soil Survey of Chester and Delaware Counties and/or
in United States Department of Agriculture SCS Hydric Soils Lists; and
the existence of hydrophytic vegetation or hydrologic conditions, as
determined by on-site investigations; a wetlands delineation in
accordance with the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands dated January 10, 1989, as amended, shall be
performed by a licensed professional engineer, hydrogeologist, soil
scientist or similarly qualified professional experienced in wetlands
ecology, selected by the applicant. Plans shall be submitted to the
Township for review; such plans shall show the delineation and indicate
any disturbance of wetlands anticipated. The qualifications of the
consultant performing the delineation shall be submitted with such
plans.
B. Should the Township Engineer dispute the delineation submitted by the
applicant: [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
(1) The Township and the applicant may select a mutually acceptable,
qualified professional to reexamine the site for boundary
confirmation and readjustment. All costs for such work shall be
borne by the applicant. The Township at no time shall be held
accountable for any additional boundary modifications imposed by
state or federal agencies. If either party is dissatisfied with the
wetlands boundary as confirmed or adjusted through this
procedure, it shall have the right to appeal those findings to the
United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection or the United States Fish
and Wildlife Service for final boundary determination.
(2) As an alternative to the procedure described in Subsection B(1)
above, the applicant may appeal the Township Engineer's findings
directly to the appropriate regulatory agency, including the Army
Corps of Engineers, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service for boundary confirmation.
§ 280-114 CHARTER § 280-115
C:1101
§ 280-115.1. Home occupations. [Added 10-26-1998 by Ord. No.
98-09]
C. Should the Township conclude, on the basis of the criteria cited in
Subsection A above, that wetlands exist on the site, contrary to the
applicant's findings:
(1) The Township and the applicant may select a mutually acceptable,
qualified professional to reexamine the site, using the criteria cited
in Subsection A above, to determine if wetlands exist. All costs for
such work shall be borne by the applicant. The Township shall at no
time be held accountable for wetlands found to exist by state or
federal agencies.
(2) As an alternative to the procedure described in Subsection C(1)
above, the Township may, at its discretion, request that either the
United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection or the United States Fish
and Wildlife Service verify the existence of wetlands. In the event
that such agency or agencies verify the existence of wetlands, the
applicant will be required to perform a delineation in accordance
with the requirements of Subsection A above and secure any
required wetlands permits or waivers pursuant thereto in
accordance with the requirements of Subsection D below.
[Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
D. Unless it is clearly evident in the plans submitted by the applicant and/
or through any field review by the Township Engineer that no
disturbance to the designated wetlands is anticipated, the delineation
performed shall be submitted to the appropriate regulatory agencies,
including but not limited to the United States Army Corps of Engineers
and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for
boundary confirmation and/or requisite wetlands permits or waivers
pursuant thereto. All potential impacts on wetlands shall conform to
applicable regulations, as amended. [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-04]
E. Where wetlands exist and disturbance permits and/or mitigation
activities are required, final plan approval or granting of applicable
permits from the Township shall be conditioned upon the applicant
receiving all necessary wetlands permits or waivers pursuant thereto
and/or the approval of the Township Engineer.
A. Nontraffic home occupation. A nontraffic home occupation which
involves no employees, clients, customers, patients, agents or any other
commercial invitee shall be permitted, provided that it satisfies all of
the following requirements:
(1) The home occupation shall utilize not more than 35% of the gross
floor area or 400 square feet of the dwelling unit, whichever is less.
§ 280-115 RADNOR CODE § 280-115.1
C:1102
(2) The home occupation shall be conducted exclusively within the
dwelling unit or within an accessory structure so long as that
accessory structure meets the yard and setback requirements for
the dwelling unit, and the home occupation is conducted in the
accessory structure by the occupant of the dwelling. Storage shall
be permitted within an attached or detached accessory structure.
(3) Delivery of items incidental to the operation of the home
occupation shall be by passenger motor vehicle, light commercial
vehicle or by parcel or mail service vehicles typically employed in
residential deliveries.
(4) One contractor or service truck used as a part of a home occupation
shall be permitted to park on the premises, provided that such
vehicle complies with standards for the parking and storage of
vehicles as set forth in Chapter 272 of the Township Code. Parking
of such vehicles is limited to off-street only. Job-related equipment
and materials shall be stored on the premises only when in a
completely enclosed garage, accessory structure or in a
commercial vehicle used for transporting equipment or materials
between work sites.
(5) Commercial signs or displays to identify the home occupation shall
be prohibited.
(6) No hazardous equipment, materials or process shall be used, and
the home occupation shall not create noise, glare, fumes, odors,
dust, vibrations, smoke or electrical interference beyond the
exterior walls of the dwelling unit, including transmittal through
ceilings, floors and vertical party walls.
B. Traffic home occupation. A traffic home occupation which requires a
nonresident employee and/or attracts customers, clients, patients,
agents or other commercial invitees shall be permitted when authorized
as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant and
subject to § 280-145, provided that the use satisfies the following
requirements in addition to those set forth in § 280-115.1A. special
exceptions shall apply only to applicants before the Board and shall be
discontinued upon change of occupancy and/or sale of the property.
(1) A traffic home occupation shall be permitted to operate only within
a detached single-family dwelling or single-family semidetached
dwelling.
(2) Not more than one traffic home occupation shall be permitted to
operate from any one dwelling unit.
(3) No more than one nonresident associate or employee shall be on
the premises at any one time to assist in the conduct of the home
occupation.
§ 280-115.1 CHARTER § 280-115.1
C:1103
(4) The home office shall be open to the public only between the hours
of 8:30 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Saturday, and shall not
serve more than one client or customer per hour.
(5) There shall be off-street parking to accommodate at least two
vehicles for the home occupation unless found to be unnecessary
by the Zoning Hearing Board. Any additional spaces required shall
not be located in front of the building line. Parking for home
occupations shall be in addition to the number of spaces required
for the dwelling unit and shall be screened from adjacent
properties by an evergreen buffer planting strip. Such planting
shall be of proper size to provide an effective screen at the time of
installation and subject to Township approval.
(6) No traffic home occupation shall be located within 500 feet of any
other traffic home occupation, measured by the shortest distance
between the lot on which the proposed use will be located and the
lot or lots which contain the existing use. The requirement of this
subsection shall not be imposed if the applicant establishes, upon
application to the Zoning Hearing Board for a special exception,
either that the proposed use is located in a neighborhood which is
not primarily residential in character or that the proposed use will
not have a substantial tendency to commercialize the
neighborhood.
C. Day-care homes. A "day-care home" is a residence in which for-profit
child care is provided to children under the age of 16 who do not reside
in the residence and shall be permitted when authorized as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant and subject to
§ 280-145, provided that the day-care home satisfies all of the following
requirements:
(1) A day-care home shall be permitted only within a single-family
dwelling and shall be operated by the permanent resident of the
dwelling unit.
(2) A day-care home shall be permitted to operate only between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(3) A day-care home in a single-family detached dwelling shall not
provide services to more than six nonresident children at any one
time. A day-care home in a semidetached single-family dwelling
shall not provide services to more than three nonresident children
at any one time. A day-care home in an attached single-family
dwelling shall not provide services to more than two nonresident
children at any one time. During the time that day care is providing
services to nonresident children as permitted by this subsection, it
may also provide care only to residents of the home.
(4) Outdoor recreation areas and play equipment shall be located in
the rear yard of the property and shall be enclosed by a visually
§ 280-115.1 RADNOR CODE § 280-115.1
C:1104
impenetrable wood fence four feet in height or a chain link fence
with an evergreen buffer planting strip that is impenetrable by
children and small animals. Such planting shall be of proper size to
effectively screen the area at the time of installation.
(5) Outside play by children at the day-care home shall be limited to
the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(6) Commercial signs or displays which identify a day-care home shall
be prohibited.
(7) The day-care home shall meet all requirements imposed by state
law and the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare, and a
license or evidence of such compliance shall be furnished to the
Zoning Hearing Board.
(8) No day-care home shall be located within 500 feet of any other daycare
home, measured by the shortest distance between the lot on
which the proposed use will be located and the lot or lots which
contain the existing use. The requirement of this subsection shall
not be imposed if the applicant establishes, upon application to the
Zoning Hearing Board for a special exception, that the proposed
use will not have a substantial tendency to cause hazardous and
congested traffic conditions.
D. Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited as home
occupations:
(1) Food preparation and service.
(2) Veterinary uses (including care, grooming or boarding).
(3) Hospital or clinic.
(4) Bed-and-breakfast.
(5) Machine or welding shop.
(6) Equipment rental.
(7) Beauty shops, barbershops and similar uses.
(8) Any service involved in the preparation of animals or animal
products for human use or consumption.
(9) Retail sales.
(10) Funeral homes.
(11) Vehicle repair.
(12) Laundry or dry cleaning.
§ 280-115.1 CHARTER § 280-115.1
C:1105
§ 280-115.2. Student home permitted by special exception. [Added
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
A student home is permitted by special exception within the R-1, R-1A,
R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 and PA Zoning Districts within a lawful single-family
dwelling unit under the Radnor Township Zoning Ordinance, provided all of
the following requirements are met:
E. Registration. Every individual who operates a home occupation or daycare
home shall be required to secure a certificate of occupancy and
annual business license from the Township.
F. Severability. The provisions of this section are severable, and if any
section, sentence, clause, part or provision thereof shall be held illegal,
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision of the court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections,
sentences, clauses, parts or provisions of this section. It is hereby
declared to be the intent of the Board of Commissioners that this
section would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision had not
been included.
A. A student home shall only be permitted within a single-family dwelling.
B. No student home shall be permitted within a two-family dwelling unit.
C. No more than one building on a lot may be used as a student home.
D. A special exception authorizing a student home shall expire unless the
use is licensed and occupied as a student home within six months from
the date of the special exception authorization.
E. No student home shall be closer than 1,000 feet to another student
home property line. The distance requirement is measured from the
closest property line of a potential student home to another student
home property line.
F. The rules and regulations applicable to the conduct of student tenants
in student homes authorized under this section shall, at a minimum,
conform to those applicable to on-campus dormitories of the college or
university wherein the student tenants at issue attend. The owner shall
provide proof of such rules and regulations to the Township.
G. The student home shall have a minimum of 1,500 square feet of living
area, exclusive of building area covered by a basement, garage or an
accessory building.
H. The student home shall meet the minimum yard setbacks, lot area and
lot width requirements for single-family detached dwellings within the
zoning district in which located.
I. Noise abatement measures acceptable to the Township shall be used to
avoid conflicts with nearby neighbors.
§ 280-115.1 RADNOR CODE § 280-115.2
C:1106
J. A buffer area with a width of 10 feet shall be required for student homes
along the rear and side lot lines of the subject property.
K. Landscaping acceptable to the Township shall be used as a buffer
between a student home and any nearby dwellings.
L. The number of persons living in such a student home shall not exceed
two. Any number of persons in excess of two would tend to create an
institutional atmosphere that would threaten the residential character
of the subject zoning district.
M. The student home shall meet the minimum area, yard setback, lot width
and other area and bulk requirements for single-family detached
dwellings, unless otherwise specified herein.
N. A minimum of two paved off-street parking spaces located to the side or
rear of the premises and not in the front yard shall be required, in
addition to those otherwise required for a single-family dwelling.
O. The owner, manager and/or agent of the student home shall secure an
annual license from the Township in accordance with Chapter 226 of
the Radnor Township Code of Ordinances.
P. The owner of the property shall provide the Township with the number
of students that reside within a student home and shall provide the
names and contact information for each student residing therein.
Q. The owner of the property shall notify the Township when there is a
change in the individual students residing within a student home and/or
if the property is no longer used as a student home. The owner of the
property shall immediately notify the Township of a change in the
property's status as a student home. In the event that the student home
is no longer leased to students for a period of one year or more, any
request to relicense the dwelling as a student home shall only be
permitted in accordance with all requirements of this section.
R. No student residing within a student home shall conduct himself or
herself in a disruptive manner.
S. A student home shall not be permitted to be used for any purpose other
than a residence.
T. The owner of the student home and the students residing within said
student home shall not engage in, nor tolerate or permit others on the
property of the student home to engage in, conduct declared illegal
under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, Liquor Code, and/or Controlled
Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act. The owner shall provide the
Township with proof of rules and regulations enforcing the same at the
subject property.
U. The student home's exterior appearance shall be maintained so as to
resemble the dwellings within the immediate vicinity of the student
§ 280-115.2 CHARTER § 280-115.2
C:1107
§ 280-115.3. Bed-and-breakfast permitted by special exception.
[Added 2-27-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01]
A bed-and-breakfast is permitted by special exception within a lawful singlefamily
dwelling unit under the Radnor Township Zoning Ordinance,
provided all of the following requirements are met:
home, and there shall be no signs identifying the use and/or identifying
it as a student home.
V. This section is not intended, nor shall its effect be, to limit any other
enforcement remedies, which may be available to the Township against
an owner, student tenant and/or guest thereof found in this chapter
and/or other applicable law.
A. The bed-and-breakfast home and use can only be established in a
single-family dwelling existing as of the date of the adoption of this
section.
B. The bed-and-breakfast home and use shall be an accessory use to a
single-family dwelling and shall be subordinate to the residential use of
the premises. The bed-and-breakfast use shall be owned and operated
by the homeowners.
C. Each guest room of the bed-and-breakfast home must comply with
Radnor Township building, health, and safety codes.
D. There will be no change in the outside appearance of the building and/
or premises nor any visible or audible evidence detectable from the lot
as to the presence of a bed-and-breakfast home, except for signage as
permitted under Article XXI, Signs, of this chapter.
E. No meals shall be served to the general public. Meals may be served to
overnight guests of the bed-and-breakfast home. No separate kitchen or
cooking facility shall be allowed in any guest room. All food service shall
comply with federal, state, and county regulations for the preparation,
handling, and serving of food.
F. The minimum off-street parking requirements are as follows: one
parking space is provided per guest unit or guest room and one parking
space for each employee of the bed-and-breakfast home. In addition,
any applicable parking requirements for the single-family dwelling shall
be met. All parking areas shall be paved or graveled.
G. Where deemed necessary to preserve and protect the residential nature
of the neighborhood, the Board may require a landscape buffer, fence,
or other screening between the bed-and-breakfast home's parking area
and any neighbor properties or streets.
H. There shall be no bed-and-breakfast use within 1,000 feet of any other
bed-and-breakfast use.
§ 280-115.2 RADNOR CODE § 280-115.3
C:1108
§ 280-115.4. Outdoor dining regulations. [Added 4-8-2013 by Ord.
No. 2012-09]
I. Guests shall not remain in the same bed-and-breakfast for more than 14
consecutive days.
J. The use of any on-site amenities, such as a swimming pool or tennis
court, shall be restricted to use by overnight guests staying at the bedand-
breakfast, as well as the homeowners and their private guests.
A. Within the C-1, C-2, C-3, WBOD, and PB Zoning Districts, outdoor
dining shall be permitted as an accessory use on the same premises as a
licensed food establishment (restaurant) that has indoor seating. To
assure quality standards for customers and food safety, the following
provisions shall apply: [Amended 8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-07]
(1) All outdoor dining areas shall be subject to compliance with all
applicable health, building, accessibility, fire, and plumbing codes
of Radnor Township.
(2) Areas for outdoor dining shall not interfere with any means of
ingress or egress to a building, or with any emergency or safety
exits. Where the dining area extends into a public sidewalk or rightof-
way, the following shall apply: A minimum sidewalk width,
exclusive of the outdoor dining area, of 48 inches shall be
maintained free and clear at all times for pedestrians (unless a
greater width is required by the building and/or accessibility
codes). Such area shall not include the outdoor dining area and
shall be free of surface obstacles and obstructions (i.e., hydrants,
streetlights, parking meters, and street trees.) (See Figure 13.293)
(3) Pedestrian barriers. Outdoor dining areas may be enclosed and
separated from the pedestrian or travel way to allow for the privacy
of the dining patron and to permit the unimpeded flow of traffic.
When the dining area is located within the interior of the property,
enclosures may consist of a wall or fence, approved by the
Township. The following minimum standards shall apply if the
establishment chooses to use a barrier:
(a) Pedestrian barriers shall have sufficient weight to prevent
them from being tipped or knocked over.
(b) If the pedestrian barrier is to be permanent, the method of
attachment shall be subject to approval by the Township. No
barrier shall be permanently attached to a public sidewalk or
an area located within the right-of-way.
(c) Pedestrian barriers shall be at least 36 inches high to prevent a
tripping hazard; unless more restrictive requirements are
required by other municipal codes.
293. Editor's Note: Figure 13 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 280-115.3 CHARTER § 280-115.4
C:1109
(d) Where pedestrian access to an outdoor dining area is not
through a food establishment, the required opening shall not
be less than 44 inches in width (see Figure 14294); unless a
greater width is required by other municipal codes.
(e) Pedestrian barriers shall be made of a durable metal such as
wrought iron. (See Figure 15.295)
(f) Pedestrian barriers shall not have legs or supports that
protrude into a sidewalk more than two inches.
(g) Prohibited barriers.
[1] Fabric inserts (whether natural or synthetic fabric) of any
size shall not be permitted to be used as part of a barrier.
(See Figure 16.296)
[2] The use of chain link, cyclone fencing, chicken wire or
similar appurtenances is prohibited. Materials not
specifically manufactured for fencing or pedestrian control
(including but not limited to buckets, food containers,
tires, tree stumps, vehicle parts, pallets, etc.) and not
expressly permitted elsewhere in these guidelines shall
not be used as components of a barrier.
[3] Flower pots, planters, and other ornamental containers.
(4) Furniture. To ensure outdoor dining in a quality environment,
furniture shall be limited to the following materials, unless
otherwise approved by the Design Review Board:
(a) Iron, cast: low-carbon iron, hand- or machine-cast parts,
stainless steel connectors, hand ground to a smooth finish.
(b) Iron, wrought: heavy-gauge, low-carbon, welded and finished
with a hard abrasive paint.
(c) Steel, expanded: minimum of 13 gauge cold-rolled steel, lowcarbon,
welded and finished with a hard abrasive paint.
(d) Steel, wire: 13/14 gauge cold-welded, smooth ground joints,
and abrasive-resistant finish.
(e) Aluminum, cast.
(f) Aluminum, extruded.
(g) Wood, frame.
(h) Wood, wicker.
294. Editor's Note: Figure 14 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
295. Editor's Note: Figure 15 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
296. Editor's Note: Figure 16 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 280-115.4 RADNOR CODE § 280-115.4
C:1110
(i) The use of upholstery and cushions shall be subject to review
and approval of the Township's Code Officials and Health
Officer.
(j) The use of plastic furniture to satisfy the requirements of this
subsection shall be prohibited. (See Figure 17.297)
(k) The use of tarps or similar coverings to cover the furniture
when not in use shall be prohibited.
(5) Roof coverings. At the direction of the Township's Health Officer, all
outdoor dining areas shall have an approved roof material available
for patrons. The following shall apply:
(a) No advertising on umbrellas shall be permitted. (See Figure
18.298)
(b) Flame-resistant material shall be used.
(c) If awnings are used, they shall be a minimum of six feet eight
inches in height above the sidewalk or patio surface.
(d) Tents shall not be permitted over an outdoor dining area.
(6) Signs. No signs advertising outdoor dining shall be permitted,
unless approved pursuant to Article XXI of this chapter.
(7) Parking. In addition to the parking requirements for the principal
restaurant use, outdoor dining shall provide additional parking in
accordance with the following:
Number of Outdoor Seats
Required Number of Parking
Spaces
1 to 12 None
13 to 24 1 space per 4 seats after the
first 12 seats
25 to 50 1 space per 3 seats after the
first 24 seats
(8) The number of outdoor dining seats shall be limited to a maximum
of 25% of the total number of indoor seats in the associated
principal restaurant use. However, at no point shall more than 50
outdoor dining seats be provided at any one restaurant.
(9) Outdoor dining shall be permitted between March 1 and November
30. Hours of operation shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. All
seating of patrons shall provide for the dining area to close at the
required hour.
297. Editor's Note: Figure 17 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
298. Editor's Note: Figure 18 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 280-115.4 CHARTER § 280-115.4
C:1111
(10) Setbacks.
(a) Outdoor dining shall be permitted in the front, side, and rear
yards of the property upon which the principal restaurant is
located.
(b) No outdoor dining area shall be established within 100 feet of
the property line of a single-family or two-family detached or
semidetached dwelling unit located completely or partially
within a residential zoning district.
(c) No outdoor dining area shall be established within 100 feet of
the property line of an unimproved lot located completely or
partially within a residential zoning district.
(d) Outdoor dining areas shall not be permitted to the rear or on
either side of a principal restaurant building when said
building is immediately adjacent to an existing single-family or
two-family detached or semidetached dwelling unit or
residentially zoned district. However, the outdoor dining area
can be located to the rear or side of the principal restaurant
building when the outdoor dining area is more than 500 feet
from the property line of the immediately adjacent singlefamily
or two-family detached or semidetached dwelling unit or
residentially zoned district.
(e) For the purposes of this Subsection A(10), the setbacks and
requirements set forth in Subsection A(10)(b), (c), and (d)
above shall not apply to any properties, dwelling units, or
residential zoning districts separated from the accessory
outdoor dining use by a public road.
(11) Outdoor dining areas shall be located on a permanent surface.
Temporary flooring shall not be used.
(12) Exterior heating systems. When heaters are used in an outdoor
dining area, the following shall apply:
(a) The use of outdoor heaters shall be in compliance with the
International Fire Code, as amended.
(b) Heaters shall not be located on a public sidewalk or within a
public right-of-way.
(c) Heaters shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a means of
ingress/egress into and/or out of a building or into and/or out of
an outdoor dining area.
(d) When heaters are located in outdoor dining areas, the owner/
operator of the restaurant shall provide a plan for fire
protection in accordance with applicable codes. Said plan shall
be approved by the Township's Code Officials.
§ 280-115.4 RADNOR CODE § 280-115.4
C:1112
(e) Where applicable, heaters shall be securely fastened to a wall
or the floor of the outdoor dining area to prevent the heater
from accidentally tipping over. Said fastening shall be subject
to review and approval by the Township's Code Officials.
(f) All gas-fired heaters shall be equipped with safety shutoff
valves that stop gas flow if flame is extinguished as well as a
tip-over safety switch.
(13) Outdoor dining areas shall provide additional outdoor trash
receptacles, which must meet the requirements of Subsection A(4)
above.
(14) The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be incidental to the sale and
consumption of food. Outside bar service and/or walk-up bar
service for the sole purpose of the consumption of alcohol without
the consumption of food is prohibited.
(15) Pets are not permitted in the outdoor dining area with the
exceptions as identified in Chapter 170, Food Regulations (by
reference) Section 46.982, Limitations on animals.
B. Outdoor dining shall be permitted within the PLO District as part of an
accessory cafeteria, provided the outdoor dining area is used
exclusively by the occupants of the building or campus; and shall be
subject to the provisions of § 280-115.4A.
C. Outdoor dining shall be permitted by special exception in all other
zoning districts, except all of the Garrett Hill Districts, as an accessory
use on the same premises as an existing licensed nonconforming food
establishment that has indoor seating; and shall be subject to the
provisions of § 280-115.4A. [Amended 8-12-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-07]
D. Storage of materials. At the conclusion of any outdoor dining season, all
portable equipment (i.e., barriers, furniture, roof coverings, etc.) shall
be stored within the facility in a location that does not interfere with the
operation of the food establishment, or shall be stored off site.
E. Outdoor dining permit. To assure compliance with safety and food code
standards of the Township, the following regulations shall govern the
issuance of all outdoor dining permits:
(1) Applications shall be filed on forms provided by the Township along
with the required fees (as set forth in Chapter 162 of the Code or by
separate resolution of the Board of Commissioners) and any
information necessary to determine compliance with this section.
(2) Applications shall be submitted to the Community Development
Department for a preliminary review.
(3) Once a preliminary review has been completed by the Community
Development Department, the application shall be forwarded to the
§ 280-115.4 CHARTER § 280-115.4
C:1113
§ 280-115.5. Municipal services/uses. [Added 8-12-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-12; amended 3-28-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
When approved by the Board of Commissioners and located on lands owned,
operated, leased, and/or maintained by Radnor Township, the following
services/uses shall be permitted as principal and/or accessory use(s) in all
zoning districts:
Design Review Board for an initial application for outdoor dining
or when changes are proposed to the outdoor dining area. In
addition to the application requirements established by the Design
Review Board, the applicant shall provide samples of materials to
determine compliance with this section.
(4) Upon a successful review and approval by the Design Review
Board, the application shall be reviewed by the Community
Development Department for final approval to determine
compliance with safety standards, the food code requirements set
forth in Chapter 170 of the Township Code, and other applicable
municipal regulations.
(5) Upon final approval of an application, a permit shall be issued. Fees
shall be paid upon the filing of an application and shall be renewed
on an annual basis.
(6) All locations shall be subject to periodic inspections for compliance
with the standards of this section. Two or more violations of this
section may result in a minimum seven-day suspension and/or
revocation of all zoning, health, or building permits applicable to
the outdoor dining use.
(7) Noise. Outdoor dining shall be subject to Chapter 200, Noise. No
amplified music or sound is permitted. All activities, including the
playing of music or other forms of entertainment, shall comply with
the noise limitations of the Township Ordinances and any other
regulatory agencies having jurisdiction, as applicable.
A. All Township buildings, structures, services, and uses, including, but
not limited to, the following: governmental offices; garages for the
storage of tools, equipment and vehicles; police and emergency
services; transportation and pedestrian safety improvements; utilities;
renewable energy facilities; recreational facilities and appurtenances;
libraries; information resources; parking (accessory); signs; and the use
of land for the stockpiling of materials used by the municipality in its
municipal functions.
B. Preferred parking: One off-street parking space for every four seats in
meeting areas or one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet
of gross floor area, whichever requires the greater number of off-street
parking spaces, plus one off-street parking space for every employee.
§ 280-115.4 RADNOR CODE § 280-115.5
C:1114
This standard shall be used as a guideline only. Required parking shall
be based on the needs as determined by the Board of Commissioners.
C. Area and dimensional requirements. Any improvement project shall be
subject to the underlying district regulations unless otherwise approved
by the Board of Commissioners,
D. Natural resource protection and buffer yards shall be as required in the
underlying district unless otherwise approved by the Board of
Commissioners.
E. Notice of any proposed project shall be provided to adjacent property
owners within 500 feet of the subject site.
F. Wherever there is a conflict or inconsistency between these regulations
and other definitions and regulations of this Chapter, the regulations
set forth in this section shall govern.
§ 280-115.5 CHARTER § 280-115.5
C:1115

ARTICLE XXI
Signs
[Amended 2-24-1975 by Ord. No. 1601; 9-22-1980 by Ord. No.
80-21; 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 91-14]
§ 280-116. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to regulate all signs within the Township to
ensure that they are appropriate for their respective principal uses and
in keeping with the appearance of the affected property and surrounding
environment and to protect the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare. In addition, the intent of this section is to:
§ 280-117. Conformance required.
Any sign hereafter erected or maintained shall conform to the provisions
of this article and any other ordinance or regulations of the Township of
Radnor relating thereto.
A. Encourage good design in the context of the overall image and visual
environment of the Township.
B. Enhance the appearance of the business community, taking into
account the nature of the use, and thus stimulate as well as protect the
economic vitality of the Township.
C. Provide for signage which is adequate but not excessive and which
displays a message through use of pictures, symbols and logos for rapid
comprehension by the public.
D. Prohibit the erection of signs in such numbers, sizes, designs and
locations as may create a hazard to pedestrians and motorists.
E. Avoid excessive competition for large or multiple signs, so that
permitted signs provide adequate identification and direction while
minimizing clutter, unsightliness and confusion.
F. Allow for the coordination of signs to reflect the character of the
architecture, landscape and visual themes which the Township is
supporting.
G. Promote signs which are designed utilizing clear, crisp lettering and
bold, uncomplicated symbols which will identify a business or activity
efficiently and also enhance the area where they are located as well as
the general appearance of the street or town.
H. Prevent sign overload and excessively large signs which creates a
visually chaotic and competitive situation within the business
community.
§ 280-116 CHARTER § 280-118
C:1117
§ 280-118. Definitions.
Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated unless otherwise expressly stated:
ACCESSORY USE SIGN — A sign which designates home occupations as
permitted by § 280-9H(2).
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign with action or motion, flashing, color changes
requiring electrical energy or electronic manufactured sources of supply,
but not including wind-actuated elements such as flags, banners or specialty
items.
ARTISAN SIGN — A temporary sign of workmen performing services at or
alterations to a building.
AWNING SIGN — Any sign painted on or applied to a structure made of
cloth, canvas, metal or similar material which is affixed to a building and
projects therefrom. Such signs may or may not be fixed or equipped with a
mechanism for raising and holding an awning in a retracted position against
the building.[Amended 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
BANNER — A sign consisting of light weight, flexible material which is
supported by frame, rope, wires or other anchoring devices, which may or
may not include copy, logo or graphic symbols.
BEACON LIGHT — Any source of electric light, whether portable or fixed,
the primary purpose of which is to cast a concentrated beam of light
generally skyward as a means of attracting attention to its location rather
than to illuminate any particular sign, structure or other object.
BILLBOARD — A freestanding, off-premises sign.
BULLETIN BOARD — A sign of permanent character, including a
freestanding sign, but with movable letters, words, logo or numerals
indicating the names of persons associated with or events, products or
services offered upon the same premises on which the sign is located.
BUSINESS SIGN — A sign directing attention to a business, commodity
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered upon the same premises
as those upon which the sign is maintained.
CHANGEABLE COPY — Copy containing or displaying letters, numbers or
graphics which is designed to be readily changed, as for a theater marquee,
gas station or similar use.
CIVIC EVENT SIGN — A sign, other than a commercial sign, posted to
promote and advertise an activity sponsored by the Township school
district, church, public agency, civic or charitable association or other
similar noncommercial organization.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A sign indicating that the premises are in the
process of subdivision or land development for residential and
nonresidential uses.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign designating points of ingress and egress to a
property, normally located at such points of ingress and egress.
§ 280-118 RADNOR CODE § 280-118
C:1118
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A freestanding sign with two identical faces of
equal sign area which are back to back and more than two feet apart.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, which
shall also include the painting of wall signs or other graphics.
FACADE — The exterior surface of a building up to the roof line.
FESTOON LIGHTING — An electrically lighted sign comprised of either:
FLAG — A piece of fabric or other material of distinctive design that is
used as a symbol of a nation, state, city, agency or corporation and which is
usually displayed hanging free from a staff or halyard.
FLASHING SIGN — A sign whose illumination is not kept constant in
intensity at all times when in use and which exhibits changes in light, color,
direction or animation. Illuminated signs which indicate the date, time and
temperature will not be considered flashing signs.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign and supporting structure which is secured
in the ground and independent of any building, fence or other support.
For the purpose of this definition, "freestanding signs" may consist of the
following:
GOVERNMENTAL SIGNS — Any sign for the control of traffic or for
identification purposes, street signs, warning signs, railroad-crossing signs
and signs of public service companies indicating danger or construction,
which are erected by or at the order of a public officer, employee or agent
thereof in the discharge of his official duties.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A wall sign indicating the name or address of a
building or the name of the management thereof.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A nonflashing or nontwinkling sign which has
letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by a lighting source as a part
of the sign.
INSTRUCTIONAL SIGN — A sign located within the interior of a lot,
generally not visible from the street or adjoining properties, which provides
A group of incandescent light bulbs hung or strung overhead or on a
building or other structure(s); or
A.
Light bulbs not shaded or hooded or otherwise screened to prevent
direct rays of light from shining on adjacent properties or rights-of-way.
B.
GROUND SIGN — A sign designed to be viewed at eye level or below
within the immediate vicinity and which is intended to be designed and
viewed as an architecturally unified and proportional element. Ground
signs shall be constructed so that the maximum height from mean
grade to the lowest area of the sign face does not exceed four feet.
A.
POLE SIGN — A sign which is detached from a building and supported
by no more than two poles or other structural supports which are
architecturally dissimilar to the design of the sign.
B.
§ 280-118 CHARTER § 280-118
C:1119
information as to the location, interior operation and/or use of buildings or
facilities.
INTERIOR SIGNS — Any sign located fully within the interior of any
building or stadium which is intended solely for information relating to the
operation of such building or stadium.
LANDMARK SIGN — An older sign of artistic or historic merit, uniqueness
or extraordinary significance to the Township as identified by the Board of
Commissioners.
LETTER HEIGHT — The height of a letter from its bottom to its top,
including any shadow lines and other forms of outlining.
MARQUEE — A permanent, roof-like structure, supported by a wall of a
building but having no relationship to the roof structure, generally designed
and constructed for protection against weather.
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to a marquee for the purpose of
identifying a movie theater or similar place of entertainment.
MEMORIAL SIGN — A memorial plaque or tablet, to include grave markers
or other remembrances of persons or events, which is not for commercial or
advertising purposes.
MOVEABLE SIGN — A sign capable of being readily moved or relocated,
including portable signs mounted on a chassis and wheels or supported by
legs.
NAMEPLATE SIGN — A wall sign which designates the name and address
of an occupant or group of occupants within any one building.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign which has a valid permit, was erected
prior to the effective date of this article or any subsequent amendment
hereto and which does not otherwise conform to the provisions of this
article.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Any commercial sign advertising a product,
service, business or activity sold, located or conducted elsewhere than on
the premises on which the sign is located.[Amended 5-26-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-12]
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign relating to the election of a person to
a public office or a political party or a matter to be voted upon at an election
by the general public.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign designed to be transported or moved,
including but not limited to signs designed to be transported by wheels,
signs converted to A-frames or menu and sandwich boards.
PREMISES — Any lot, building, business establishment or combination
thereof held under single lease or ownership.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which is attached directly to any building wall
and which extends more than 12 inches from the face of the wall.
§ 280-118 RADNOR CODE § 280-118
C:1120
REGULATORY SIGN — Any sign which is erected for any period of time
to satisfy requirements or regulations promulgated by any federal, state or
local governmental agency.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign indicating the sale, rental or lease
of the premises on which the sign is placed.
REVOLVING SIGN — A sign which revolves in a circular motion rather than
remaining stationary on its supporting structure.
SIGN — Any writing, figure representation, logo, emblem, flag, lighting,
banner, device, letter, word or street clock-and-temperature announcement,
which shall include any announcement, declaration, display, illustration,
name identification, description or insignia, which is used to advertise or
promote the interest of any person or firm, which such representation is
placed in the general view of the public.
SIGN AREA — The area of all lettering, wording and accompanying designs
and symbols, together with the background on which they are displayed,
but excluding any supporting framework and bracing which are solely
incidental to the display itself, provided that the same do not contain any
such lettering, wording, designs or symbols. For the purpose of this chapter,
"sign area" shall be computed as a square or rectangle drawn at the outer
limits of the sign face.
SIGN FACE — The part of a sign that is or can be used to identify, advertise
and communicate information for visual representation which attracts the
attention of the public for any purpose. This definition shall include any
background material, panel, trim and color used that differentiates the sign
from the building or structure on which it is placed. The sign structure shall
not be included, provided that no message, display or symbol is designed
and included as part of the structure.
SIGN HEIGHT — The distance from the highest portion of the sign,
including all structural elements to mean grade.
SIGN STRUCTURE — A supporting structure erected and used for the
purpose of identification or attracting attention, with or without a sign
thereon, situated upon any premises where a sign may be located. This
definition shall not include a building, fence, wall or earthen berm.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign erected for a period of time not to exceed
30 days in any one calendar year.
Where the sign consists of a double face, only one side shall be
considered for the purpose of calculating total sign area. Where both
sides are not identical or where the interior angle formed by the faces
of a sign is greater than 45°, all faces shall be considered in calculating
total sign area.
A.
Any spacing between signs designating different or separate occupants
or uses of a building shall not be included in the computed area(s) of
regulated signs.
B.
§ 280-118 CHARTER § 280-118
C:1121
TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGN — A display containing illuminated
numerals flashing alternately to show the time and the temperature.
VEHICULAR SIGN — Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a manner
that the carrying of such sign or signs no longer is incidental to the vehicle's
primary purpose.
WALL SIGN — Any sign erected against the wall of a building or display
on windows or doors or displayed with the exposed face thereof in a plane
parallel to the face of said wall, window or door and which sign is mounted
at a distance measured perpendicular to said wall not greater than 12
inches.
WINDOW SIGN — Any business sign which is placed inside or upon a
window for the primary purpose of being viewed by the general public from
the exterior of the premises. Temporary show window displays shall not be
included within this definition.[Amended 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
§ 280-119. Prohibited signs.
Except as may be hereinafter specifically permitted, it shall be unlawful,
after the effective date of this article or any amendment thereto, for any
person, firm or corporation to erect any of the following signs within the
Township of Radnor:
A. Any sign which by color, shape or location conflicts with or resembles a
traffic signal device.
B. Signs attached to a utility pole, parking meter, traffic sign post, traffic
signal or control device, street sign, historical marker, tree or rock.
C. (Reserved)299
D. Portable signs.
E. (Reserved)300
F. Signs erected without the permission of the property owner or
authorized agent.
G. Signs on awnings, except on the vertical face thereof as provided
herein.
H. Signs that create a hazard by obstructing the clear view of vehicles and
pedestrian traffic.
I. Signs painted on any wall surface.
J. Projecting signs, except as may be provided for within this ordinance.
299. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding off-premises signs, was repealed 5-26-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-12.
300. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding signs which advertise or publicize activities
or business not conducted on the businesses' premises, was repealed 5-26-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-12.
§ 280-118 RADNOR CODE § 280-119
C:1122
§ 280-120. Exempt signs.
The following signs shall be allowed without a sign permit and shall not be
included in the determination of type, number, colors or area of permanent
signs allowed within a zoning district.
K. Animated signs, except time and temperature signs.
L. Illuminated tubing or strings of lights which outline rooflines, doors,
windows or wall edges when used for advertising purposes, but
excluding temporary signs for traditional seasonal decorations.
M. Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door,
window, fire escape or other required exitway.
N. Banners, pennants or balloons, except as may be otherwise provided for
within this article.
O. Vehicular signs.
P. Sidewalk and sandwich signs.
Q. Abandoned or dilapidated signs.
R. Signs which exhibit statements, words or pictures of obscene or
pornographic subjects.
S. Internally illuminated signs, except as may be provided for within this
article.
T. Flashing signs, except time and temperature signs.
U. Revolving signs.
V. Festoon signs.
W. Beacon lights.
X. Roof signs.
Y. Any sign inconsistent with provisions of this article.
A. Governmental signs as herein defined.
B. Real estate and development signs, subject to height, area and number
requirements as set forth in this article.
C. Political signs, provided that no sign shall be displayed more than 30
calendar days prior to an election or for more than 10 days following
the election for which it is erected.
D. (Reserved)301
301. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, directional signs, was repealed 2-16-1999 by Ord. No.
99-01.
§ 280-119 CHARTER § 280-120
C:1123
E. Civic event signs subject to the following regulations: [Amended
2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
(1) Signs shall be erected for not more than 30 calendar days prior to
an event and shall be removed within 72 hours following the event.
(2) Total sign area shall not exceed 50 square feet or a maximum
height of 10 feet above grade.
(3) Sign content shall clearly indicate the event or celebration.
(4) Signs shall be limited to a maximum of one for each street frontage.
(5) Signs shall not be displayed for more than 45 cumulative days in
any one calendar year.
(6) Signs located beyond the required front yard setback which are not
intended to be viewed by the general public shall be exempt from
this provision of the Code.
F. "No Trespassing" or similar on-premise signs, provided that no sign
shall exceed one square foot in sign area or be placed at intervals of less
than 150 feet.
G. Memorial and landmark signs erected within the definition of this
article.
H. Changeable copy, repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance
and repair of a sign unless the sign structure, design, color or lighting is
altered.
I. Temporary signs, to include the following:
(1) Artisans' signs, provided that such signs shall not exceed six square
feet for each sign face and are erected on the premises where the
work is being performed. Signs shall be removed upon completion
of active work.
(2) Signs advertising garage or yard sales, provided that no sign shall
exceed nine square feet in sign area. Signs shall be permitted only
on the premises where the sale is to be conducted and limited to
one for each street frontage. Signs shall be removed at the close of
the garage or yard sale.
(3) Temporary signs, which shall be limited to banners made of cloth,
light fabric or similar material, subject to the following regulations:
[Amended 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
(a) Signs shall be securely fastened to the wall of a building or may
cover an existing freestanding sign only during a period of sign
repair or transition of owner and/or tenant.
§ 280-120 RADNOR CODE § 280-120
C:1124
§ 280-121. Signs in residential and similar districts.
The following types of signs and no others shall be permitted within
Agricultural Conservation, Residential and Planned Apartment Zoning
Districts, except as provided for otherwise within this article:
(b) Temporary signs shall not exceed the height and area
requirements for permanent wall signs in the district where
located.
(c) Temporary signs shall not be displayed without prior approval
from the Zoning officer and for more than 30 cumulative days
in any one calendar year.
J. Regulatory signs as required.
K. Address signs. All buildings in all zoning districts shall be required to
display the address of the property in such a fashion as is clearly visible
from the street and which is in accord with the provisions of this article.
The area of an address sign shall be exempt from the computation of
the total permitted sign area, provided that the sign does not contain
any advertising, trade names or logos.
L. (Reserved)302
M. Interior signs as herein defined.
N. Logo and operating instructions for an automatic teller or money access
center when located on the machine.
O. Any other sign as may be provided for within this article.
P. Flags, which shall be subject to the following regulations: [Added
2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
(1) Flags which display a business or corporate logo or are used for the
purpose of advertising a business or commodity shall be considered
a permanent sign and subject to the sign area requirements of this
article.
(2) Flags shall not exceed a height of 35 feet above grade when
attached to a freestanding pole, or extend above the first floor
when attached to a building.
(3) Seasonal flags which display a noncommercial message shall not be
subject to the requirements of this article.
A. (Reserved)303
302. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, instructional signs, was repealed 2-16-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-01.
303. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, professional accessory use or nameplate signs, was
repealed 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01.
§ 280-120 CHARTER § 280-121
C:1125
B. Signage for estates, farms, churches, recreation areas and other
permitted nonresidential uses, provided that:
(1) The total sign area shall not exceed 15 square feet and the sign
height of any freestanding sign shall not exceed eight feet above
mean grade.
(2) No more than one sign shall be placed on premises held in single
and separate ownership, unless such premises front on more than
one street, in which case one sign may be located along each street
frontage, provided that a minimum street frontage of 150 feet is
maintained between signs.
C. Signage for multifamily dwellings and residential developments,
provided that:
(1) The sign area shall not exceed 15 square feet and, if freestanding,
shall not exceed a sign height of six feet above mean grade.
(2) No more than one sign shall be placed on premises held in single
and separate ownership, unless such premises front on more than
one street, in which case one sign may be erected along each street
frontage.
(3) In any multiple-family development in which a rental office is
located, one wall sign not to exceed six square feet in sign area
shall be permitted. The sign shall be nonilluminated and shall
indicate only the name of the development, the presence of a
vacancy, business hours, address and telephone number of the
office.
D. Real estate signs, provided that:
(1) The sign area shall not exceed six square feet for each exposed face
and, if freestanding, shall not exceed a sign height of four feet from
mean grade. Signs shall be removed within 15 days from the date of
sale.
(2) No more than one sign shall be placed on premises held in single
and separate ownership, unless such premises front on more than
one street, in which case one sign may be erected along each street
frontage.
(3) A maximum of two off-premises directional signs, not to exceed a
sign area of three square feet, designating an open house shall be
permitted. Signs shall contain only directional information and the
name of the real estate agent or individual holding the open house.
Signs shall be erected and removed on the day of the open house
and shall not be located so as to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or be attached to a utility pole, off-site building, tree or other
natural feature.
§ 280-121 RADNOR CODE § 280-121
C:1126
§ 280-122. Signs in commercial districts.
The following types of signs shall be permitted within Commercial Office
(CO) and Commercial (C-1, C-2, C-3) Zoning Districts:
(4) Signs shall be nonilluminated and exempt from permit
requirements.
E. Development signs, provided that:
(1) The sign area shall not exceed six square feet and a sign height of
eight feet above mean grade.
(2) No more than one sign shall be erected for each 500 feet of street
frontage.
(3) Signs shall be nonilluminated and exempt from permit
requirements.
(4) No sign shall be erected until final approval of the development has
been granted by the Board of Commissioners and shall be removed
upon completion of active work.
A. Any sign permitted in residential districts which relates to a use
permitted in the district.
B. Real estate and development signs advertising the sale, rental or
development of premises, provided that:
(1) The sign area shall not exceed eight square feet and, if
freestanding, shall not exceed a sign height of eight feet above
mean grade.
(2) No more than one sign shall be erected for each 500 feet of street
frontage.
(3) Signs shall be nonilluminated and exempt from permit
requirements.
(4) Off-premises signs advertising the sale, rental or development of
premises shall be prohibited within these districts, except as
provided for in § 280-127. [Amended 5-26-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-12]
C. Business or related signs in accordance with the following regulations:
(1) Sign area. The total sign area of all signs placed on a lot or facing
any one street frontage of any one premises shall not exceed two
square feet for each linear foot of building frontage. Nontemporary
window signs shall be included in the computation of total
permitted sign area. The total area of all window signs, including
both temporary and nontemporary window signs, shall be limited to
20% of the glass area.
§ 280-121 CHARTER § 280-122
C:1127
(2) Wall signs. The total sign area of all wall signs placed on any one
premises shall not exceed two square feet for the first 15 linear feet
of building frontage, plus one square foot of sign area for each
additional foot of building frontage, up to a maximum sign area of
50 square feet. No wall sign shall exceed a sign height of 15 feet
above the existing grade or project above any cornice, parapet
wall, roofline or building facade. When a building has frontage on
more than one street, the sign area of all wall signs along each
street shall be limited by the amount of frontage along that street.
(3) Awning signs. Awning signs shall be permitted and shall be
included in the computation of total permitted sign area. Signs
shall display only the business name, proprietor, property address
or business telephone number. Letters, logo and numerals, not
exceeding a height of eight inches, shall be located on the vertical
face and within 14 inches from the base of the awning. Illumination
of awning signs shall be subject to approval by the Design Review
Board and consistent with § 280-125D of the Code. The minimum
clearance between the awning and grade shall be not less than
seven feet. [Amended 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
(4) Marquee signs. Theater or movie marquee signs containing
changeable copy shall be permitted in addition to the otherwise
permitted sign area for the use, provided that the total sign area
shall not exceed 200 square feet. Such signs shall be required at all
times to maintain a minimum vertical clearance of 10 feet.
Marquee signs shall be exempt from the lighting requirements as
set forth in § 280-125D.
(5) Freestanding signs. For each commercial building, shopping
center, office building, public use building, mixed-use development
or group of contiguous buildings under one ownership or control,
one freestanding sign shall be permitted. Where the premises has
more than one street frontage, one freestanding ground sign shall
be permitted for each street frontage. Where a property has more
than one point of ingress and egress designated for public use
along a street frontage, two freestanding signs along the frontage
shall be permitted, provided that both are ground signs. A
minimum street frontage of 150 feet shall be maintained between
signs. [Amended 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
(a) Area and height regulations.
[1] Pole signs. Pole signs shall not exceed a sign area of 25
square feet or a sign height of 15 feet above mean grade.
[2] Ground signs. Ground signs shall not exceed a sign area of
30 square feet or a sign height of eight feet above mean
grade.
§ 280-122 RADNOR CODE § 280-122
C:1128
(b) Sign contents. A freestanding sign shall contain only the name,
address, logo and/or telephone number of the permitted use.
(c) Location. Freestanding signs shall not be located within the
right-of-way and shall be set back a minimum distance of 10
feet from the street cartway. No sign shall be so located as to
present a hazard to motorists or pedestrians.
(6) Gasoline service stations. Gasoline service stations, commercial
motor vehicle service stations, including locations offering both the
sale of gasoline and related products, as well as other retail
products from the same location, shall be permitted signage
subject to the following regulations:
(a) Wall signs. One wall sign not to exceed 25 square feet in sign
area shall be permitted for each principal building. Where a
building fronts on more than one street, one wall sign may be
erected along each street frontage. Additional wall signs
identifying service provided on the premises shall be
permitted, provided that such signs shall not exceed 10 square
feet in sign area and are located directly above the area where
service is performed. In no case shall a wall sign be higher than
15 feet above existing grade or project above any cornice,
roofline, parapet wall or building facade.
(b) Freestanding signs. Gasoline service stations shall be
permitted a maximum of one freestanding ground sign for each
location.
[1] Area and height regulations. Freestanding signs shall not
exceed a sign height of 10 feet above mean grade or a sign
area of 30 square feet, except that where gasoline is
offered for sale, an additional 20 square feet of sign area
shall be permitted for pricing information.
[2] Sign contents. A freestanding sign shall contain only the
name, address, logo, pricing information and/or telephone
number of the permitted use.
[3] Location. Freestanding signs shall be located in
accordance with Subsection C(5)(c) above.
(c) Exempt signs. The following signs shall be allowed without a
sign permit and shall not be included in the determination of
type, number or area of permanent signs permitted for
gasoline and motor vehicle service stations:
[1] Signs on pump islands, to include company logo, and signs
to identify self-service or full-service locations, price
information, fuel availability, octane levels and similar
signs. Signage and company logo shall be prohibited on
canopies located above pump islands.
§ 280-122 CHARTER § 280-122
C:1129
[2] Any other sign required by fire and safety regulations.
(7) Automobile dealership signs. Automobile dealerships shall be
permitted signage subject to the following regulations:
(a) Sign area. The total permitted sign area shall be computed in
accordance with Subsection C(1) above.
(b) Wall signs. The total sign area of all wall signs placed on any
one premises shall not exceed a maximum sign area of 60
square feet. Additional wall signs identifying automotive
service provided on the premises shall be permitted, provided
that such signs shall not exceed 10 square feet in sign area and
are located directly above the area where service is performed.
In no case shall a wall sign exceed a sign height of 15 feet
above the existing grade or project above any cornice, roofline,
parapet wall or building facade. When a building has frontage
on more than one street, the sign area of all wall signs along
each street shall be limited by the amount of building frontage
along that street.
(c) Freestanding signs. Automobile dealerships shall be permitted
freestanding signs subject to the following regulations:
[1] Number and type.
[a] Primary ground sign. Each location shall be permitted
one freestanding ground sign for the purpose of
identification. Signs shall not exceed a sign area of 30
square feet or a sign height of 10 feet above mean
grade. Where a dealership has more than one street
frontage, one ground sign shall be permitted along
each street for the purpose of identification.
[b] Secondary ground sign. A second ground sign shall be
permitted only if used or pre-owned automobiles are
being offered for sale or if there are two or more
automobile makes being sold from the premises. Signs
shall not exceed a sign area of 30 square feet or a sign
height of 10 feet above mean grade.
[c] Distance between signs. A minimum street frontage of
100 feet shall be required between all ground signs.
[d] Location. Freestanding signs shall be located subject
to the requirements of Subsection C(5)(c).
[2] Sign content. Signs shall contain only the name of the
permitted use, business logo, address and/or telephone
number.
[3] Location. Freestanding signs shall be set back as required
by Subsection C(5)(c).
§ 280-122 RADNOR CODE § 280-122
C:1130
§ 280-123. Signs in Planned Business, Planned Laboratory Office,
Planned Institutional and Public Land Use Districts.
(8) Directional signs. Directional signs shall be permitted subject to
the following regulations: [Added 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
(a) Signs shall not exceed four square feet in sign area or a sign
height of three feet above existing grade. Signs may be
illuminated but shall not blink, flash or be animated. Trade
names and logo shall be permitted to the minimum extent
necessary.
(9) Instructional signs. Instructional signs shall be permitted subject to
the following regulations: [Added 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
(a) Signs shall not exceed 30 square feet in sign area or a sign
height of six feet above existing grade. Signs may be
illuminated but shall not blink, flash or be animated.
A. Sign area. The total sign area located on any one premises shall not
exceed 1 1/2 square feet for each linear foot of building frontage.
Nontemporary and temporary window signs shall be permitted only
within shopping centers and retail developments and shall be limited to
15% of the glass area.
B. Wall signs. Each building devoted solely to office use shall be permitted
one identification sign not to exceed 40 square feet in sign area. Where
a shopping center or retail use is permitted or integrated within a
planned development, each business shall be permitted one wall sign
not to exceed 60 square feet in sign area. In no case shall a wall sign be
higher than 15 feet above the existing grade or project above any
cornice, roofline, parapet wall or building facade. When a building has
frontage on more than one street, the sign area of all wall signs along
each street shall be limited by the amount of building frontage along
that street.
C. Awning signs. Awning signs shall be permitted subject to requirements
as set forth in § 280-122C(3).
D. Freestanding signs. For each office building, shopping center, mixed
use development, institution or other permitted use under one
ownership or control, one freestanding ground sign shall be permitted
for each street frontage and/or major point of ingress and egress,
provided that a minimum street frontage of 200 feet shall be required
between each sign.
(1) Area and height regulations. Signs shall not exceed a total sign
area of 75 square feet or exceed a sign height of 10 feet above
mean grade.
(2) Sign content. A freestanding sign shall contain only the name,
address, logo and/or telephone number of a permitted use.
§ 280-122 CHARTER § 280-123
C:1131
§ 280-124. Signs on nonconforming use premises.
Signs located on nonconforming use premises shall be limited to the sign
regulations of the district where the use is first permitted and shall be
subject to all other requirements of this chapter, provided that any
freestanding sign located on the premises shall be limited to a ground sign.
§ 280-125. General regulations.
The following restrictions and regulations shall be applicable to all
permanent signs as permitted by this article, unless otherwise specified:
(3) Location. Freestanding signs shall be located subject to the
requirements of § 280-122C(5)(c).
E. Real estate and development signs advertising the sale, rental or
development of premises, provided that:
(1) The sign area shall not exceed eight square feet and, if
freestanding, shall not exceed a sign height of eight feet above
mean grade.
(2) No more than one sign shall be erected for each 500 feet of street
frontage.
(3) Signs shall be nonilluminated and exempt from permit
requirements.
(4) Off-premises signs advertising the sale, rental or development of
premises shall be prohibited within these districts.
F. Directional signs. Directional signs shall be permitted in accordance
with § 280-122C(8). [Added 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
G. Instructional signs. Instructional signs shall be permitted in accordance
with § 280-122C(9). [Added 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
A. Materials.
(1) Signs shall be constructed only from wood, metal, stone or other
appropriate material which have the general appearance of
structures composed primarily of wood, metal or stone, with
painted, engraved or raised messages. Sign materials should be
consistent with and compliment the original construction materials
and architectural style of the building facade on which they are to
be displayed. For this reason, natural materials such as wood, stone
and metal are most appropriate. If plywood is used, medium
density overlay (MDO) shall be used as a minimum grade.
(2) Neon window signs. Neon window signs utilizing custom shapes,
designs and colors shall be permitted, provided that the signs
compliment and add character to the business establishment.
§ 280-123 RADNOR CODE § 280-125
C:1132
B. Lettering. Lettering styles should compliment the style and
architecture of the building on which they appear. Traditional block and
curvilinear styles which are easy to read are preferred.
C. Color. Each sign so erected shall contain a maximum of four colors,
including black and white. In selecting the principal colors for a sign,
colors which compliment the general tone of the building should be
used. Business logos shall not be included in determining the maximum
number of colors.
D. Illumination. Where permitted, signs shall be illuminated only as
authorized in an appropriate sign permit by a steady, stationary light of
reasonably minimal intensity. Light sources shall be shielded from all
adjacent properties and streets and shall not be of such intensity as to
cause glare hazardous to pedestrians or motorists. Signs using internal
illumination shall be designed so that when illuminated at night, only
the letters and logos of the sign are visible. No light shall emanate
through the background, the borders, sides or any other surface of the
sign or its supporting structure. Individual, solid letters with internal
lighting tubes which backlight a wall in a halo effect shall be permitted.
E. Electrical connections. The electrical supply to all exterior signs,
whether to the sign itself or to lighting fixtures positioned to illuminate
the sign, shall be provided by means of concealed electrical cables.
Electrical supply to freestanding signs shall be provided by means of
underground cables. Applications for electrical permits shall be filed at
the time of the sign permit application.
F. Nuisance. No sign shall create a public nuisance by emitting smoke,
sound, vapor, particle emission or odors.
G. Sign removal. Any sign which no longer advertises an existing business
conducted on the premises shall be removed by the owner of the sign.
The Zoning Officer, upon determining that such business operations
have ceased while a sign remains, shall notify the owner of the
premises, in writing, to remove said sign within 30 days from the date
of such notice. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the
prescribed period, the Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to remove or
cause removal of such sign and to collect the cost of such removal,
together with any penalties, from the owner in a manner provided by
law.
H. Signs on multiple tenant buildings. Where a permit is required for any
new sign, or change of existing signage in a multiple tenant building,
the Township shall have authority to require the owner of such building
to submit for approval a sign plan for the entire building. Such a plan
shall be submitted and approved prior to, or at the time of application
for any new or change of existing signage. All signs shall be consistent
with the plan, unless otherwise approved by the Design Review Board.
[Added 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
§ 280-125 CHARTER § 280-126
C:1133
§ 280-126. Nonconforming signs.
§ 280-127. Off-premises signs. [Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-12304]
A. All permitted signs relating to a single use existing at the effective date
of this article which are not in conformance with the provisions as set
forth herein shall be removed, altered or replaced so as to conform fully
with this article within three years from the effective date hereof.
B. Any business which has been established, which has been transferred
to a new owner or which has put up an approved sign within five years
prior to the effective date of this article shall be provided an additional
two years in which to comply with the provisions of this section,
provided that valid sign permits have been secured from the
Department of Community Development.
A. Off-premises signs shall be permitted within the following zoning
districts when authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board, subject to the general standards prescribed in § 280-145:
(1) The Wayne Business Overlay District (WBOD); and
(2) The C-3 Zoning District, provided that it has frontage on the
Amtrak/SEPTA right-of-way line.
B. In addition to permitted signs within commercial districts as set forth in
§ 280-122 of this chapter, only one off-premises sign may be erected per
parcel. Off-premises signs may only be permitted when authorized as a
special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the general
standards prescribed in § 280-145, and the Zoning Hearing Board may,
in approving any such special exception application, modify § 280-125A
and C as necessary to permit a reasonable use of a property for an offpremises
sign under this article.
C. Off-premises signs may be permanent, freestanding signs erected upon
the ground or may be erected upon, applied to, attached to and/or
supported by a building or other structure. No painted off-premises
signs are permitted.
D. Setbacks.
(1) Within the WBOD District, no off-premises signs, or part thereof,
shall be erected or maintained closer than 100 feet from any
adjacent residential zoning district.
(2) Within the C-3 Zoning District, as described in Subsection A of this
section, the setback for off-premises signs shall be 100 feet from
any adjacent residential zoning district and a minimum of 20 feet
from the Amtrak/SEPTA right-of-way line.
304. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§ 280-127, 280-128 and 280-129
as §§ 280-128, 280-129 and 280-129.1, respectively.
§ 280-126 RADNOR CODE § 280-127
C:1134
§ 280-128. Permits.
(3) No off-premises sign shall be located within the right-of-way of any
street and shall be set back a minimum distance of 10 feet from the
street cartway. No signs shall be so located as to present a hazard
to motorists or pedestrians,
E. No off-premises signs shall be located closer than 100 feet to any other
off-premises outdoor advertising sign, such measurement to be made
between the two nearest points located on any portion of the signs.
F. No off-premises sign shall be permitted to exceed a maximum area of 64
square feet, including border and trim, but excluding supports. A sign
having two identical or different signs back-to-back or a V-shaped sign
with a horizontal angle not greater than 45º is permitted to have a
maximum area of 64 square feet on each side for a total maximum area
of 128 square feet.
G. No off-premises sign, or part thereof, shall be taller than 15 feet if a
freestanding sign as measured from existing grade and no taller than
15 feet if erected upon, applied to, attached to and/or supported by a
building or other structure.
H. An off-premises sign structure may contain only one sign or
advertisement per face.
I. Lighting. Off-premises signs shall conform to the lighting standards as
set forth in § 280-125D.
J. No revolving or electronic off-premises signs, including, but not limited
to, flashing signs, signs with intermittent illumination, signs with
mechanically or electronically changing messages, or electronic digital
signs, shall be permitted. No mobile off-premises signs shall be
permitted.
K. Design Review Board. All off-premises sign applications shall be
reviewed for a recommendation by the Design Review Board prior to
special exception application to the Zoning Hearing Board.
L. All off premises signs shall be maintained in good condition. The
structural components of the sign shall be maintained to ensure their
integrity and to prevent the possible collapse of the sign. Any damage to
the structural components shall be repaired within 24 hours. Signs
having ripped, defaced or partial advertisements shall be immediately
repaired by having the advertisement restored to its original condition,
removed or covered.
A. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to erect, alter, repair or relocate any sign within the Township of
Radnor without first obtaining a sign permit, unless such sign is
specifically exempt from the permit requirements.
§ 280-127 CHARTER § 280-128
C:1135
§ 280-129. Structural requirements, maintenance and illumination.
B. Application for permit. Application for sign permits shall be made upon
forms provided by the Director of Community Development and shall
contain and/or have attached the following information where relevant:
(1) Name, address, telephone number and signature of the owner or
duly authorized agent for the property owner.
(2) Name, address, telephone number and signature of the owner of
the sign.
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the sign contractor.
(4) Two copies of a plan drawn to scale depicting:
(a) Lot dimensions, building frontage and existing cartways,
rights-of-way and driveways.
(b) Design of each sign face and sign structure with dimensions,
total area, sign height, depth, color scheme, structural details,
materials, lighting scheme and proposed location.
(c) Building elevations, existing and proposed facades, parapet
walls, cornices and the location and size of all proposed and
existing permanent signage, including wall signs, window
signs, projecting signs and freestanding signs.
(5) Current photographs showing existing signs on the premises and
certifying the date on which photographs were taken.
(6) Such other information which may be required by the Director of
Community Development to show full compliance with this and all
other ordinances of the Township.
C. Design review. Upon submission of an application for a sign permit,
such application may be referred by the Director of Community
Development to the Design Review Board. The Design Review Board
shall review the application to ensure compliance with the provisions
and intent of this article.
A. No sign or sign structure shall be erected unless it complies with all
applicable requirements of Chapter 255, Building Construction.
B. Permits for illuminated signs shall not be submitted for review unless
an application is filed concurrently for an electrical permit. All work
shall be completed in full compliance with the Electrical Code as set
forth in Chapter 156, Electrical Standards, of the Code of the Township
of Radnor.
C. All signs and sign structures shall be kept in good repair and in a
presentable condition, such that all sign information is clearly legible.
Any sign found to show deterioration, including rust, faded colors,
§ 280-128 RADNOR CODE § 280-129
C:1136
§ 280-129.1. Violations and penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements of
this article or who fails to or refuses to comply with any notice, order
or direction of the Director of Community Development made hereinunder
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall pay a fine to
the Township of Radnor of not less than $100 nor more than $500 plus costs
of prosecution. Each day during which any violation of this article continues
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
discoloration, holes and missing parts or information items, shall
constitute a violation of this article.
§ 280-129 CHARTER § 280-129.1
C:1137

ARTICLE XXII
Administration
§ 280-130. Enforcing authority. [Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No.
90-48]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer, who shall be appointed
by and meet the qualifications established by the Board of Commissioners.
It shall be his duty to:
§ 280-130.1. New or undefined uses. [Added 8-20-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-06]
Residential or nonresidential uses not specifically defined in the use
regulations of the various zoning districts of this chapter may evolve after
the enactment of this chapter or may have been uses not commonly
permitted, defined, or in use at the time of the enactment of this chapter.
Such uses, if determined to be reasonable, appropriate, and/or legitimate
uses, must be provided for in this chapter, and it is the purpose of this
section to provide for all reasonable and legitimate uses, and to establish a
mechanism for including such uses within the appropriate zoning district of
the Township.
A. Enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Accept applications for permits.
C. Issue permits.
A. The landowner, equitable or otherwise, shall submit a zoning
determination request to the Township Zoning Officer for inclusion of a
specific use within the Zoning Ordinance, along with illustrations and
explanatory information which fully describe the proposed use and the
manner in which the proposed use is substantially different from uses
currently permitted and specifically defined in this chapter.
B. Upon receipt of the foregoing request, the Zoning Officer shall make a
determination as to whether or not the proposed use fits within any
currently permitted and defined uses within this chapter. If the Zoning
Officer determines that the use is not adequately defined or permitted,
he/she shall render an opinion as to which zoning district the use shall
be permitted in accordance with the criteria set forth in Subsections C
and D of this section. In making the foregoing determination, the
Zoning Officer may submit the request to the Planning Commission for
an advisory opinion.
C. All legitimate residential or nonresidential uses not specifically or
adequately described in this chapter shall be allowed in the following
zoning districts based on the class of uses the proposed use falls under:
(1) Residential uses shall only be allowed in the R-6 or PA Districts.
Institutional uses shall only be allowed in the PI District.
§ 280-130 CHARTER § 280-130.1
C:1139
§ 280-131. Permits.
(2) Office, commercial or consumer service uses shall only be allowed
in the PB District, provided that the proposed site for such use has
road frontage along Lancaster Avenue.
(3) Industrial uses shall only be allowed in the PB or PLO Districts.
D. Once the requested use has been provided for through the allowance of
this use in the designated zoning district by the Zoning Officer, such use
shall meet the density, area, dimensional and other requirements of that
district and shall only be approved as a conditional use pursuant to
§ 280-134 of this chapter. Such use shall also meet the parking
requirements established in § 280-103 of this chapter.
A. Requirement. A permit shall be required prior to the erection or
alteration of any building, structure or portion thereof, prior to the use
or change in use of a building or land and prior to the change or
extension of a nonconforming use.
B. Application. Applications for permits shall be made to the Township on
such forms as may be furnished by the Township. Each application shall
contain all information necessary to ascertain whether the proposed
erection, alteration, use or change in use complies with the provisions
of this chapter.
C. Issuance. No building or use permit shall be issued until the Zoning
Officer has certified that the proposed building or alteration and the
proposed use of the property complies with all the provisions of this
chapter.
D. Prior to the issuance of any zoning permit: [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-04]
(1) The Building Permit Officer shall review the application for the
permit to determine if all other necessary government permits
required by state and federal laws have been obtained, such as
those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act
1966-537, as amended);305 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);306 the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);307
and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33, U.S.C. 1344. No
permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the Township
305. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
306. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
307. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 280-130.1 RADNOR CODE § 280-131
C:1140
§ 280-132. Special regulations for planned districts.
In establishing or developing a Planned Apartment, Planned Business or
Planned Laboratory-Office District, the following special requirements shall
apply:
§ 280-133. Application of regulations.
After the date of adoption of the Zoning Map and of this chapter, with
any changes or amendments thereto, no building or premises or any part
thereof shall be used or maintained for any purpose other than a use
permitted by this chapter, with any changes or amendments thereto, and
no building shall be erected, enlarged or maintained except in conformity
and until all required permits or approvals have been first obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(3) In addition, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development shall be notified by the Township prior to any
alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
A. A request for amendment or, in the case of an area designated as in PA,
PB or PLO District, prior to a specific request, an application for a
building or use permit involving a use other than a single-family
dwelling or a unified group of buildings, shall be accompanied by:
(1) A plan or plans for the integrated or overall development of the
tract of land or district for which an application is made, which
shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 255, Subdivision of
Land, and be subject to review by the Planning Commission and
approval by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with
provisions of Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land.
(2) Sufficient data in all instances to enable the Township to determine
that the proposed plan and use comply with the requirements of the
district and any other pertinent requirements of this chapter.
B. Compliance with plan. Following the issuance of a permit for
construction and use in accordance with approved plans, no change,
deviation or alteration shall thereafter be permitted except when
authorized by the Board of Commissioners upon written application,
which application shall be in the nature of an original application for a
permit. If the lot or tract for which the development has been approved
is sold, the original conditions upon which approval was granted shall
be fulfilled by the new owners.
C. Renewal of approval. If construction of an approved planned
development is not undertaken within 18 months from the time that
approval was last granted by the Board of Commissioners, the
application for development must be reviewed and renewal of approval
must be obtained.
§ 280-131 CHARTER § 280-133
C:1141
with the regulations prescribed by this chapter, with any changes or
amendments thereto, for the district in which the building is located.
Existing nonconforming uses and nonconforming buildings are exempt from
these provisions to the extent provided in § 280-101.
§ 280-133 RADNOR CODE § 280-133
C:1142
ARTICLE XXIII
Conditional Uses
[Added 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 90-20]
§ 280-134. Intent.
This chapter provides for certain uses to be permitted within the Township
as conditional uses. In so providing, the Board of Commissioners recognizes
that these uses may or may not be appropriate at every location within
any specific district and, accordingly, has established standards and criteria
by which it can evaluate and decide upon applications for such uses. It is
intended that these uses, constituting major uses having the potential for
substantial impact upon the community, shall comply with the standards
for conditional uses hereinafter set forth, in addition to the relevant
stipulations of the district in which the conditional use is authorized. In
the sole discretion of the Board of Commissioners, failure to comply with
these standards may be deemed a basis for denial or for the imposition of
appropriate conditions upon a grant of approval. Where there is a conflict
between the standards set forth in this article and other standards
elsewhere established by this chapter or other applicable ordinances, it is
intended that the more stringent standards shall apply, and it is not the
intent of this article to abrogate or impair any other such standards or
requirements.
§ 280-135. Application submission and content.
A. It shall be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate compliance with
the standards for conditional use contained in this article and with any
other relevant stipulations of this chapter and to indicate means by
which potential impacts from the proposed use will be mitigated.
B. An application for conditional use approval shall be submitted on a form
provided by or otherwise acceptable to the Township and shall be
accompanied by an application fee, the amount of which shall be
established by ordinance enacted by the Board of Commissioners.
C. A generalized site plan shall be submitted as part of any conditional use
application. It is not intended that such a plan be engineered or contain
a fixed architectural layout, such as would be required under Chapter
255, Subdivision of Land. The plan shall, however, demonstrate
compliance with all applicable standards for approval of the conditional
use, including those cited in Subsection F below.
D. The scale of the generalized site plan shall be one inch equals 50 feet.
E. Where specific conditional use submission requirements are contained
within another Article of this chapter and are applicable to a particular
conditional use authorized by that Article, those requirements shall be
adhered to and shall prevail in any instance of conflict or overlap.
§ 280-134 CHARTER § 280-135
C:1143
F. In addition to demonstrating compliance with all standards applicable
to the conditional use being requested, the generalized site plan shall
show the applicant's intentions with regard to the following:
(1) Site access, interior circulation and parking.
(2) Location, approximate dimension and arrangement of all areas
devoted to ground cover, trees, screening and buffering, other
planting, open space, recreation and similar purposes, as
applicable.
(3) Adequate handling of stormwater, in the form of a preliminary
written analysis and conclusions as to anticipated methods,
prepared by a registered professional engineer.
(4) Location, planned uses, approximate overall dimensions, gross
floor area, coverage and height of each building or structure.
G. Development impact statement. [Added 3-31-2014 by Ord. No.
2013-21]
(1) For any application filed pursuant to Article XXIII of this chapter, a
development impact statement shall be submitted with the
application. To ensure that a proposed use will not have an adverse
effect upon the natural features of the site, as well as upon the
provision of light and air, water, transportation, police and fire
protection, schools, utilities and other public facilities, the Board of
Commissioners and the Township Planning Commission shall
evaluate the impact of the development upon the site, the
surrounding neighborhood, and the facilities and services of
Radnor Township as listed below. The applicant shall provide all of
the information, data and studies needed to fully evaluate these
items. Such statement shall contain the following:
(a) An analysis of the consistency of the proposed use with the
Radnor Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended. The
analysis shall include, but not be limited to, the compatibility
with environmental and natural resources; housing,
demographics, and socioeconomics; business and economic
development; transportation and circulation plan; open space
and recreation; historical and archaeological resources;
community services and facilities; and the land use plan
sections of the Comprehensive Plan.
(b) The impact of the proposed use on floodplains, waterways,
heavily wooded areas, steep slopes, and other sensitive natural
features located upon and adjacent to the site, if any.
(c) The proposed use's impact on the Township and regional
transportation system(s) and the ability of adjacent streets and
intersections to efficiently and safely handle the traffic
generated by the proposed development. This analysis shall
§ 280-135 RADNOR CODE § 280-135
C:1144
include all modes of transportation and shall be based on
current Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) requirements within their Policies and Procedures
for Transportation Impact Studies (PennDOT Strike-off Letter
470-09-4, dated 2009, as amended). The applicant shall
address any measures proposed to be implemented in order to
mitigate any adverse impacts.
(d) The proposed use's impact on the Radnor School District,
including an estimate of new pupils generated by the proposed
development.
(e) The proposed use's impact on nearby commercial facilities
within the Township and surrounding municipalities.
(f) The proposed use's impact on public utilities, including but not
limited to sewage disposal, water supply, storm drainage, and
electrical utilities.
(g) The proposed use's impact upon the provision of police and fire
protection.
(h) The proposed use's impact on the Township's open space and
recreation facilities.
(i) The proposed use's impact upon the character of the
surrounding neighborhood. The applicant must show the
proposed development will not adversely affect the
surrounding neighborhood and what measures are proposed to
mitigate any potential impacts.
(j) An analysis of the proposed use's fiscal impacts upon the
county, Township, and school district.
(2) Required documentation for the statement shall include the
following, if applicable:
(a) A conditional use plan for the proposed development,
identifying all proposed uses to be located on the site, and
demonstrating compliance with the area, bulk and dimensional
requirements for the proposed use. The conditional use plan
shall be submitted in the form of a sketch plan containing the
information required by § 255-19 of the Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.
(b) The applicant shall provide conceptual architectural
renderings (perspectives and elevations) of the proposed
development.
(c) The location and size of the site, with evidence supporting the
general adequacy for development.
§ 280-135 CHARTER § 280-135
C:1145
§ 280-136. Application review procedure.
(d) The proposed residential density of the development and the
percentage mix of the various dwelling types.
(e) The location, size, accessibility and proposed use of the open
space, manner of ownership and maintenance, and a copy of
the covenant to be incorporated in the individual deeds, if
applicable.
(f) Conceptual landscape plans showing locations of trees and
shrubs and other landscape improvements (e.g., berms,
fences) as necessary to mitigate the adverse visual impacts
which the proposed actions will have on the property, adjoining
properties and the Township in general. This shall include
improvements to the streetscape adjacent to the property
boundaries.
(g) Conceptual plans of proposed utility and drainage systems.
(h) A phasing plan describing how the proposed development will
be implemented (if applicable).
(i) Plans and renderings indicating the design, unity and aesthetic
relationship of building and landscaping within the proposed
development with that of the surrounding area.
(j) The text of covenants, easements and existing restrictions or
those to be imposed upon the land or structure, including
provisions for public utilities, and trails for such activities as
hiking or bicycling, if applicable.
A. The application shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer. If it is deficient
with regard to any required components, procedures or fees, the
Zoning Officer shall so notify the applicant. This review and notification
shall occur prior to the scheduling of a public hearing on the
application. If such identified deficiencies are not remedied in the form
of a resubmitted application, such deficiencies shall constitute potential
grounds for denial of the application by the Board of Commissioners,
subsequent to public hearing.
B. The Board of Commissioners shall schedule and hold a public hearing
on the application, pursuant to public notice, within 60 days of filing,
unless the applicant, in writing, waives or extends the time limitation.
C. At least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, one copy of the
application shall be furnished to the Township Planning Commission.
The Board shall request that the Planning Commission submit
recommendations to the Board for consideration within a time frame
established by the Board for reaching a final decision on the
application. The Planning Commission, in its review of the conditional
use application, shall evaluate, in particular, the generalized site plan in
§ 280-135 RADNOR CODE § 280-136
C:1146
§ 280-137. Standards for approval.
relation to the Township Comprehensive Plan and the physical
development of the Township.
D. A stenographic record of the hearing proceedings shall be made by a
court reporter. Any party requesting the original transcript or a copy of
the transcript shall bear the cost of the same.
E. Upon review of the application in terms of the standards and criteria of
this chapter, the Board of Commissioners shall render a decision within
45 days of completion of the public hearing process.
F. In approving a conditional use application, where such use is
authorized under this chapter, the Board of Commissioners may, at its
sole discretion, attach such conditions to its approval as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. Such conditions may
include, but need not be limited to:
(1) Specific modifications to otherwise applicable area and bulk
requirements.
(2) Provisions for additional utility or traffic safety facilities.
(3) Securing of additional easements or property to assure proper site
design.
(4) Modification to the applicable design standards.
G. If the Board of Commissioners approves the application and
accompanying generalized site plan, such approved plan shall
accompany any application for subdivision or land development as
prescribed by Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land, in addition to the
detailed working drawings normally required, and any application for a
building permit. The issuance or rejection of a building permit shall
take place in the regularly prescribed manner herein pertaining to
building permits, but shall be preceded by compliance with Chapter
255, Subdivision of Land.
H. Any grant of conditional use approval shall be deemed null and void six
months from the date of such approval if, within that period, no
application is made for a building permit, a use and occupancy permit
or subdivision or land development approval, as appropriate, unless the
Board of Commissioners shall grant an extension.
A. The following standards shall be used by the Township as a guide in
evaluating and acting upon any application for conditional use
approval:
(1) The proposed use shall meet all of the specific standards and
regulations for eligibility which are contained in the section of this
article that authorizes the proposed conditional use.
§ 280-136 CHARTER § 280-137
C:1147
(2) The proposed use shall meet the standards set forth in § 280-145
that otherwise apply to the review of special exception and
variance applications.
B. The Board of Commissioners shall weigh each case on its own merits,
separately, based upon pertinent information presented or known to it
and without regard to any previous case.
§ 280-137 RADNOR CODE § 280-137
C:1148
ARTICLE XXIV
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 280-138. Appointment. [Amended 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 84-12;
2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 89-05; 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-48]
There shall be a Zoning Hearing Board consisting of five members and
up to but no more than three alternate members, all of whom shall be
residents of Radnor Township and appointed by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners in accordance with Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.) as amended,
hereinafter called "code."
§ 280-139. Powers.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall function in strict accordance with and
pursuant to the code and shall have all powers set forth therein, including
but not limited to the following:
§ 280-140. Rules and procedure.
The Zoning Hearing Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for
its procedure, including but not limited to the manner of filing appeals and
applications for special exceptions and variances.
A. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that the Township Zoning
Officer has failed to follow prescribed procedures or has misinterpreted
or misapplied any provision of a valid ordinance or map of the Township
or any valid rule or regulation governing the action of the Zoning
Officer.
B. To hear and decide requests for special exceptions authorized by this
chapter in accordance with the standards or criteria set forth in
§ 280-145 hereof. The Zoning Hearing Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of the code and this chapter.
C. To hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions of
this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. A variance
may be granted only after the Zoning Hearing Board has made the
findings required in 53 P.S. § 10910.2. In granting a variance, the
Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the
code and this chapter.
D. To conduct hearings and make such decisions and findings in
connection with challenges to the validity of any provision of this
chapter, as authorized by 53 P.S. § 10910.
§ 280-138 CHARTER § 280-141
C:1149
§ 280-141. Meetings.
Meetings of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and at such other times as the Zoning Hearing Board may
determine. The Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of
the Zoning Hearing Board shall be open to the public. The Zoning Hearing
Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions,
all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Township and
shall be a public record. In accordance with Section 908 of the code,308 the
Zoning Hearing Board shall not communicate directly or indirectly with any
party nor take notice of any material nor inspect any site except as provided
therein.
§ 280-142. Appeals and requests. [Amended 11-11-1985 by Ord. No.
85-33; 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-48; 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-18;
2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-06]
A. Appeals. Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board may be filed by the
landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Township or any person
aggrieved. Such appeals shall comply with requirements and
information for appeals approved by the Board and filed with the
Zoning Officer 30 calendar days prior to the hearing. Prior to a public
hearing, the Zoning Officer shall transmit to members of the Zoning
Hearing Board a copy of the application and documents constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. Planning Commission review. Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board that
will involve the subdivision of land or land development pursuant to
Chapter 255, Subdivision of Land, shall be forwarded to the Planning
Commission prior to a public hearing for review. The Planning
Commission may review the application and related documents as a
sketch plan and provide comments to the Zoning Hearing Board
consistent with § 280-1 of the Zoning Code. Notice of the Planning
Commission meeting shall be forwarded to the applicant seven days
prior to the scheduled meeting. Failure by the Planning Commission to
review an application or provide comments shall not invalidate action
taken by the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. Records. A stenographic record of the public hearing proceedings shall
be made by a court reporter. The appearance fee shall be shared
equally by the applicant and the Board. Any party requesting the
original transcript or a copy of the transcript shall bear the cost of
same. Copies of graphic or written material received in evidence shall
be made available to any party at cost.
308. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
§ 280-141 RADNOR CODE § 280-142
C:1150
D. Fees. Fees shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners and charged in accordance with Chapter 162, Fees, of
the Township Code.
E. Request for continuance. Upon receipt of a written request, or a verbal
request from the applicant at the time of the hearing, the Zoning
Hearing Board may authorize the continuance of an application. Such
request shall be made before the Board during a scheduled meeting. In
the event that the Board shall grant any request for a continuance, then
the Board shall specify a date not more than 180 days from the date the
continuance is granted upon which the continuance shall expire and the
appeal be heard. The Board may grant more than one continuance for
any appeal, provided that individual continuances shall not exceed a
period of 180 days per continuance. Where a continuance is granted the
appeal shall be scheduled as required by Subsections F and G of this
section, provided that the applicant shall pay any continuance fee per
Chapter 162, Fees, of the Township Code.
F. Zoning Hearing Board notice. The Board shall give notice of the public
hearing as follows:
(1) By giving public notice as defined in § 280-4B of this chapter.
(2) By providing notice to the applicant, Board of Commissioners,
Township Manager, Township Solicitor, and any other person who
has made timely request for same.
(3) By posting written notice of said hearing in a conspicuous location
on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
(4) By mailing written notice thereof to the Zoning Officer, applicant,
and every resident or association of residents of the Township who
shall have registered their names and addresses for this purpose
with the Zoning Hearing Board. The Board of Commissioners may
fix an annual fee for provisions of notices to such registered
persons or associations.
G. Notice to residents. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided by
the applicant as follows: The agenda notice shall be sent by the
applicant to the owners of property located within an area of 500 feet of
the lot in question, provided that for appeals within the AC or R-1
Zoning Districts notification shall be provided within an area of 1,000
feet from the property in question. Where a public hearing involves a
multifamily dwelling, notice shall be provided to all individual tenants
of the premises. Notices shall be forwarded not less than 10 days prior
to the hearing using Radnor Township return address envelopes and
labels provided by the Township. Proof of said mailing on United States
Postal Service Form 3877 shall be delivered to the Township not less
than three days prior to the hearing. Failure by the owner to receive
notice when sent in compliance with this subsection shall not invalidate
any action taken by the Board.
§ 280-142 CHARTER § 280-142
C:1151
§ 280-143. (Reserved)309
§ 280-144. Expiration of special exceptions and variances.
Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Hearing Board, a special
exception or variance which has been authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a building or use permit
within six months from the date of authorization thereof or fails to
commence a substantial amount of work within six months from the date of
issuance of the permit for such work.
§ 280-145. Standards for review of special exceptions and
variances. [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 89-18]
In any instance where the Zoning Hearing Board is required to consider a
request for a special exception or variance, the Zoning Hearing Board must
determine that the following standards and criteria are met before granting
the request:
H. Decisions. The Board shall render a decision, in writing, within 45 days
after the hearing or, if said hearing is continued, within 45 days after
the continued hearing. Where required by Section 908(9) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code or otherwise under
Pennsylvania law, each written decision shall be accompanied by
findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, together with the
reasons therefor. If the Board does not make a written decision within
45 days of the hearing or continued hearing, it shall be deemed that the
Zoning Hearing Board has decided in favor of the applicant. Any party
may appear at a public hearing in person or by agent or attorney.
A. The size, scope, extent and character of the special exception or
variance requested is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the
Township and promotes the harmonious and orderly development of the
zoning district involved. [Amended 11-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-20]
B. The proposed change or modification constitutes an appropriate use
consistent with the character and type of development in the area
surrounding the location for which the request is made and will not
substantially injure or detract from the use of surrounding property or
the character of the neighborhood in light of the zoning classification of
the area affected; the effect on other properties in the area; the number,
extent and scope of nonconforming uses in the area; and the presence
or the absence in the neighborhood of conditions or uses which are the
same or similar in character to the condition or use for which the
applicant seeks approval.
309. Editor's Note: Former § 280-143, Hearings, as amended, was repealed 2-27-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-06.
§ 280-142 RADNOR CODE § 280-145
C:1152
C. The proposed use is suitable with respect to traffic and highways in the
area and provides for adequate access and off-street parking
arrangements in order to protect major streets and highways from
undue congestion and hazard.
D. Major street and highway frontage will be developed so as to limit the
total number of access points and encourage the frontage of buildings
on parallel marginal roads or on roads perpendicular to the major street
or highway.
E. The proposed change is reasonable in terms of the logical, efficient and
economical extension of public services and facilities, such as public
water, sewers, police, fire protection and public schools, and assures
adequate arrangements for sanitation in specific instances.
F. All commercial or industrial parking, loading, access or service areas
will be adequately illuminated at night while in use and arranged so as
to comply with the requirements of § 280-105.
G. If the proposed use is to be developed in progressive stages, each stage
shall be planned so that the conditions and intent of this chapter shall
be fully complied with upon the completion of any stage. [Added
5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 90-21]
H. Conditions are being imposed on the grant of the request necessary to
ensure that the general purpose and intent of this chapter is complied
with and that the use of the property adjacent to the area included in
the proposed change or modification is adequately safeguarded with
respect to harmonious design of buildings, aesthetics, planting and its
maintenance as a sight or sound screen, landscaping, hours of
operation, lighting, numbers of persons involved, allied activities,
ventilation, noise, sanitation, safety, smoke and fume control and the
minimizing of noxious, offensive or hazardous elements.
I. The proposed change protects and promotes the safety, health, morals
and general welfare of the Township.
§ 280-145 CHARTER § 280-145
C:1153

ARTICLE XXV
Amendments
§ 280-146. Power of amendment.
The Board of Township Commissioners may from time to time amend,
supplement, change, modify or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning
Map, by proceeding in the manner indicated in this article.
§ 280-147. Notice of public hearing on proposed amendments.
[Amended 5-23-1983 by Ord. No. 83-18; 6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
90-26; 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-48; 4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-03]
The Board of Commissioners shall, during a public meeting, fix the time and
place of a public hearing on a proposed zoning amendment and cause notice
thereof to be given as follows:
§ 280-148. Township and County Planning Commission referral.
[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-48]
A. By publishing a legal notice thereof once a week for two consecutive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the Township as
provided for in § 9.02 of the Home Rule Charter. Such notice shall state
the date, place, time and particular nature to be considered at the
public hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and
the second publication shall not be less than seven days from the public
hearing.
B. By mailing a notice thereof to contiguous municipalities, the Township
school district and residents or associations of residents within the
Township who have registered their names and addresses for this
purpose with the Department of Community Development. The Board of
Commissioners may fix an annual fee for provisions of notices to such
registered persons or associations.
C. Where the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice
of the public hearing shall be mailed to every property to be affected
and to every property in the Township which is located on the same
street and is within 1,000 feet of the land in question and to every
property not on the same street within 500 feet of said land. Notice of
the public hearing shall also be posted in conspicuous locations along
street frontages of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens.
Such notices shall be posted at least one week prior to the hearing.
A. Any proposed amendment, other than one originated by the Township
Planning Commission, shall be referred by the Board, at least 30 days
prior to the hearing on the amendment, to the Township Planning
Commission. That Commission shall consider whether or not the
proposed amendment would be, in its view, consistent with the
desirable in furtherance of the plan therein referred to for future land
use. The Township Planning Commission shall transmit its conclusion
§ 280-146 CHARTER § 280-148
C:1155
§ 280-149. Citizens' petition for amendment. [Amended 10-22-1990
by Ord. No. 90-48]
Whenever the owners of 50% or more of the frontage in any district or
part thereof wherein a change of zoning regulations is sought shall present
to the Board of Township Commissioners a petition duly signed and
acknowledged requesting an amendment, supplement, change,
modification or repeal of the regulations prescribed for or of the Zoning
Map including such district or part thereof, it shall be the duty of the Board
of Commissioners to hold a public hearing thereon and cause notice thereof
to be given in a manner prescribed in § 280-147.
§ 280-150. Application fees and deposits. [Added 10-22-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-48]
Applicants to the Board of Commissioners on the amendment, change or
modification to the provisions of this chapter shall, upon filing of such
application, pay the appropriate fee established by the Township for such
application. In addition to the payment of said filing fee, such applicant
shall, at the time, deposit the appropriate sum established by the Township
for each application to cover the costs of advertising and aforesaid notice,
appropriate share of stenographic service and any other expense incurred
in connection with such application; provided, however, that if the total
of the aforesaid costs and expenses incurred in connection with such
application shall be less than the amount paid by the applicant, the excess
of the deposit over the total of the aforesaid costs and expenses shall be
refunded to the applicant. In no event shall any of the filing fee be refunded.
§ 280-151. Residents' rights at hearing. [Amended 10-22-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-48]
At any public hearing on a proposed amendment, full opportunity to be
heard shall be given to any resident of the Township and all parties in
interest.
thereon, together with its reasons therefor, to the Board. The Board
shall take such conclusion and reasons into consideration in reaching
its decision, but shall not be bound thereby.
B. All proposed amendments shall be submitted by the Board to the
Delaware County Planning Department for review and comment, in
accordance with the terms of Article VI of the Municipalities Planning
Code.310 The Board shall not act upon the proposed amendment until a
report is received from the County Planning Department or the time
period for such a response has elapsed. The Board shall not be bound by
the recommendations of the County Planning Department.
310. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10603.1 et seq.
§ 280-148 RADNOR CODE § 280-152
C:1156
§ 280-152. Requirements for planned development. [Amended
10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-48]
Applications to create a Planned Apartment, Planned Business or Planned
Laboratory-Office District shall comply with the plan requirements of
§ 280-132.
§ 280-153. Curative amendments. [Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-48]
Any landowner who desires to submit a curative amendment may do so
pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Code, Article VI, Section 609.1, and Article IX, Section 916.1.311
§ 280-154. Enactment of amendments. [Added 10-22-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-48]
A. In the event that substantial amendments are made to the proposed
amendment, then the Board, at least 10 days prior to the scheduled vote
on enactment, shall readvertise, in a newspaper of general circulation
within the Township, a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail, together with a summary of the proposed
amendments. The Board also shall readvertise any proposed
amendment where the scheduled date of enactment is more than 60
days following the date of the last advertisement of the proposed
amendment.
B. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment shall be
forwarded to the Delaware County Planning Department.
311. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1.
§ 280-152 CHARTER § 280-154
C:1157

ARTICLE XXVI
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
[Amended 9-22-1990 by Ord. No. 80-21; 8-11-1986 by Ord. No.
86-35; 3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 89-07; 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-48]
§ 280-155. Violations.
It shall be a violation of this chapter to undertake any action which is
contrary to the terms of this chapter, including but not limited to the failure
to obtain a permit as stipulated in § 280-131.
§ 280-156. Enforcement notice.
§ 280-157. Causes of action.
A. When it appears to the Zoning Officer that a violation of this chapter
has occurred, enforcement proceedings shall be initiated by sending an
enforcement notice. By means of the enforcement notice, the Zoning
Officer may order discontinuance of illegal use of land or structure;
removal of illegal structures or additions, alterations or structural
changes thereto; or discontinuance of any illegal work being done.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel
and to any other person requested, in writing, by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall, at minimum, state the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation, with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board, in accordance with the procedures set forth
in this chapter.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
A. Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint,
§ 280-155 CHARTER § 280-157
C:1159
§ 280-158. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which have violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being
found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the District Justice determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there
was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been
only one such violation until the fifth (5th) day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. Thereafter, each day that
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments,
costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this chapter
shall be paid over to the Township.
stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the Zoning
Officer. He shall record properly such complaint, investigate and take
action thereon.
B. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed to
be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained
or used in violation of this chapter, the Board of Commissioners or the
Zoning Officer or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who
shows that his property or person will be substantially affected by the
alleged violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate
such building, structure, landscaping or other growth or land or to
prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use
constituting a violation.
C. Where any action authorized in Subsection B above is instituted by a
landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the
Township at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun, by
serving a copy of the complaint upon the Board of Commissioners. No
such action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
§ 280-157 RADNOR CODE § 280-158
C:1160
ARTICLE XXVII
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-48]
§ 280-159. Fees and expenses.312
§ 280-160. Municipal liability.
The granting of any permit under this chapter shall create no liability upon
nor a cause of action against any Township official or employee for damages
or injury that may occur from the use, construction or enlargement of
structures or the use of land.
A. Permit applications. Fees for permit applications shall be paid in
accordance with a fee schedule adopted by ordinance of the Board of
Commissioners. Such schedule may be revised, as necessary, by
ordinance of the Board of Commissioners.
B. Application or appeals before the Board of Commissioners or Zoning
Hearing Board. Upon submission of an application or appeal before
either the Board of Commissioners or the Zoning Hearing Board, the
applicant shall deposit an amount of money in accordance with a fee
schedule adopted by ordinance of the Board of Commissioners. The
Zoning Officer shall have the discretion to determine in which category
an application falls and, therefore, what amount is due.
312. Editor's Note: See Chapter 162, Fees.
§ 280-159 CHARTER § 280-160
C:1161

ARTICLE XXVIII
Wireless Communications Systems
[Added 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-06]
§ 280-161. Intent.
The intent of this article is to:
§ 280-162. Applicability.
No wireless communication facility shall be erected or installed except in
compliance with the provisions of this article, provided that:
§ 280-163. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANTENNA ARRAY — One or more dipoles, panels (discs) or similar devices
used for the transmission of or reception of radio frequency signals, which
A. Provide for a range of locations for wireless communication facilities in
zoning districts within the Township.
B. Provide clear performance standards and review requirements
addressing the installation and maintenance of wireless communication
facilities.
C. Encourage the location of wireless communication facilities on existing
buildings, structures and other appropriate structures.
D. Encourage the collocation and site sharing of new and existing wireless
communication facilities.
E. Ensure that wireless communication facilities will be safe and blend
into their environment to the greatest extent possible.
F. Establish guidelines and standards for the installation of wireless
communication facilities with the right-of-way.
G. Comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
A. Wireless communication facilities for which a permit has been issued
prior to the effective date of this article shall not be required to meet
the minimum requirements of this article.
B. This article shall not govern the installation of any amateur radio
facility that is owned by a federally licensed amateur radio station
operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas.
C. This article shall supersede all conflicting requirements of other codes
and ordinances regarding the location and permitting of wireless
communication facilities.
§ 280-161 CHARTER § 280-163
C:1163
may include omnidirectional dipole, directional antenna (panel) and
parabolic antenna disc. The antenna array shall not include the support
structure.
APPLICATION — The process by which a person submits a request to
develop, construct, build, modify or erect a wireless communication facility.
Application shall include all written documentation, verbal statements and
representations, in whatever form or forum required by the applicant to
determine compliance with the provisions of this article.
ATTACHMENT STRUCTURE — Any building or structure suitable for the
support of a wireless communication facility but which has been designed
and used for other purposes.
BASE STATION (MICROCELL-TYPE) — Wireless communication facilities
consisting of an array that is either no more than four feet in height with an
area of not more than 580 square inches or, if a tubular antenna, no more
than four inches in diameter and no more than six feet in height.
COLLOCATION/SITE SHARING — A common wireless communication
facility or common site by two or more wireless license holders or by
one wireless license holder for more than one type of communications
technology.
ENGINEER — An engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
for the particular protocol required.
EQUIPMENT FACILITY — Any structure or enclosure used to contain
ancillary equipment as a component of a wireless communication facility,
including a cabinet, shelter, build-out of an existing structure or a pedestal.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communication Commission.
HEIGHT — The distance measured from ground level to the highest point of
the wireless communication facility, including the antenna array.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, agency,
unincorporated association or municipal corporation or agency within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any combination thereof.
PROVIDER — A person (hereinafter referred to as "applicant"), not to
include a public utility, who is licensed by the Federal Communication
Commission to provide telecommunication service to the public.
PUBLIC UTILITY — An entity regulated by the Public Utility Commission.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land set aside for passage, including streets, highways,
lanes or alleys in which the Township or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
holds any property interest (title, easement or otherwise) or exercises any
rights of management or control and which, consistent with the purposes
for which it was acquired or dedicated, may be used for the installation of a
wireless communication facility.
SETBACK — The minimum open space required from any right-of-way or
property line.
§ 280-163 RADNOR CODE § 280-163
C:1164
SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A structure designed and constructed
specifically to support an antenna array or base station. Any device which
is used to affix an attached wireless communication facility to a building or
structure shall be excluded from this definition.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — Any personal wireless service as defined
in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which includes FCC-licensed
commercial wireless communication services, including cellular, personal
communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging and similar services.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY — A facility which is not staffed
and used for the transmission and/or reception of wireless communication
services, usually consisting of base station or antenna array, connection
cables, equipment facility and a support structure to achieve the necessary
elevation.
§ 280-164. Facilities outside the right-of-way.
Wireless communication facilities located outside the right-of-way shall be
located and subject to the applicable requirements of this section.
ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY — An antenna
array that is attached to any existing building or structure, along with
any device which attaches the antenna array to the existing building or
structure, including antenna cables and equipment facility.
A.
A. Wireless communication facilities attached to buildings or structures.
Attached wireless communication facilities located on any parcel or
tract of land shall not exceed the height of the building or structure by
more than 15 feet and shall be permitted as a secondary use within the
following zoning districts:
(1) R-5 Residential.
(2) C-2 General Commercial.
(3) C-3 Service Commercial.
(4) PB Planned Business.
(5) PLO Planned Laboratory Office.
(6) PI Planned Institutional.
B. Wireless communication facilities with support structures. Wireless
communication facilities with support structures shall not exceed a
maximum height of 120 feet. Where permitted, a minimum setback
shall be maintained from all property lines a distance equal to 75% of
the structure's height; however, in no case shall a wireless
communication facility with a support structure be located within 200
feet of any adjacent residential zoning district or property used for
residential purposes. Wireless communication facilities with support
§ 280-163 CHARTER § 280-164
C:1165
structures shall be permitted within the following zoning districts as
a secondary use, when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as
a special exception subject to the requirements of this article and
additional standards prescribed in § 280-145:
(1) AC Agricultural Conservation.
(2) PLO Planned Laboratory Office.
(3) PLU Public Land Use.
C. Equipment facilities. Equipment facilities shall be concealed from
public view to the maximum extent possible and be compatible with the
architecture of surrounding buildings, structures or landscape.
Equipment facilities shall not intrude into the minimum setback
requirements for the district in which the wireless communication
facility is located or exceed a maximum height of 15 feet.
D. Visual impact. In an effort to mitigate the visual impacts of wireless
communication systems, applicants shall design and locate facilities
consistent with the following design guidelines:
(1) Attached wireless communication facilities and equipment facilities
must be of a neutral color that is identical to or closely compatible
with the building or structure so as to make the antenna and
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted
antennas and equipment shall match existing air-conditioning
units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. When mounted
on the face of a building or structure, antennas shall be
incorporated into the vertical design elements.
(2) Applicants for wireless communication facilities shall, to the extent
practical, incorporate architectural features, materials and colors
which blend with surrounding buildings, structures, terrain or
landscape. Applications for wireless communication facilities shall
be subject to review and approval by the Design Review Board.
(3) In order to assist in evaluating the visual impact, the applicant shall
provide color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the
wireless communication facility with a photo-realistic
representation of the facility as it would appear viewed from the
closest residential property, adjacent roads and from other
locations as required.
E. Alternative locations for wireless communications facilities with
support structures. No new support structure shall be permitted unless
the applicant demonstrates that no existing support structure,
alternative technology, building or other structure exists to meet the
needs of the applicant. Applicants shall be required to submit this
information along with their application. Evidence submitted may
consist of the following:
§ 280-164 RADNOR CODE § 280-164
C:1166
§ 280-165. Facilities within the right-of-way.
Wireless communication facilities located within the right-of-way shall be
subject to the following requirements:
(1) No existing support structure, building or other structure are
located within the geographic area which meet the applicant's
engineering requirements.
(2) Existing support structures, buildings or other structures are not of
sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
(3) Existing support structures, buildings or other structures do not
have the strength to support the applicant's equipment.
(4) The applicant's equipment would cause electromagnetic
interference with equipment on the existing support structure,
building or other structure.
(5) Fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing location or to adapt for the applicant are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new construction for a support
structure are presumed to be unreasonable.
(6) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render other locations unsuitable.
(7) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of a support structure, such as cable
microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/
receivers attached to a wireline system, is not suitable. Costs of
alternative technology that exceed costs for the construction of a
support structure and antenna development shall not be presumed
to render the technology unsuitable.
A. Wireless communication facilities shall be limited to base stations
attached to utility poles, light poles, mast arms or other structures.
Such facilities shall be permitted within all zoning districts upon
approval by Radnor Township, subject to the applicable standards of
this article and following requirements:
(1) Every person who constructs, installs or maintains a wireless
communication facility within the right-of-way shall be required to
obtain a use permit from Radnor Township and pay the required fee
as set forth in Chapter 162 (Fees) of the Township Code.
(2) Use permits shall be subject to term limits and conditions agreed to
by the applicant and Radnor Township. Use permits shall not be
transferred unless approved by Radnor Township and the
transferee.
(3) The Township may refuse to issue a use permit if the proposed
location of the facility interferes with the use of the right-of-way by
§ 280-164 CHARTER § 280-165
C:1167
§ 280-166. Information required of applicants.
Applicants shall meet the requirements of this section and provide the
following information, where applicable, for the installation of a wireless
communication facility:
others or is contrary to public safety. The Township may require
a facility to be relocated at the permittee's expense if necessary
to accommodate the location or relocation of public utilities or to
protect the public safety.
(4) Equipment facilities shall be located underground unless otherwise
approved by the Board of Commissioners.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and owner of
the property on which the facility is to be located. If the applicant is not
the owner of the property or structure on which a wireless
communication facility is to be located, written authorization from the
owner in a form acceptable to the Township shall accompany the
application.
B. A legal description and scaled site plan of the property on which the
wireless communication facility is to be located.
C. A current license which has been issued to the applicant by the Federal
Communication Commission.
D. Current certificate of insurance naming the Township of Radnor as
additionally insured against liability for installations within the right-ofway.
E. Copies of ongoing FCC information concerning wireless communication
facilities and radio frequency (RF) emission standards, along with the
projected power density of the facility and how it meets FCC standards.
F. A sworn affidavit from a radio frequency engineer that the placement of
the wireless communication system will not interfere with public safety
communications and the usual and customary transmission or reception
of radio, television or other communication services enjoyed by
adjacent residential and nonresidential properties.
G. Equipment facilities shall be fully automated and visited only for
periodic maintenance and repair. Use of the facilities for offices, vehicle
storage or for the storage of any other equipment shall be prohibited.
H. Support structures shall be enclosed by a security fence not less than
six feet in height and shall be equipped with an anticlimbing device.
This requirement may be waived, provided that the applicant
demonstrates alternative design techniques provide adequate
protection.
§ 280-165 RADNOR CODE § 280-166
C:1168
§ 280-167. Compliance with state and federal standards.
All wireless communication facilities shall meet or exceed current standards
of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government
with the authority to regulate wireless communication facilities. If such
standards or regulations are changed, the owners of the facility governed
by this article shall bring such facility into compliance with the revised
standards within six months of the date of the effective date of such
standards, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring such facilities into
compliance shall constitute grounds for the removal of the wireless
communication facility at the owner's expense.
§ 280-168. Inspections; reports.
Wireless communication facilities shall be inspected on a periodic basis to
ensure structural integrity and compliance with applicable federal, state
I. A buffer planting strip 10 feet in width shall be provided to screen the
perimeter of the wireless communication facility in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) Existing vegetation shall be preserved and used to the greatest
extent possible. Disturbance of the existing topography shall be
minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual
impact.
(2) Landscape materials planted shall consist of rows of evergreens a
minimum of eight feet high planted a maximum of 10 feet on center.
(3) Applicants may submit for consideration alternative screening
techniques consisting of walls or other design features which
satisfy the requirements of this article.
J. Wireless communication facilities shall not be utilized for advertising
purposes.
K. Wireless communication facilities shall not be artificially lighted, unless
required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is
required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen shall cause the
least disturbance to the surrounding views.
L. Plans for wireless communication facilities shall be sealed by an
engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and shall
comply with all applicable building codes and standards to ensure
structural integrity.
(1) Plans for a support structure shall include a soil report complying
with the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical Investigations,
ANSI/EIA 222-E, as amended, to document and verify the design
specifications of the foundation of the support structure, and
required anchors, if used.
§ 280-166 CHARTER § 280-168
C:1169
and local codes and regulations. Inspection reports shall be submitted to
the Township upon request.
§ 280-169. Abandoned facilities; removal.
A wireless communication facility not operated for a period of 12 months
shall be considered abandoned, and the owner(s) of such facility shall
remove same within 90 days from the date of written notice. If such facility
is not removed, Radnor Township shall pursue all legal remedies available
under the law to ensure removal of the facility and restoration of the site at
the expense of the owner. Any delay by the Township in taking action shall
not invalidate the Township's right to take action. The Township may seek
to have the facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent
to operate the facility regardless of any state or federal permits. Where
there are two or more users of a single wireless communication facility, this
provision shall not become effective until all users have terminated use of
the facility.
§ 280-170. Preexisting facilities.
Wireless communication facilities operative on the effective date of this
article shall be classified as nonconforming and allowed to continue as
presently existing. Except for routine maintenance, all work shall be subject
to the provisions of this article and approval by the Township.
§ 280-171. Application review and fees.
A. Applications for the installation of a wireless communication facility
shall be filed with the Township, along with plans and documentation
required to determine compliance with the provisions of this article.
B. The Township may refer applications to an independent consultant,
professional communications consultant or technical advisor to
determine compliance with the provisions of this article, upon which
the applicant shall be required to establish an escrow account with the
Township for payment of fees and services necessary to provide
services deemed necessary by the Township.
C. Escrow funds will be used for payment of fees and services charged by
such consultants or advisors, as deemed necessary by the Township for
review of the application and installation of the facility.
D. Applicants shall be required to maintain sufficient funds in the account
and to provide additional funds as required by the Township. If
sufficient funds are not available, applicants shall be required to make
additional payments within 10 calendar days of the request. If sufficient
funds are not provided, processing of the applications shall be
suspended or the application shall be rejected and returned to the
applicant.
§ 280-168 RADNOR CODE § 280-171
C:1170
E. The Township shall provide to the applicant, upon written request, a
statement indicating expenditures of escrow funds. At the time the
escrow account is closed out, funds remaining shall be returned to the
applicant.
F. Fees. Application and related fees shall be set forth in Chapter 162
(Fees) of the Township Code.
§ 280-171 CHARTER § 280-171
C:1171
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
92-08 4-13-1992 DELCORA wastewater
standards
Ch. 235, Art. IV
92-09 4-13-1992 Trees Ch. 263
92-10 4-27-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
92-11 5-11-1992 Acceptance of public
improvements
NCM
92-12 5-26-1992 Fees amendment Ch. 162
92-13 7-20-1992 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
92-14 12-28-1992 Wards Ch. 90
92-15 7-20-1992 Sidewalk construction NCM
92-16 9-21-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
92-17 10-13-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
92-18 Bond NCM
92-19 10-13-1992 Grading, excavations and fills
amendment
Ch. 175
92-20 10-26-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
92-21 11-23-1992 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5.
92-22 12-14-1992 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
92-23 12-28-1992 Appropriation NCM
92-24 12-28-1992 Tax rate for 1993 NCM
93-01 1-4-1993 Certificates of occupancy Ch. 142, Art. I
93-02 1-4-1993 Street dedication NCM
93-03 2-8-1993 Public bathing places
amendment
Ch. 120
93-04 2-8-1993 Property maintenance
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 96-16
§ 280-171 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1172
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
93-05 2-22-1993 Budget amendment NCM
93-06 3-8-1993 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
93-07 3-8-1993 Acceptance of land NCM
93-08 3-8-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
93-09 3-22-1993 Rezoning NCM
93-10 5-10-1993 Rezoning NCM
93-11 5-10-1993 Street excavations
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2017-15
93-12 5-24-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
93-13 5-24-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
93-14 5-24-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
93-15 6-28-1993 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
93-16 6-28-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
93-17 8-23-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
93-18 9-20-1993 Sewer construction NCM
93-19 10-11-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
93-20 11-8-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
93-21 11-22-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
93-22 12-7-1993 Tax certification fee Ch. 162, Art. VIII
93-23 12-7-1993 Bond NCM
93-24 12-20-1993 Budget for 1994 NCM
93-25 12-20-1993 Tax rate for 1994 NCM
94-01 1-3-1994 Fees amendment Ch. 162, Arts. II and
IV
94-02 1-3-1994 Acceptance of public
improvements
NCM
94-03 1-24-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1173
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
94-04 2-14-1994 Appropriations NCM
94-05 2-14-1994 Appropriations NCM
94-06 2-14-1994 Zoning Map amendment NCM
94-07 2-28-1994 Conveyance of Property NCM
94-08 3-14-1994 Grading, excavations and fills
amendment
Ch. 175
94-09 3-29-1994 Realty transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. V
94-10 3-28-1994 Civilian employees' pension
plan amendment
Ch. 62, Art. I
94-11 4-25-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
94-12 6-13-1994 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 245, Art. I
94-13 6-13-1994 Ballot NCM
94-14 6-13-1994 Electrical standards Superseded by Ord.
No. 96-12
94-15 6-13-1994 Plumbing Superseded by Ord.
No. 96-10
94-16 6-13-1994 Property maintenance Superseded by Ord.
No. 96-13
94-17 6-13-1994 Mechanical standards Repealed by Ord.
No. 96-11
94-18 6-13-1994 Design review amendment;
zoning fees amendment;
rental housing fees; design
review fees
Ch. 150; Ch. 160,
Arts. VI, IX and X
94-19 6-27-1994 Clearing Ch. 144
94-20 6-27-1994 Ballot NCM
94-21 9-19-1994 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
94-22 Tabled
94-23 9-19-1994 Building standards Superseded by Ord.
No. 96-18
94-24 9-19-1994 One- and two-family dwelling
standards
Superseded by Ord.
No. 96-19
94-25 9-19-1994 Fire prevention Superseded by Ord.
No. 96-20
94-26 9-19-1994 Fire control management Ch. 164
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1174
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
94-27 10-10-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
94-28 10-10-1994 Recycling Ch. 240, Art.III
94-29 11-14-1994 Acceptance of subdivision
improvements
NCM
94-30 11-28-1994 Fee Schedule amendment Ch. 162
94-31 11-28-1994 Animals amendment Ch. 115
94-32 11-28-1994 Public bathing; food
establishment amendments
Ch. 120; Ch. 170
94-33 12-19-1994 Budget for 1995 NCM
94-34 12-19-1994 Tax levy NCM
94-35 12-19-1994 Fees amendment Ch. 162
94-36 12-19-1994 Acceptance of subdivision
improvements
NCM
94-37 12-19-1994 Acceptance of subdivision
improvements
NCM
95-01 2-27-1995 Zoning Map amendment NCM
95-02 2-13-1995 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
95-03 2-27-1995 Ballot question for biking
and/or pedestrian trail
NCM
95-04 2-27-1995 Transfer of funds NCM
95-05 3-23-1995 Ballot question for PennDOT NCM
95-06 4-24-1995 Certificates of occupancy
amendment
Ch. 142, Art. I
95-07 5-22-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-08 5-22-1995 Purchase of property NCM
95-09 5-22-1995 Dedication of land NCM
95-10 6-19-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-11 6-19-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-12 7-10-1995 Street dedication NCM
95-13 7-10-1995 Public improvement NCM
95-14 8-14-1995 Public improvement NCM
95-15 9-18-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1175
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
95-16 9-18-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-17 9-18-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-18 9-18-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-19 9-18-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-20 9-18-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-21 9-18-1995 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
95-22 10-23-1995 Civilian Employees' Plan
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. I
95-23 10-23-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-24 10-23-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-25 10-23-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-26 11-13-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-27 11-13-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-28 11-13-1995 Police Plan amendment Ch. 62, Art. II
95-29 11-27-1995 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
95-30 11-27-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-31 11-27-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-32 11-27-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
95-33 12-27-1995 Condemnation of land NCM
95-34 12-18-1995 Budget for 1996 NCM
95-35 12-18-1995 Tax levy and fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 162
96-01 1-2-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1176
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
96-02 1-2-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
96-03 1-2-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
96-04 1-16-1996 Bond NCM
96-05 1-16-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
96-06 2-12-1996 Condemnation of land
amendment
NCM
96-07 1-16-1996 Trees Ch. 263
96-08 2-26-1996 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
96-09 5-13-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
96-10 6-17-1996 International Plumbing Code Superseded by Ord.
No. 99-23
96-11 6-17-1996 International Mechanical
Code
Repealed by Ord.
No. 99-16
96-12 6-17-1996 National Electrical Code Superseded by Ord.
No. 99-07
96-13 6-17-1996 BOCA Property Maintenance
Code
Superseded by Ord.
No. 99-10
96-14 6-17-1996 Charter amendment Charter (footnote
only)
96-15 6-17-1996 Cigarette vending; tobacco
sales
Ch. 143
96-16 7-15-1996 Public improvement NCM
96-17 7-15-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
96-18 7-15-1996 Building standards Ch. 125, Art. I
96-19 7-15-1996 One- and two-family dwelling
standards
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2000-03
96-20 7-15-1996 Fire prevention Superseded by Ord.
No. 2000-02
96-21 7-15-1996 Contractors Ch. 145
96-22 8-19-1996 Athletic fields Ch. 205, Art. II
96-23 8-19-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1177
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
96-24 8-19-1996 Grading, excavations and fills
amendment
Ch. 175
96-25 10-14-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
96-26 10-14-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
96-27 10-14-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
96-28 10-28-1996 Enlargement of purposes for
bond issue and approval of
loan
NCM
96-29 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
96-30 11-25-1996 Wastewater treatment
standards amendment
Ch. 235, Art. IV
96-31 12-9-1996 Grading, excavations and fills
amendment
Ch. 175
96-32 12-9-1996 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
96-33 12-9-1996 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
96-34 12-16-1996 Budget for 1997 NCM
96-35 12-16-1996 Tax levy and fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 162
96-36 12-16-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
96-37 12-16-1996 Environmental Advisory
Committee
Ch. 33
97-03 3-10-1997 Sanitary sewer construction NCM
97-04 3-10-1997 Sanitary sewer construction NCM
97-05 3-24-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-06 3-24-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-07 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-08 3-24-1997 Acceptance of public
improvements
NCM
97-09 3-24-1997 Sanitation amendment Ch. 230
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1178
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
97-10 4-14-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-11 5-12-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
97-12 5-12-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
97-13 5-27-1997 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
97-14 6-16-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-15 6-16-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-16 7-21-1997 General obligation bonds NCM
97-17 7-21-1997 Acceptance of public
improvements
NCM
97-18 8-18-1997 Property maintenance
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 99-10
97-19 9-22-1997 Code enforcement
amendment
Ch. 19
97-20 9-22-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-21 9-22-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-22 9-22-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-23 9-22-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-24 9-22-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-25 9-22-1997 Clearing amendment Ch. 144
97-26 9-22-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
97-27 9-22-1997 Construction of sewers and
assessment of costs
NCM
97-28 9-22-1997 Condemnation of easements NCM
97-29 9-22-1997 Condemnation of easements NCM
97-30 10-13-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-31 10-13-1997 Extra police protection
amendment
Ch. 67, Art. I
97-32 10-13-1997 Park and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 205, Art. I
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1179
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
97-33 10-13-1997 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 39
97-34 10-27-1997 Trees Ch. 263
97-35 11-11-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-36 11-11-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-37 11-11-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-38 12-8-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-39 12-8-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
97-40 12-15-1997 Budget for 1998 NCM
97-41 12-15-1997 Tax levy and fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 162
98-01 1-26-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
98-02 1-26-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
98-03 4-27-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
98-04 4-27-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
98-05 4-27-1998 Construction of sanitary
sewer
NCM
98-06 5-11-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
98-07 5-11-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
98-08 5-11-1998 Animals Ch. 115
98-09 10-26-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
98-10 10-26-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
98-11 10-26-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
98-12 10-26-1998 Construction of sanitary
sewer
NCM
98-13 11-9-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
98-14 11-9-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1180
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
98-15 11-9-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
98-16 11-9-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
98-17 11-9-1998 Assessments Ch. 9
98-18 12-7-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
98-19 12-14-1998 Budget for 1999 NCM
98-20 12-14-1998 Tax levy and fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 162
98-21 12-14-1998 Fire prevention amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2000-02
99-01 2-16-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
99-02 3-8-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-03 3-8-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-04 3-8-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-05 3-8-1999 Acceptance of public
improvements
NCM
99-06 3-22-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-07 4-12-1999 Electrical standards Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-18
99-08 4-12-1999 Construction of sanitary
sewer; assessment of costs
NCM
99-09 4-26-1999 Cigarette vending; tobacco
sales amendment
Ch. 143
99-10 4-26-1999 Property maintenance Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-23
99-11 7-20-1999 Purchase of property NCM
99-12 4-26-1999 Acceptance of improvements NCM
99-13 5-17-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-14 5-17-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-15 8-16-1999 Exchange of property NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1181
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
99-16 6-21-1999 Mechanical standards Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-16
99-17 6-21-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
99-18 6-21-1999 Towing Ch. 262
99-19 7-20-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-20 7-20-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-21 7-20-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-22 7-20-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-23 7-20-1999 Plumbing standards Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-17
99-24 7-20-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
99-25 8-16-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
99-26 10-18-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-27 10-18-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-28 10-18-1999 Police Pension Plan Ch. 62, Art. II
99-29 10-18-1999 Civilian Employees' Pension
Plan
Ch. 62, Art. I
99-30 11-8-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
99-31 11-8-1999 Purchase of property NCM
99-32 11-22-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-33 11-22-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-34 11-22-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-35 11-22-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-36 11-22-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-37 11-22-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
99-38 11-22-1999 Wastewater control Ch. 276
99-39 12-6-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1182
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
99-40 12-6-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
99-41 12-6-1999 Trees amendment Ch. 263
99-42 12-13-1999 Budget for 2000 NCM
99-43 12-13-1999 Tax levy and fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 162
99-44 12-13-1999 Building standards Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-05
2000-01 2-28-2000 Construction of sanitary
sewer; assessment of costs
NCM
2000-02 2-28-2000 Fire prevention Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-15
2000-03 2-28-2000 One- and two-family dwelling
standards amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-22
2000-04 3-13-2000 Right-of-way use agreement NCM
2000-05 2-28-2000 Construction of sanitary
sewer; assessment of costs
NCM
2000-06 3-13-2000 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 104
2000-07 3-13-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2000-08 3-13-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2000-09 3-27-2000 Increasing indebtedness NCM
2000-10 4-10-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2000-11 4-10-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2000-12 4-24-2000 Fees amendment Ch. 162
2000-13 6-19-2000 Purchase of property NCM
2000-14 5-15-2000 Condemnation of easement NCM
2000-15 6-19-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2000-16 6-19-2000 Condemnation of land NCM
2000-17 7-17-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2000-18 7-17-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2000-19 7-17-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2000-20 7-17-2000 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1183
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2000-21 8-21-2000 Environmental Advisory
Committee amendment
Ch. 33
2000-22 9-18-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2000-23 9-18-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2000-24 9-18-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2000-25 10-23-2000 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
2000-26 11-13-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2000-27 11-13-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2000-28 11-27-2000 Stormwater management:
limitations on increase of
impervious surfaces
amendment
Ch. 245, Art I
2000-29 12-18-2000 Purchase of property NCM
2000-32 12-11-2000 Towing amendment Ch. 262
2001-01 1-2-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2001-02 1-2-2001 Purchase of property NCM
2001-03 1-2-2001 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
2001-04 1-2-2001 Stormwater management:
limitations on increase of
impervious surfaces
amendment
Ch. 245, Art. I
2001-05 1-2-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2001-06 1-22-2001 Fire prevention amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-15
2001-07 2-12-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2001-08 2-12-2001 Sewer construction NCM
2001-09 2-26-2001 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 250, Art. I
2001-10 2-26-2001 Skateboards Ch. 237
2001-11 2-26-2001 Traffic calming systems Ch. 262A
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1184
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2001-12 2-26-2001 Sewer construction NCM
2001-13 3-12-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2001-14 3-12-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2001-15 3-12-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2001-16 3-12-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2001-17 4-9-2001 Solid waste: general
provisions; recycling
Ch. 240, Art. III
2001-18 4-9-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2001-19 5-14-2001 Design review amendment Ch. 150
2001-20 4-23-2001 Sewers: storm drainage
systems
Ch. 235
2001-21 5-14-2001 Acceptance of public
improvements
NCM
2001-22 5-14-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2001-23 5-14-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2001-24 Tabled
2001-25 6-18-2001 Rental property: rental unit
regulations
Ch. 226, Art. I
2001-26 7-16-2001 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
2001-27 8-13-2001 Sewer construction;
assessment of costs
NCM
2001-28 9-10-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2001-29 10-8-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2001-30 11-26-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2001-31 11-26-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2001-32 11-26-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2001-33 12-17-2001 2002 budget NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1185
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2001-34 12-17-2001 2002 tax levy and fee
schedule
Ch. 162
2001-35 12-17-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-1 1-22-2002 Construction of sanitary
sewer and assessment of
costs
NCM
2002-2 1-22-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-3 2-11-2002 Environmental Advisory
Committee amendment
Ch. 33
2002-4 2-25-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-5 2-25-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-6 2-25-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-7 2-25-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-8 3-11-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-9 3-25-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-10 3-25-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-11 3-25-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-12 3-25-2002 Acceptance of subdivision
improvements
NCM
2002-13 4-18-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-14 4-22-2002 Towing amendment Ch. 262
2002-15 4-22-2002 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-23
2002-16 5-20-2002 Sale of property NCM
2002-17 5-20-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2002-18 6-17-2002 Acceptance of public
improvements
NCM
2002-19 6-17-2002 Purchase of property NCM
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1186
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2002-20 6-17-2002 Pensions and annuities:
Civilian Employees' Plan
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. I
2002-21 6-17-2002 Pensions and annuities: Police
Plan amendment
Ch. 62, Art. II
2002-22 8-19-2002 Hunting and weapons
amendment
Ch. 180
2002-23 7-15-2002 Purchase of property NCM
2002-24 9-9-2002 Certificates of occupancy
amendment
Ch. 142
2002-25 9-23-2002 Bond NCM
2002-26 10-15-2002 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
2002-27 10-28-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-28 10-28-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2002-29 11-12-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-30 11-12-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-31 11-12-2002 Construction of sanitary
sewer and assessment of
costs
NCM
2002-32 12-9-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2002-33 12-9-2002 Purchase of property NCM
2002-34 12-16-2002 2003 budget NCM
2002-35 12-16-2002 2003 tax levy and fee
schedule
Ch. 162
2003-1 1-6-2003 Towing amendment Ch. 262
2003-2 1-6-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2003-3 1-27-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2003-4 1-27-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2003-5 2-10-2003 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1187
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2003-6 3-10-2002 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
2003-7 3-24-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2003-8 3-24-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2003-9 5-19-2003 General obligation note NCM
2003-10 6-16-2003 Transfer of liquor licenses Ch. 109, Art. II
2003-11 7-21-2003 Administration of government
amendment; financial
policies: investment of
Township funds
Ch. 5; Ch. 44, Art. I
2003-12 8-12-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2003-13 8-12-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2003-14 8-12-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2003-15 8-12-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2003-16 8-12-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2003-17 8-12-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2003-18 10-27-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2003-19 11-10-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2003-20 11-10-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2003-21 11-24-2003 Trees Ch. 263
2003-22 12-8-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2003-23 12-8-2003 Animals amendment Ch. 115
2003-24 12-15-2003 2004 budget NCM
2003-25 12-15-2003 2004 tax levy and fee
schedule
Ch. 162
2004-1 1-26-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2004-2 1-26-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1188
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2004-3 2-9-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2004-4 3-8-2004 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. II
2004-5 3-8-2004 Pension plan: civilian
employees amendment
Ch. 62, Art. I
2004-6 3-22-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2004-7 3-22-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2004-8 3-22-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2004-9 4-12-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2004-10 4-12-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2004-11 4-12-2004 Land purchase NCM
2004-12 4-26-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2004-13 4-26-2004 Bond NCM
2004-14 5-24-2004 Building standards
amendment; Uniform
construction codes
Chs. 125, Art. I; 144
2004-15 5-24-2004 Fire prevention Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-09
2004-16 5-24-2004 Mechanical standards Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-08
2004-17 5-24-2004 Plumbing Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-07
2004-18 5-24-2004 Electrical standards
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-11
2004-19 5-24-2004 Fuel gas Superseded by Ord.
No. 2007-10
2004-20 5-24-2004 Energy conservation Superseded by Ord.
No. 2007-12
2004-21 5-24-2004 Existing buildings Superseded by Ord.
No. 2007-13
2004-22 5-24-2004 One- and two-family dwelling
standards
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-06
2004-23 5-24-2004 Property maintenance Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-14
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1189
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2004-24 6-21-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2004-25 6-21-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2004-26 7-19-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2004-27 7-19-2004 Food regulations Ch. 170
2004-28 7-19-2004 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
2004-29 8-19-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2004-30 8-19-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2004-31 9-13-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2004-32 9-13-2004 Bond NCM
2004-33 9-27-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2004-34 9-27-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2004-35 9-27-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2004-36 10-12-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2004-37 10-12-2004 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
2004-38 11-8-2004 One- and two-family dwelling
standards amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-06
2004-39 11-22-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2004-40 12-6-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2004-41 12-13-2004 Budget 2005 NCM
2004-42 12-13-2004 Tax levy and fee schedule Ch. 162
2005-01 1-3-2005 Emergency and municipal
services tax
Ch. 260, Art. VI
2005-02 4-25-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2005-03 1-24-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2005-04 1-24-2005 Acceptance of public
improvements
NCM
2005-05 5-23-2005 Traffic calming systems
amendment
Ch. 262A
2005-06 2-14-2005 Purchase of property NCM
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1190
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2005-07 2-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2005-8 2-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2005-9 5-9-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2005-10 5-9-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2005-11 5-9-2005 Stormwater management;
subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 245; Ch. 255
2005-12 8-15-2005 Interest rate swap
amendment
NCM
2005-13 9-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2005-14 9-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2005-15 9-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2005-16 9-26-2005 Parking and storage of
vehicles amendment
Ch. 272
2005-17 10-11-2005 Towing amendment Ch. 262
2005-18 10-24-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2005-19 11-14-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2005-20 11-14-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2005-21 11-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2005-22 11-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2005-23 11-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2005-24 11-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2005-25 11-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2005-26 11-28-2005 Sewer construction approval NCM
2005-27 11-28-2005 Historic District Ch. 178
2005-28 12-19-2005 2006 Budget NCM
2005-29 12-19-2005 2006 tax levy; fee schedule CH. 162
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1191
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-01 2-14-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2006-02 2-27-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2006-03 2-27-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2006-04 2-27-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2006-05 2-27-2006 Acceptance of public
improvements
NCM
2006-06 2-27-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2006-07 2-27-2006 Housing and Architectural
Review Board
Ch. 5, Art. VI
2006-08 3-27-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2006-09 4-10-2006 Reimbursement for Police
Department services
Rescinded by Ord.
No. 2007-15
2006-10 5-8-2006 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
2006-11 5-8-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2006-12 5-8-2006 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
2006-13 5-8-2006 Historic District amendment Ch. 178
2006-14 6-2-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2006-15 5-22-2006 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
2006-16 11-13-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2006-17 11-13-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2006-18 8-21-2006 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 209
2006-19 9-11-2006 Ballot question (incurrence of
debt for purchase and/or
preservation of land)
NCM
2006-20 9-25-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1192
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-21 9-25-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2006-22 9-25-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2006-23 9-25-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2006-24 9-25-2006 Cable television franchise
agreement with Verizon
See Ch. 140
2006-25 Construction of sanitary
sewer in Orchard Lane
NCM
2006-26 10-9-2006 Purchase of property NCM
2006-27 11-27-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2006-28 12-18-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2006-29 12-18-2006 2007 budget NCM
2006-30 12-18-2006 Assessments amendment;
fees amendment; sewers
sewers amendment
Ch. 9; Ch. 162; Ch.
235
2006-31 12-18-2006 Building standards
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-05
2007-01 1-2-2007 Delaware Valley Municipal
Health Insurance Trust
Ch. 50, Art. IV
2007-02 2-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-03 2-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-04 2-12-2007 Fire prevention amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-09
2007-05 2-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-06 2-12-2007 Building construction: Oneand
two-family dwelling
standards
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2010-13
2007-07 2-12-2007 Plumbing Repealed by Ord.
No. 2010-08
2007-08 2-12-2007 Mechanical standards Repealed by Ord.
No. 2010-07
2007-09 2-12-2007 Fire prevention Repealed by Ord.
No. 2010-06
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1193
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-10 2-12-2007 Fuel gas Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-10
2007-11 2-12-2007 Electrical standards Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-09
2007-12 2-12-2007 Energy conservation Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-11
2007-13 2-12-2007 Existing buildings Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-12
2007-14 2-12-2007 Property maintenance Repealed by Ord.
No. 2010-14
2007-15 2-26-2007 Reimbursement for Police
Department services
Ch. 67, Art. II
(footnote only)
2007-16 2-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-17 2-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-18 2-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-19 2-26-2007 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. II
2007-20 3-26-2007 Acceptance of public
improvements
NCM
2007-21 3-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-22 3-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-23 3-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-24 3-26-2007 Bond NCM
2007-25 4-23-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-26 4-23-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-27 7-16-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2007-28 7-16-2007 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
2007-29 7-16-2007 Historic preservation Ch. 178
2007-30 7-16-2007 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1194
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-31 8-13-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-32 8-13-2007 Sanitary sewer extension and
assessment approved
NCM
2007-33 9-24-2007 Lease agreement NCM
2007-34 9-24-2007 Cable franchise agreement
extension2007-35 amendment
NCM 10-22-2007
2007-36 11-26-2007 Local services tax Ch. 260, Art. VI
2007-37 11-26-2007 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
2007-38 10-22-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-39 10-22-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-40 10-22-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-41 10-22-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-42 10-22-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2007-43 12-17-2007 2008 budget NCM
2007-44 12-17-2007 2008 tax levy and fees
amendment
Ch. 162
2008-1 2-11-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2008-2 2-25-2008 Environmental Advisory
amendment
Ch. 33
2008-3 4-28-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2008-4 8-18-2008 Fire prevention amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2010-06
2008-5 8-18-2008 Financial policies: investment
of Township funds
amendment
Ch. 44, Art. I
2008-6 8-18-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2008-7 8-18-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2008-8 9-8-2008 Budget transfer NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1195
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-9 Number not used
2008-10 Number not used
2008-11 9-22-2008 Certificates of occupancy:
transfer of property
amendment
Ch. 142, Art. I
2008-12 9-22-2008 Sewers amendment Ch. 235
2008-13 10-13-2008 Historic districts amendment Ch. 178
2008-14 9-22-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2008-15 11-24-2008 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
2008-16 11-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2008-17 12-15-2008 2009 budget NCM
2008-18 12-15-2008 2009 tax levy and fees
amendment
Ch. 162
2009-01 1-5-2009 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
2009-02 1-26-2009 Construction of sanitary
sewer in Gulph Creek Road
NCM
2009-03 2-23-2009 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
2009-04 2-23-2009 Acceptance of public
improvements
NCM
2009-05 2-23-2009 Budget transfer NCM
2009-06 3-9-2009 Lease agreement NCM
2009-07 3-23-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2009-08 3-23-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2009-09 3-23-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2009-10 3-23-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2009-11 3-23-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2009-12 5-26-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2009-13 6-15-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1196
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-14 6-15-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2009-15 6-15-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2009-16 7-20-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2009-17 10-26-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2009-18 9-29-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2009-19 9-29-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2009-20 NCM
2009-21 NCM
2009-22 NCM
2009-23 NCM
2009-24 10-26-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2009-25 10-26-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2009-26 10-26-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2009-27 10-26-2009 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
2009-28 10-26-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2009-29 NCM
2010-01 2-25-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2010-02 2-25-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2010-03 2-25-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2010-04 2-25-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2010-05 2-22-2010 Building standards Ch. 125, Art. I
2010-06 2-22-2010 Fire prevention Ch. 166
2010-07 2-22-2010 Mechanical standards Ch. 195
2010-08 2-22-2010 Plumbing Ch. 218
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1197
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-09 2-22-2010 Electrical standards Ch. 156
2010-10 2-22-2010 Fuel gas Ch. 172
2010-11 2-22-2010 Energy conservation Ch. 158
2010-12 2-22-2010 Existing buildings Ch. 132
2010-13 2-22-2010 One- and two-family dwelling
standards
Ch. 125, Art. II
2010-14 2-22-2010 Property maintenance Ch. 222
2010-15 5-10-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2010-16 2-22-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2010-17 3-22-2010 Land lease agreement
amendment
NCM
2010-18 Number not used
2010-19 3-22-2010 Transfer of funds NCM
2010-20 4-12-2010 Fee amendment Ch. 162, footnote
only
2010-21 4-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2010-22 4-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2010-23 1-3-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2010-24 6-7-2010 Approval of certain
construction contracts
NCM
2010-25 8-16-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2010-26 7-19-2010 Approval of contract for park
signs
NCM
2010-27 Number not used
2010-28 Number not used
2010-29 Number not used
2010-30 Number not used
2010-31 10-11-2010 Street excavations
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2017-15
2010-32 Number not used
2010-33 10-11-2010 Approval of bid for
replacement of sidewalks
NCM
2010-34 Number not used
2010-35 Number not used
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1198
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-36 Number not used
2010-37 Number not used
2010-38 10-11-2010 Park and recreation areas:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 205, Art. I
2010-39 Number not used
2010-40 11-8-2010 General obligation bonds NCM
2010-41 12-13-2010 Rental unit regulations
amendment
Ch. 226, Art. I
2010-42 12-13-2010 2011 budget and tax levy NCM
2010-43 Number not used
2010-44 1-3-2011 Municipal Utility Alliance Ch. 50, Art. V
2011-01 2-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2011-02 2-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2011-03 2-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2011-04 3-14-2011 Grading, excavations and fills
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 175; 280
2011-05 2-14-2011 2011 fee schedule NCM
2011-06 2-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2011-07 2-14-2011 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 104
2011-08 2-28-2011 Approval of bids for library
roof replacement
NCM
2011-09 4-25-2011 Acceptance of subdivision
public improvements
NCM
2011-10 3-14-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2011-11 Not introduced
2011-12 6-20-2011 Rental unit regulations
amendment
Ch. 226, Art. I
2011-13 Not introduced
2011-14 5-23-2011 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
2011-15 6-20-2011 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1199
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-16 6-20-2011 Land lease agreement NCM
2011-17 Not introduced
2011-18 Number not used
2011-19 Number not used
2011-20 10-10-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2011-21 10-10-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2011-22 10-10-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2011-23 10-10-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2011-24 10-10-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2011-25 Number not used
2011-26 12-12-2011 2012 budget and tax levy NCM
2011-27 12-12-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 162
2011-28 1-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2011-29 1-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2011-30 1-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2011-31 1-9-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2011-32 1-9-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2011-33 1-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2012-01 2-27-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2012-02 3-26-2012 Public bathing places
amendment
Ch. 120
2012-03 3-26-2012 General obligation bonds NCM
2012-04 5-14-2012 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
2012-05 2-11-2013 Trees amendment Ch. 263
2012-06 8-20-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1200
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-07 6-18-2012 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 156
2012-08 8-20-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2012-09 4-8-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2012-10 Tabled
2012-11 2-25-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2012-12 Tabled
2012-13 9-10-2012 Mercantile tax amendment Ch. 260, Art. II
2012-14 9-10-2012 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
2012-15 11-12-2012 Temporary signs and aerial
advertising
Ch. 95, Art. I
2012-16 10-22-2012 Fire Investigator Ch. 46
2012-17 4-8-2013 Investment of Township funds Ch. 44, Art. I
2012-18 12-17-2012 2013 budget and tax levy NCM
2012-19 12-17-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 162
2012-20 1-7-2013 Charter amendment §§ 1.04; 2.03; 2.04;
2.05; 2.09; 2.10;
2.11; 5.03; 6.03
2012-21 1-7-2013 Charter amendment §§ 4.03; 4.05
2012-22 1-7-2013 Charter amendment §§ 7.03; 7.05; 7.06;
7.07
2012-23 1-7-2013 Charter amendment § 7.11
2013-01 2-25-2013 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
2013-02 3-18-2013 Mercantile tax amendment;
business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 260, Arts. II, III
2013-03 3-18-2013 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. VI
2013-04 3-18-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2013-05 5-13-2013 Issuance of general obligation
notes
NCM
2013-06 6-10-2013 Pensions and annuities:
Postemployment Benefit
Obligation Plan and Trust
Ch. 62, Art. III
2013-07 8-12-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1201
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-08 6-10-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2013-09 6-10-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2013-10 6-10-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-16
2013-11 Tabled
2013-12 8-12-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2013-13 9-23-2013 Lease agreement NCM
2013-14 8-26-2013 Animals amendment Ch. 115
2013-15 10-14-2013 Stormwater management fees Ch. 246
2013-16 8-12-2013 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 270
2013-17 1-6-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch 270
2013-18 Zoning amendment Tabled
2013-19 Tabled
2013-20 Tabled
2013-21 3-31-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2013-22 12-16-2013 Purchase of property NCM
2013-23 12-16-2013 2014 budget and tax levy;
fees amendment
NCM; Ch. 162
2013-24 12-16-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 162
2014-01 3-24-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2014-02 Zoning amendment Not adopted
2014-03 Stormwater management
amendment
Not yet adopted
2014-04 Zoning amendment Not adopted
2014-05 6-9-2014 General fund; revenues;
capital funding amendment
Ch. 44, Art. II
2014-06 9-8-2014 Land lease agreement NCM
2014-07 8-18-2014 Lease agreement NCM
2014-08 10-13-2014 Appropriation amendment NCM
2014-09 9-22-2014 Wards amendment Ch. 90
2014-10 9-8-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2014-11 Not adopted
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1202
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-12 10-13-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch 270
2014-13 10-13-2014 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
2014-14 11-24-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2014-15 11-10-2014 Bond NCM
2014-16 1-5-2015 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
2014-17 12-8-2014 2015 budget and tax levy;
fees amendment
NCM; Ch. 162
2014-18 Tabled
2014-19 Tabled
2014-20 1-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2015-01 2-17-2015 Bond NCM
2015-02 3-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2015-03 6-15-2015 Food regulations amendment Ch. 170
2015-04 5-11-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2015-05 5-11-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2015-06 6-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2015-07 7-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2015-08 7-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2015-09 7-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2015-10 Not yet adopted
2015-11 10-26-2015 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 255
2015-12 9-15-2015 2015 budget amendment NCM
2015-13 Sale of property Tabled
2015-14 10-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1203
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-15 10-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2015-16 10-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2015-17 Traffic signal easement Tabled
2015-18 10-26-2015 Bond NCM
2015-19 11-23-2015 Fire loss reimbursement
claims and procedures
Ch. 165
2015-20 12-14-2015 2016 budget and tax levy;
fees amendment
NCM; Ch. 162
2015-21 12-14-2015 Towing amendment Ch. 262
2015-22 12-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2015-23 12-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2015-24 12-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2016-01 1-25-2016 Sale and purchase of
property
NCM
2016-02 2-22-2016 Sale of property NCM
2016-03 4-11-2016 Capital budget for
stormwater fund
NCM
2016-04 3-28-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2016-05 Temporary parking
restriction
Tabled
2016-06 5-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2016-07 5-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2016-08 7-18-2016 Solid waste: county disposal
agreement amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
2016-09 8-15-2016 Lease agreement NCM
2016-10 9-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2016-11 12-12-2016 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
2016-12 Not yet adopted
2016-13 12-11-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2016-14 Not yet adopted
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1204
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-15 12-12-2016 2017 budget and tax levy;
fees amendment
NCM; Ch. 162
2016-16 1-3-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 162
2017-01 2-13-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2017-02 2-13-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2017-03 2-27-2017 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 104
2017-04 2-27-2017 Change in purpose for
proceeds of bonds
NCM
2017-05 Tabled
2017-06 5-8-2017 Lease agreement NCM
2017-07 Tabled
2017-08 6-12-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2017-09 6-26-2017 2017 budget amendment NCM
2017-10 7-17-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch 270
2017–11 Not yet adopted
2017-12 Not yet adopted
2017-13 9-11-2017 Trees amendment Ch. 263
2017-14 11-13-2017 Extending term of Radnor-
Haverford-Marple Sewer
Authority
NCM
2017-15 11-13-2017 Streets and sidewalks: rightof-
way management
Ch. 250, Art. VI
2017-16 Street vacation NCM
2017-17 12-11-2017 2017 budget and tax levy NCM
2017-18 12-11-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 162
2017-19 1-16-2018 Towing amendment Ch. 262
2018-01 3-12-2018 Sewers amendment Ch. 235
2018-02 2-26-2018 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2018-03 3-12-2018 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2018-04 Number not used
2018-05 5-14-2018 Lease Agreement NCM
2018-06 6-11-2018 Trees Amendment Ch. 263
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1205
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-07 Not yet adopted
2018-08 6-11-2018 Code of Ethics Amendment Ch. 39
2018-09 8-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 270
2018-10 8-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 270
2018-11 10-8-2018 Sewers Amendment;
Stormwater Management
Fees Amendment
Ch. 235; Ch. 246
2018-12 11-12-2018 Pensions and Annuities:
Police Plan Amendment
Ch. 62, Art. II
2018-13 11-12-2018 Streets and Sidewalks: Rightof-
Way Management
Amendment
Ch. 250, Art. VI
2018-14 11-12-2018 Incurrence of Debt NCM
2018-15 Not yet adopted
2018-16 Not yet adopted
2018-17 12-10-2018 Budget NCM
2018-18 12-10-2018 Budget NCM
2018-19 12-10-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 162
§ DL-1 RADNOR CODE § DL-1
C:1206